<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Its Scope</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="sbo-corecss">
  <section class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 1. this or That?" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" id="chapter-1-this-or-that">
    <div class="epub__sect1" title="Confusions">
      <div class="epub__sect2" title="Its Scope">
        <div class="epub__titlepage">
          <div>
            <div>
              <h3>Its Scope</h3>
            </div>
          </div>
        </div>
        <p>The next most common misconception about the meaning of <code class="epub__literal">this</code> is that
it somehow refers to the function’s scope. It’s a tricky question,
because in one sense there is some truth, but in the other sense, it’s
quite misguided.</p>
        <p>To be clear, <code class="epub__literal">this</code> does not, in any way, refer to a function’s lexical
scope. It is true that internally, scope is kind of like an object with
properties for each of the available identifiers. But the scope “object”
is not accessible to JavaScript code. It’s an inner part of the
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>engine</em></span>’s implementation.</p>
        <p>Consider code that attempts (and fails!) to cross over the boundary and
use <code class="epub__literal">this</code> to implicitly refer to a function’s lexical scope:</p>
        <pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">()</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__mi">2</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
    <code class="epub__k">this</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">bar</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">bar</code><code class="epub__p">()</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__k">this</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">();</code> <code class="epub__c1">//ReferenceError: a is not defined</code></pre>
        <p>There’s more than one mistake in this snippet. While it may seem
contrived, the code you see is a distillation of actual real-world code
that has been exchanged in public community help forums. It’s a
wonderful (if not sad) illustration of just how misguided <code class="epub__literal">this</code>
assumptions can be.</p>
        <p>First, an attempt is made to reference the <code class="epub__literal">bar()</code> function via
<code class="epub__literal">this.bar()</code>. It is almost certainly an accident that it works, but
we’ll explain the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>how</em></span> of that shortly. The most natural way to have
invoked <code class="epub__literal">bar()</code> would have been to omit the leading <code class="epub__literal">this.</code> and just
make a lexical reference to the identifier.</p>
        <p>However, the developer who writes such code is attempting to use <code class="epub__literal">this</code>
to create a bridge between the lexical scopes of <code class="epub__literal">foo()</code> and <code class="epub__literal">bar()</code>, so
that <code class="epub__literal">bar()</code> has access to the variable <code class="epub__literal">a</code> in the inner scope of
<code class="epub__literal">foo()</code>. No such bridge is possible. You cannot use a <code class="epub__literal">this</code> reference
to look something up in a lexical scope. It is not possible.</p>
        <p>Every time you feel yourself trying to mix lexical scope look-ups with
<code class="epub__literal">this</code>, remind yourself: <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>there is no bridge</em></span>.</p>
      </div>
    </div>
  </section>
</div>


</body>
</html>
