<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Call-Site</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="sbo-corecss">
  <section class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 2. this All Makes Sense Now!" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" id="chapter-2-this-all-makes-sense-now">
    <div class="epub__sect1" title="Call-Site">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2 style="clear: both">Call-Site</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>To understand <code class="epub__literal">this</code> binding, we have to understand the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>call-site</em></span>: the
location in code where a function is called (not where it’s declared).
We must inspect the call-site to answer the question: what is <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>this</em></span>
<code class="epub__literal">this</code> a reference to?</p>
      <p>Finding the call-site is generally “go locate where a function is
called from,” but it’s not always that easy, as certain coding patterns
can obscure the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>true</em></span> call-site.</p>
      <p>What’s important is to think about the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>call-stack</em></span> (the stack of
functions that have been called to get us to the current moment in
execution). The call-site we care about is <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>in</em></span> the invocation <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>before</em></span>
the currently executing function.</p>
      <p>Let’s demonstrate the call-stack and call-site:</p>
      <pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">baz</code><code class="epub__p">()</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// call-stack is: `baz`</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// so, our call-site is in the global scope</code>

    <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"baz"</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">bar</code><code class="epub__p">();</code> <code class="epub__c1">// &lt;-- call-site for `bar`</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">bar</code><code class="epub__p">()</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// call-stack is: `baz` -&gt; `bar`</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// so, our call-site is in `baz`</code>

    <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"bar"</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">();</code> <code class="epub__c1">// &lt;-- call-site for `foo`</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">()</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// call-stack is: `baz` -&gt; `bar` -&gt; `foo`</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// so, our call-site is in `bar`</code>

    <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"foo"</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__nx">baz</code><code class="epub__p">();</code> <code class="epub__c1">// &lt;-- call-site for `baz`</code></pre>
      <p>Take care when analyzing code to find the actual call-site (from the
call-stack), because it’s the only thing that matters for <code class="epub__literal">this</code>
binding.</p>
      <div class="epub__note" title="Note">
        <h3>Note</h3>
        <p>You can visualize a call-stack in your mind by looking at the
chain of function calls in order, as we did with the comments in the
previous snippet. But this is painstaking and error-prone. Another way of
seeing the call-stack is using a debugger tool in your browser. Most
modern desktop browsers have built-in developer tools that include a
JS debugger. In the previous snippet, you could have set a breakpoint in
the tools for the first line of the <code class="epub__literal">foo()</code> function, or simply inserted
the <code class="epub__literal">debugger;</code> statement on that first line. When you run the page, the
debugger will pause at this location, and will show you a list of the
functions that have been called to get to that line, which will be your
call-stack. So, if you’re trying to diagnose <code class="epub__literal">this</code> binding, use the
developer tools to get the call-stack, then find the second item from
the top, and that will show you the real call-site.</p>
      </div>
    </div>
  </section>
</div>


</body>
</html>
