<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>new Binding</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="sbo-corecss">
  <section class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 2. this All Makes Sense Now!" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" id="chapter-2-this-all-makes-sense-now">
    <div class="epub__sect1" title="Nothing but Rules">
      <div class="epub__sect2" title="new Binding">
        <div class="epub__titlepage">
          <div>
            <div>
              <h3>new Binding</h3>
            </div>
          </div>
        </div>
        <p>The fourth and final rule for <code class="epub__literal">this</code> binding requires us to rethink a
very common misconception about functions and objects in JavaScript.</p>
        <p>In traditional class-oriented languages, “constructors” are special
methods attached to classes, and when the class is instantiated with a
<code class="epub__literal">new</code> operator, the constructor of that class is called. This usually
looks something like:</p>
        <pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__nx">something</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__k">new</code> <code class="epub__nx">MyClass</code><code class="epub__p">(..);</code></pre>
        <p>JavaScript has a <code class="epub__literal">new</code> operator, and the code pattern to use it looks
basically identical to what we see in those class-oriented languages;
most developers assume that JavaScript’s mechanism is doing something
similar. However, there really is <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>no connection</em></span> to class-oriented
functionality implied by <code class="epub__literal">new</code> usage in JS.</p>
        <p>First, let’s redefine what a “constructor” in JavaScript is. In JS,
constructors are just functions that happen to be called with the
<code class="epub__literal">new</code> operator in front of them. They are not attached to classes, nor
are they instantiating a class. They are not even special types of
functions. They’re just regular functions that are, in essence, hijacked
by the use of <code class="epub__literal">new</code> in their invocation.</p>
        <p>For example, consider the <code class="epub__literal">Number(..)</code> function acting as a constructor, quoting
from the ES5.1 spec:</p>
        <div class="epub__blockquote">
          <blockquote class="epub__blockquote">
            <p>15.7.2 The Number Constructor</p>
            <p>When Number is called as part of a new expression it is a constructor:
it initialises the newly created object.</p>
          </blockquote>
        </div>
        <p>So, pretty much any ol’ function, including the built-in object
functions like <code class="epub__literal">Number(..)</code> (see Chapter 3) can be called with <code class="epub__literal">new</code> in
front of it, and that makes that function call a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>constructor call</em></span>.
This is an important but subtle distinction: there’s really no such
thing as “constructor functions,” but rather construction calls <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>of</em></span>
functions.</p>
        <p>When a function is invoked with <code class="epub__literal">new</code> in front of it, otherwise known as
a constructor call, the following things are done automatically:</p>
        <div class="epub__orderedlist">
          <ol class="epub__orderedlist" type="1">
            <li class="epub__listitem">
A brand new object is created (aka constructed) out of thin air.
</li>
            <li class="epub__listitem">
The newly constructed object is <code class="epub__literal">[[Prototype]]</code>-linked.
</li>
            <li class="epub__listitem">
The newly constructed object is set as the <code class="epub__literal">this</code> binding for that
function call.
</li>
            <li class="epub__listitem">
Unless the function returns its own alternate object, the
<code class="epub__literal">new</code>-invoked function call will <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>automatically</em></span> return the newly
constructed object.
</li>
          </ol>
        </div>
        <p>Steps 1, 3, and 4 apply to our current discussion. We’ll skip over step
2 for now and come back to it in Chapter 5.</p>
        <p>Consider this code:</p>
        <pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">a</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__k">this</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">bar</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__k">new</code> <code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__mi">2</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
<code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">bar</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code> <code class="epub__c1">// 2</code></pre>
        <p>By calling <code class="epub__literal">foo(..)</code> with <code class="epub__literal">new</code> in front of it, we’ve constructed a new
object and set that new object as the <code class="epub__literal">this</code> for the call of <code class="epub__literal">foo(..)</code>.
So <code class="epub__literal">new</code> is the final way that a function call’s <code class="epub__literal">this</code> can be bound.
We’ll call this <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>new binding</em></span>.</p>
      </div>
    </div>
  </section>
</div>


</body>
</html>
