<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Type</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="sbo-corecss">
  <section class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 3. Objects" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" id="chapter-3-objects">
    <div class="epub__sect1" title="Type">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2 style="clear: both">Type</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>Objects are the general building block upon which much of JS is built.
They are one of the six primary types (called “language types” in the
specification) in JS:</p>
      <div class="epub__itemizedlist">
        <ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
          <li class="epub__listitem">
<code class="epub__literal">string</code>
</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">
<code class="epub__literal">number</code>
</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">
<code class="epub__literal">boolean</code>
</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">
<code class="epub__literal">null</code>
</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">
<code class="epub__literal">undefined</code>
</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">
<code class="epub__literal">object</code>
</li>
        </ul>
      </div>
      <p>Note that the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>simple primitives</em></span> (<code class="epub__literal">string</code>, <code class="epub__literal">boolean</code>, <code class="epub__literal">number</code>,
<code class="epub__literal">null</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">undefined</code>) are not themselves <code class="epub__literal">objects</code>. <code class="epub__literal">null</code> is
sometimes referred to as an object type, but this misconception stems
from a bug in the language that causes <code class="epub__literal">typeof null</code> to return the
string <code class="epub__literal">"object"</code> incorrectly (and confusingly). In fact, <code class="epub__literal">null</code> is its
own primitive type.</p>
      <p>It’s a common misstatement that “everything in JavaScript is an
object.” This is clearly not true.</p>
      <p>By contrast, there <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>are</em></span> a few special object subtypes, which we can
refer to as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>complex primitives</em></span>.</p>
      <p><code class="epub__literal">function</code> is a subtype of object (technically, a “callable object”).
Functions in JS are said to be “first class” in that they are basically
just normal objects (with callable behavior semantics bolted on), and so
they can be handled like any other plain object.</p>
      <p>Arrays are also a form of objects, with extra behavior. The organization
of contents in arrays is slightly more structured than for general
objects.</p>
      <div class="epub__sect2" title="Built-in Objects">
        <div class="epub__titlepage">
          <div>
            <div>
              <h3>Built-in Objects</h3>
            </div>
          </div>
        </div>
        <p>There are several other object subtypes, usually referred to as
built-in objects. For some of them, their names seem to imply they are
directly related to their simple primitive counterparts, but in fact,
their relationship is more complicated, which we’ll explore shortly.</p>
        <div class="epub__itemizedlist">
          <ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
            <li class="epub__listitem">
<code class="epub__literal">String</code>
</li>
            <li class="epub__listitem">
<code class="epub__literal">Number</code>
</li>
            <li class="epub__listitem">
<code class="epub__literal">Boolean</code>
</li>
            <li class="epub__listitem">
<code class="epub__literal">Object</code>
</li>
            <li class="epub__listitem">
<code class="epub__literal">Function</code>
</li>
            <li class="epub__listitem">
<code class="epub__literal">Array</code>
</li>
            <li class="epub__listitem">
<code class="epub__literal">Date</code>
</li>
            <li class="epub__listitem">
<code class="epub__literal">RegExp</code>
</li>
            <li class="epub__listitem">
<code class="epub__literal">Error</code>
</li>
          </ul>
        </div>
        <p>These built-ins have the appearance of being actual types, even classes,
if you rely on the similarity to other languages such as Java’s <code class="epub__literal">String</code>
class.</p>
        <p>But in JS, these are actually just built-in functions. Each of these
built-in functions can be used as a constructor (that is, a function
call with the <code class="epub__literal">new</code> operator—see Chapter 2), with the result being a
newly <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>constructed</em></span> object of the subtype in question. For instance:</p>
        <pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">strPrimitive</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__s2">"I am a string"</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
<code class="epub__k">typeof</code> <code class="epub__nx">strPrimitive</code><code class="epub__p">;</code> <code class="epub__c1">// "string"</code>
<code class="epub__nx">strPrimitive</code> <code class="epub__k">instanceof</code> <code class="epub__nb">String</code><code class="epub__p">;</code> <code class="epub__c1">// false</code>

<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">strObject</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__k">new</code> <code class="epub__nb">String</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"I am a string"</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
<code class="epub__k">typeof</code> <code class="epub__nx">strObject</code><code class="epub__p">;</code> <code class="epub__c1">// "object"</code>
<code class="epub__nx">strObject</code> <code class="epub__k">instanceof</code> <code class="epub__nb">String</code><code class="epub__p">;</code> <code class="epub__c1">// true</code>

<code class="epub__c1">// inspect the object sub-type</code>
<code class="epub__nb">Object</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">prototype</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">toString</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">call</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">strObject</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code> <code class="epub__c1">// [object String]</code></pre>
        <p>We’ll see in detail in a later chapter exactly how the
<code class="epub__literal">Object.prototype.toString...</code> bit works, but briefly, we can inspect
the internal subtype by borrowing the base default <code class="epub__literal">toString()</code> method,
and you can see it reveals that <code class="epub__literal">strObject</code> is an object that was in
fact created by the <code class="epub__literal">String</code> constructor.</p>
        <p>The primitive value <code class="epub__literal">"I am a string"</code> is not an object, it’s a primitive
literal and immutable value. To perform operations on it, such as
checking its length, accessing its individual character contents, etc., a <code class="epub__literal">String</code> object is
required.</p>
        <p>Luckily, the language automatically coerces a string primitive to a
<code class="epub__literal">String</code> object when necessary, which means you almost never need to
explicitly create the <code class="epub__literal">Object</code> form. It is strongly preferred by the
majority of the JS community to use the literal form for a value, where
possible, rather than the constructed object form.</p>
        <p>Consider:</p>
        <pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">strPrimitive</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__s2">"I am a string"</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>

<code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">strPrimitive</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">length</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code> <code class="epub__c1">// 13</code>

<code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">strPrimitive</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">charAt</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__mi">3</code> <code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code> <code class="epub__c1">// "m"</code></pre>
        <p>In both cases, we call a property or method on a string primitive, and
the engine automatically coerces it to a <code class="epub__literal">String</code> object, so that the
property/method access works.</p>
        <p>The same sort of coercion happens between the number literal primitive
<code class="epub__literal">42</code> and the <code class="epub__literal">new Number(42)</code> object wrapper, when using methods like
<code class="epub__literal">42.359.toFixed(2)</code>. Likewise for <code class="epub__literal">Boolean</code> objects from <code class="epub__literal">"boolean"</code>
primitives.</p>
        <p><code class="epub__literal">null</code> and <code class="epub__literal">undefined</code> have no object wrapper form, only their primitive
values. By contrast, <code class="epub__literal">Date</code> values can <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>only</em></span> be created with their
constructed object form, as they have no literal form counterpart.</p>
        <p><code class="epub__literal">Object</code>s, <code class="epub__literal">Array</code>s, <code class="epub__literal">Function</code>s, and <code class="epub__literal">RegExp</code>s (regular expressions)
are all objects regardless of whether the literal or constructed form is
used. The constructed form does offer, in some cases, more options in
creation than the literal form counterpart. Since objects are created
either way, the simpler literal form is almost universally preferred.
Only use the constructed form if you need the extra options.</p>
        <p><code class="epub__literal">Error</code> objects are rarely created explicitly in code, but usually
created automatically when exceptions are thrown. They can be created
with the constructed form <code class="epub__literal">new Error(..)</code>, but it’s often unnecessary.</p>
      </div>
    </div>
  </section>
</div>


</body>
</html>
