<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Property Versus Method</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="sbo-corecss">
  <section class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 3. Objects" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" id="chapter-3-objects">
    <div class="epub__sect1" title="Contents">
      <div class="epub__sect2" title="Property Versus Method">
        <div class="epub__titlepage">
          <div>
            <div>
              <h3>Property Versus Method</h3>
            </div>
          </div>
        </div>
        <p>Some developers like to make a distinction when talking about a property
access on an object, if the value being accessed happens to be a
function. Because it’s tempting to think of the function as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>belonging</em></span>
to the object, and in other languages, functions that belong to objects
(aka “classes”) are referred to as “methods,” it’s not uncommon to
hear “method access” as opposed to “property access.”</p>
        <p>The specification makes this same distinction, interestingly.</p>
        <p>Technically, functions never “belong” to objects, so saying that a
function that just happens to be accessed on an object reference is
automatically a “method” seems a bit of a stretch of semantics.</p>
        <p>It <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>is</em></span> true that some functions have <code class="epub__literal">this</code> references in them, and
that <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>sometimes</em></span> these <code class="epub__literal">this</code> references refer to the object reference
at the call-site. But this usage really does not make that function any
more a “method” than any other function, as <code class="epub__literal">this</code> is dynamically bound
at runtime, at the call-site, and thus its relationship to the object
is indirect, at best.</p>
        <p>Every time you access a property on an object, that is a property
access, regardless of the type of value you get back. If you happen
to get a function from that property access, it’s not magically a
“method” at that point. There’s nothing special (outside of possible
implicit <code class="epub__literal">this</code> binding as explained earlier) about a function that
comes from a property access.</p>
        <p>For instance:</p>
        <pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">()</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"foo"</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">someFoo</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">;</code> <code class="epub__c1">// variable reference to `foo`</code>

<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">myObject</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">someFoo</code><code class="epub__o">:</code> <code class="epub__nx">foo</code>
<code class="epub__p">};</code>

<code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">;</code> <code class="epub__c1">// function foo(){..}</code>

<code class="epub__nx">someFoo</code><code class="epub__p">;</code> <code class="epub__c1">// function foo(){..}</code>

<code class="epub__nx">myObject</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">someFoo</code><code class="epub__p">;</code> <code class="epub__c1">// function foo(){..}</code></pre>
        <p><code class="epub__literal">someFoo</code> and <code class="epub__literal">myObject.someFoo</code> are just two separate references to the
same function, and neither implies anything about the function being
special or “owned” by any other object. If <code class="epub__literal">foo()</code> was defined to
have a <code class="epub__literal">this</code> reference inside it, that <code class="epub__literal">myObject.someFoo</code> <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>implicit
binding</em></span> would be the only observable difference between the two
references. It doesn’t make sense to call either reference a “method.”</p>
        <p>Perhaps one could argue that a function becomes a method, not at
definition time, but during runtime just for that invocation, depending
on how it’s called at its call-site (with or without an object reference context—see Chapter 2 for more details). Even this interpretation is a
bit of a stretch.</p>
        <p>The safest conclusion is probably that “function” and “method” are
interchangeable in JavaScript.</p>
        <div class="epub__note" title="Note">
          <h3>Note</h3>
          <p>ES6 adds a <code class="epub__literal">super</code> reference, which is typically going to be
used with <code class="epub__literal">class</code> (see Appendix A). The way <code class="epub__literal">super</code> behaves (static
binding rather than late binding as <code class="epub__literal">this</code>) gives further weight to the
idea that a function that is <code class="epub__literal">super</code>-bound somewhere is more a “method”
than “function.” But again, these are just subtle semantic (and
mechanical) nuances.</p>
        </div>
        <p>Even when you declare a function expression as part of the
object literal, that function doesn’t magically <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>belong</em></span> more to the
object—there are still just multiple references to the same function object:</p>
        <pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">myObject</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__o">:</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">()</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
        <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"foo"</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
    <code class="epub__p">}</code>
<code class="epub__p">};</code>

<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">someFoo</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">myObject</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>

<code class="epub__nx">someFoo</code><code class="epub__p">;</code> <code class="epub__c1">// function foo(){..}</code>

<code class="epub__nx">myObject</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">;</code> <code class="epub__c1">// function foo(){..}</code></pre>
        <div class="epub__note" title="Note">
          <h3>Note</h3>
          <p>In Chapter 6, we will cover an ES6 shorthand for that
<code class="epub__literal">foo: function foo() { .. }</code> declaration syntax in our object literal.</p>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
  </section>
</div>


</body>
</html>
