<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>[[Put]]</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="sbo-corecss">
  <section class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 3. Objects" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" id="chapter-3-objects">
    <div class="epub__sect1" title="Contents">
      <div class="epub__sect2" title="[[Put]]">
        <div class="epub__titlepage">
          <div>
            <div>
              <h3>[[Put]]</h3>
            </div>
          </div>
        </div>
        <p>Since there’s an internally defined <code class="epub__literal">[[Get]]</code> operation for getting a
value from a property, it should be obvious there’s also a default
<code class="epub__literal">[[Put]]</code> operation.</p>
        <p>It may be tempting to think that an assignment to a property on an
object would just invoke <code class="epub__literal">[[Put]]</code> to set or create that property on the
object in question. But the situation is more nuanced than that.</p>
        <p>When invoking <code class="epub__literal">[[Put]]</code>, how it behaves differs based on a number of
factors, including (most impactfully) whether the property is already
present on the object or not.</p>
        <p>If the property is present, the <code class="epub__literal">[[Put]]</code> algorithm will roughly check:</p>
        <div class="epub__orderedlist">
          <ol class="epub__orderedlist" type="1">
            <li class="epub__listitem">
Is the property an accessor descriptor (see Getters and Setters)? If so, call the setter, if any.
</li>
            <li class="epub__listitem">
Is the property a data descriptor with <code class="epub__literal">writable</code> of <code class="epub__literal">false</code>? If
so, silently fail in non-<code class="epub__literal">strict mode</code>, or throw <code class="epub__literal">TypeError</code> in
<code class="epub__literal">strict mode</code>.
</li>
            <li class="epub__listitem">
Otherwise, set the value to the existing property as normal.
</li>
          </ol>
        </div>
        <p>If the property is not yet present on the object in question, the
<code class="epub__literal">[[Put]]</code> operation is even more nuanced and complex. We will revisit
this scenario in Chapter 5 when we discuss <code class="epub__literal">[[Prototype]]</code> to give it
more clarity.</p>
      </div>
    </div>
  </section>
</div>


</body>
</html>
