<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Review</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="sbo-corecss">
  <section class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 3. Objects" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" id="chapter-3-objects">
    <div class="epub__sect1" title="Review">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2 style="clear: both">Review</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>Objects in JS have both a literal form (such as <code class="epub__literal">var a = { .. }</code>) and a
constructed form (such as <code class="epub__literal">var a = new Array(..)</code>). The literal form is
almost always preferred, but the constructed form offers, in some cases,
more creation options.</p>
      <p>Many people mistakenly claim “everything in JavaScript is an object,”
but this is incorrect. Objects are one of the six (or seven, depending on your
perspective) primitive types. Objects have subtypes, including
<code class="epub__literal">function</code>, and also can be behavior-specialized, like <code class="epub__literal">[object Array]</code>
as the internal label representing the array object subtype.</p>
      <p>Objects are collections of key/value pairs. The values can be accessed
as properties, via the <code class="epub__literal">.propName</code> or <code class="epub__literal">["propName"]</code> syntax. Whenever a
property is accessed, the engine actually invokes the internal default
<code class="epub__literal">[[Get]]</code> operation (and <code class="epub__literal">[[Put]]</code> for setting values), which not only
looks for the property directly on the object, but will traverse
the <code class="epub__literal">[[Prototype]]</code> chain (see Chapter 5) if not found.</p>
      <p>Properties have certain characteristics that can be controlled through
property descriptors, such as <code class="epub__literal">writable</code> and <code class="epub__literal">configurable</code>. In
addition, objects can have their mutability (and that of their
properties) controlled to various levels of immutability using
<code class="epub__literal">Object.preventExtensions(..)</code>, <code class="epub__literal">Object.seal(..)</code>, and
<code class="epub__literal">Object.freeze(..)</code>.</p>
      <p>Properties don’t have to contain values—they can be “accessor
properties” as well, with getters/setters. They can also be either
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>enumerable</em></span> or not, which controls whether they show up in <code class="epub__literal">for..in</code> loop
iterations, for instance.</p>
      <p>You can also iterate over the values in data structures (arrays,
objects, etc.) using the ES6 <code class="epub__literal">for..of</code> syntax, which looks for either a
built-in or custom <code class="epub__literal">@@iterator</code> object consisting of a <code class="epub__literal">next()</code> method
to advance through the data values one at a time.</p>
    </div>
  </section>
</div>


</body>
</html>
