<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Class Theory</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="sbo-corecss">
  <section class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 4. Mixing (Up) “Class” Objects" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" id="chapter-4-mixing-up-class-objects">
    <div class="epub__sect1" title="Class Theory">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2 style="clear: both">Class Theory</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>Class/inheritance describes a certain form of code organization and
architecture—a way of modeling real world problem domains in our
software.</p>
      <p>OO or class-oriented programming stresses that data intrinsically has
associated behavior (of course, different depending on the type and
nature of the data!) that operates on it, so proper design is to package
up (aka encapsulate) the data and the behavior together. This is
sometimes called <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>data structures</em></span> in formal computer science.</p>
      <p>For example, a series of characters that represents a word or phrase is
usually called a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>string</em></span>. The characters are the data. But you almost
never just care about the data, you usually want to <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>do things</em></span> with the
data, so the behaviors that can apply <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>to</em></span> that data (calculating its
length, appending data, searching, etc.) are all designed as methods of a
<code class="epub__literal">String</code> class.</p>
      <p>Any given string is just an instance of this class, which means that
it’s a neatly collected packaging of both the character data and the
functionality we can perform on it.</p>
      <p>Classes also imply a way of <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>classifying</em></span> a certain data structure. The
way we do this is to think about any given structure as a specific
variation of a more general base definition.</p>
      <p>Let’s explore this classification process by looking at a commonly cited
example. A <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>car</em></span> can be described as a specific implementation of a more
general “class” of thing, called a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>vehicle</em></span>.</p>
      <p>We model this relationship in software with classes by defining a
<code class="epub__literal">Vehicle</code> class and a <code class="epub__literal">Car</code> class.</p>
      <p>The definition of <code class="epub__literal">Vehicle</code> might include things like propulsion
(engines, etc.), the ability to carry people, etc., which would all be the
behaviors. What we define in <code class="epub__literal">Vehicle</code> is all the stuff that is common
to all (or most of) the different types of vehicles (the “planes,
trains, and automobiles”).</p>
      <p>It might not make sense in our software to redefine the basic essence
of “ability to carry people” over and over again for each different type
of vehicle. Instead, we define that capability once in <code class="epub__literal">Vehicle</code>, and
then when we define <code class="epub__literal">Car</code>, we simply indicate that it <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>inherits</em></span> (or
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>extends</em></span>) the base definition from <code class="epub__literal">Vehicle</code>. The definition of <code class="epub__literal">Car</code>
is said to specialize the general <code class="epub__literal">Vehicle</code> definition.</p>
      <p>While <code class="epub__literal">Vehicle</code> and <code class="epub__literal">Car</code> collectively define the behavior by way of
methods, the data in an instance would be things like the unique VIN of
a specific car, etc.</p>
      <p>And thus, classes, inheritance, and instantiation emerge.</p>
      <p>Another key concept with classes is <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>polymorphism</em></span>, which describes the
idea that a general behavior from a parent class can be overridden in a
child class to give it more specifics. In fact, relative polymorphism
lets us reference the base behavior from the overridden behavior.</p>
      <p>Class theory strongly suggests that a parent class and a child class
share the same method name for a certain behavior, so that the child
overrides the parent (differentially). As we’ll see later, doing so in
your JavaScript code is opting into frustration and code brittleness.</p>
      <div class="epub__sect2" title="“Class” Design Pattern">
        <div class="epub__titlepage">
          <div>
            <div>
              <h3>“Class” Design Pattern</h3>
            </div>
          </div>
        </div>
        <p>You may never have thought about classes as a design pattern, since
it’s most common to see discussion of popular OO design patterns, like
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Iterator</em></span>, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Observer</em></span>, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Factory</em></span>, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Singleton</em></span>, etc. As presented this
way, it’s almost an assumption that OO classes are the lower-level
mechanics by which we implement all (higher-level) design patterns, as
if OO is a given foundation for <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>all</em></span> (proper) code.</p>
        <p>Depending on your level of formal education in programming, you may have
heard of <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>procedural programming</em></span> as a way of describing code that only
consists of procedures (aka functions) calling other functions, without
any higher abstractions. You may have been taught that classes were the
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>proper</em></span> way to transform procedural-style “spaghetti code” into
well-formed, well-organized code.</p>
        <p>Of course, if you have experience with <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>functional programming</em></span> (Monads,
etc.), you know very well that classes are just one of several
common design patterns. But for others, this may be the first time
you’ve asked yourself if classes really are a fundamental foundation for
code, or if they are an optional abstraction on top of code.</p>
        <p>Some languages (like Java) don’t give you the choice, so it’s not very
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>optional</em></span> at all—everything’s a class. Other languages like C/C++ or
PHP give you both procedural and class-oriented syntaxes, and it’s
left more to the developer’s choice which style or mixture of styles is
appropriate.</p>
      </div>
      <div class="epub__sect2" title="JavaScript “Classes”">
        <div class="epub__titlepage">
          <div>
            <div>
              <h3>JavaScript “Classes”</h3>
            </div>
          </div>
        </div>
        <p>Where does JavaScript fall in this regard? JS has had <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>some</em></span> class-like
syntactic elements (like <code class="epub__literal">new</code> and <code class="epub__literal">instanceof</code>) for quite a while, and
more recently in ES6, some additions, like the <code class="epub__literal">class</code> keyword (see
Appendix A).</p>
        <p>But does that mean JavaScript actually <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>has</em></span> classes? Plain and simple:
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>NO</strong></span>.</p>
        <p>Since classes are a design pattern, you <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>can</em></span>, with quite a bit of
effort (as we’ll see throughout the rest of this chapter), implement
approximations for much of classical class functionality. JS tries to
satisfy the extremely pervasive <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>desire</em></span> to design with classes by
providing seemingly class-like syntax.</p>
        <p>While we may have a syntax that looks like classes, it’s as if
JavaScript mechanics are fighting against you using the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>class design
pattern</em></span>, because behind the curtain, the mechanisms that you build on
are operating quite differently. Syntactic sugar and (extremely widely
used) JS “class” libraries go a long way toward hiding this reality from
you, but sooner or later you will face the fact that the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>classes</em></span> you
have in other languages are not like the “classes” you’re faking in JS.</p>
        <p>What this boils down to is that classes are an optional pattern in
software design, and you have the choice to use them in JavaScript or
not. Since many developers have a strong affinity to class-oriented
software design, we’ll spend the rest of this chapter exploring what it
takes to maintain the illusion of classes with what JS provides, and the
pain points we experience.</p>
      </div>
    </div>
  </section>
</div>


</body>
</html>
