<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Polymorphism revisited</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="sbo-corecss">
  <section class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 4. Mixing (Up) “Class” Objects" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" id="chapter-4-mixing-up-class-objects">
    <div class="epub__sect1" title="Mixins">
      <div class="epub__sect2" title="Explicit Mixins">
        <div class="epub__sect3" title="Polymorphism revisited">
          <div class="epub__titlepage">
            <div>
              <div>
                <h4>Polymorphism revisited</h4>
              </div>
            </div>
          </div>
          <p>Let’s examine this statement: <code class="epub__literal">Vehicle.drive.call( this )</code>. This is what
I call <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>explicit pseudopolymorphism</em></span>. Recall in our previous
pseudocode this line was <code class="epub__literal">inherited:drive()</code>, which we called <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>relative
polymorphism</em></span>.</p>
          <p>JavaScript does not have (prior to ES6; see Appendix A) a facility for
relative polymorphism. So, because both <code class="epub__literal">Car</code> and <code class="epub__literal">Vehicle</code> had a
function of the same name, <code class="epub__literal">drive()</code>, to distinguish a call to one or
the other, we must make an absolute (not relative) reference. We
explicitly specify the <code class="epub__literal">Vehicle</code> object by name and call the <code class="epub__literal">drive()</code>
function on it.</p>
          <p>But if we said <code class="epub__literal">Vehicle.drive()</code>, the <code class="epub__literal">this</code> binding for that function
call would be the <code class="epub__literal">Vehicle</code> object instead of the <code class="epub__literal">Car</code> object (see
Chapter 2), which is not what we want. So, instead we use
<code class="epub__literal">.call( this )</code> (Chapter 2) to ensure that <code class="epub__literal">drive()</code> is executed in the
context of the <code class="epub__literal">Car</code> object.</p>
          <div class="epub__note" title="Note">
            <h3>Note</h3>
            <p>If the function name identifier for <code class="epub__literal">Car.drive()</code> hadn’t
overlapped with (aka “shadowed”; see Chapter 5) <code class="epub__literal">Vehicle.drive()</code>, we
wouldn’t have been exercising method polymorphism. So, a reference to
<code class="epub__literal">Vehicle.drive()</code> would have been copied over by the <code class="epub__literal">mixin(..)</code> call,
and we could have accessed directly with <code class="epub__literal">this.drive()</code>. The chosen
identifier overlap shadowing is why we have to use the more complex
explicit pseudopolymorphism approach.</p>
          </div>
          <p>In class-oriented languages, which have relative polymorphism, the
linkage between <code class="epub__literal">Car</code> and <code class="epub__literal">Vehicle</code> is established once, at the top of
the class definition, which makes for only one place to maintain such
relationships.</p>
          <p>But because of JavaScript’s peculiarities, explicit pseudopolymorphism
(because of shadowing!) creates brittle manual/explicit linkage in
every single function where you need such a (pseudo)polymorphic
reference. This can significantly increase the maintenance cost.
Moreover, while explicit pseudopolymorphism can emulate the behavior of
multiple inheritance, it only increases the complexity and
brittleness.</p>
          <p>The result of such approaches is usually more complex, harder-to-read,
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>and</em></span> harder-to-maintain code. Explicit pseudopolymorphism should be
avoided wherever possible, because the cost outweighs the benefit in
most respects.</p>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
  </section>
</div>


</body>
</html>
