<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Mixing copies</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="sbo-corecss">
  <section class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 4. Mixing (Up) “Class” Objects" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" id="chapter-4-mixing-up-class-objects">
    <div class="epub__sect1" title="Mixins">
      <div class="epub__sect2" title="Explicit Mixins">
        <div class="epub__sect3" title="Mixing copies">
          <div class="epub__titlepage">
            <div>
              <div>
                <h4>Mixing copies</h4>
              </div>
            </div>
          </div>
          <p>Recall the <code class="epub__literal">mixin(..)</code> utility from earlier:</p>
          <pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__c1">// vastly simplified `mixin()` example:</code>
<code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">mixin</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">sourceObj</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__nx">targetObj</code> <code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__k">for</code> <code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">key</code> <code class="epub__k">in</code> <code class="epub__nx">sourceObj</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
        <code class="epub__c1">// only copy if not already present</code>
        <code class="epub__k">if</code> <code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__o">!</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">key</code> <code class="epub__k">in</code> <code class="epub__nx">targetObj</code><code class="epub__p">))</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
            <code class="epub__nx">targetObj</code><code class="epub__p">[</code><code class="epub__nx">key</code><code class="epub__p">]</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">sourceObj</code><code class="epub__p">[</code><code class="epub__nx">key</code><code class="epub__p">];</code>
        <code class="epub__p">}</code>
    <code class="epub__p">}</code>

    <code class="epub__k">return</code> <code class="epub__nx">targetObj</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code></pre>
          <p>Now, let’s examine how <code class="epub__literal">mixin(..)</code> works. It iterates over the
properties of <code class="epub__literal">sourceObj</code> (<code class="epub__literal">Vehicle</code>, in our example), and if there’s no
matching property of that name in <code class="epub__literal">targetObj</code> (<code class="epub__literal">Car</code>, in our example), it
makes a copy. Since we’re making the copy after the initial object
exists, we are careful to not copy over a target property.</p>
          <p>If we made the copies first, before specifying the <code class="epub__literal">Car</code>-specific
contents, we could omit this check against <code class="epub__literal">targetObj</code>, but that’s a
little more clunky and less efficient, so it’s generally less preferred:</p>
          <pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__c1">// alternate mixin, less "safe" to overwrites</code>
<code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">mixin</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">sourceObj</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__nx">targetObj</code> <code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__k">for</code> <code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">key</code> <code class="epub__k">in</code> <code class="epub__nx">sourceObj</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
        <code class="epub__nx">targetObj</code><code class="epub__p">[</code><code class="epub__nx">key</code><code class="epub__p">]</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">sourceObj</code><code class="epub__p">[</code><code class="epub__nx">key</code><code class="epub__p">];</code>
    <code class="epub__p">}</code>

    <code class="epub__k">return</code> <code class="epub__nx">targetObj</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">Vehicle</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// ...</code>
<code class="epub__p">};</code>

<code class="epub__c1">// first, create an empty object with</code>
<code class="epub__c1">// Vehicle's stuff copied in</code>
<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">Car</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">mixin</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">Vehicle</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code> <code class="epub__p">}</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>

<code class="epub__c1">// now copy the intended contents into Car</code>
<code class="epub__nx">mixin</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">wheels</code><code class="epub__o">:</code> <code class="epub__mi">4</code><code class="epub__p">,</code>

    <code class="epub__nx">drive</code><code class="epub__o">:</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">()</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
        <code class="epub__c1">// ...</code>
    <code class="epub__p">}</code>
<code class="epub__p">},</code> <code class="epub__nx">Car</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code></pre>
          <p>With either approach, we have explicitly copied the nonoverlapping contents
of <code class="epub__literal">Vehicle</code> into <code class="epub__literal">Car</code>. The name “mixin” comes from an alternate way of
explaining the task: <code class="epub__literal">Car</code> has <code class="epub__literal">Vehicle</code>’s contents mixed in, just like
you mix in chocolate chips into your favorite cookie dough.</p>
          <p>As a result of the copy operation, <code class="epub__literal">Car</code> will operate somewhat
separately from <code class="epub__literal">Vehicle</code>. If you add a property onto <code class="epub__literal">Car</code>, it will not
affect <code class="epub__literal">Vehicle</code>, and vice versa.</p>
          <div class="epub__note" title="Note">
            <h3>Note</h3>
            <p>A few minor details have been skimmed over here. There are still
some subtle ways the two objects can “affect” each other even after
copying, such as if they both share a reference to a common object (such
as an array).</p>
          </div>
          <p>Since the two objects also share references to their common functions,
that means that even manual copying of functions (aka mixins) from one
object to another doesn’t actually emulate the real duplication from
class to instance that occurs in class-oriented languages.</p>
          <p>JavaScript functions can’t really be duplicated (in a standard, reliable
way), so what you end up with instead is a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>duplicated reference</em></span> to the
same shared function object (functions are objects; see Chapter 3). If
you modified one of the shared function objects (like <code class="epub__literal">ignition()</code>) by
adding properties on top of it, for instance, both <code class="epub__literal">Vehicle</code> and <code class="epub__literal">Car</code>
would be “affected” via the shared reference.</p>
          <p>Explicit mixins are a fine mechanism in JavaScript. But they appear more
powerful than they really are. Not much benefit is <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>actually</em></span> derived
from copying a property from one object to another, as opposed to just
defining the properties twice, once on each object. And that’s
especially true given the function-object reference nuance we just
mentioned.</p>
          <p>If you explicitly mix in two or more objects into your target object,
you can partially emulate the behavior of multiple inheritance, but
there’s no direct way to handle collisions if the same method or
property is being copied from more than one source. Some
developers/libraries have come up with “late binding” techniques and
other exotic workarounds, but fundamentally, these “tricks” are
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>usually</em></span> more effort (with less performance!) than the payoff.</p>
          <p>Take care only to use explicit mixins where it actually helps make more
readable code, and avoid the pattern if you find it making code that’s
harder to trace, or if you find it creates unnecessary or unwieldy
dependencies between objects.</p>
          <p>If it starts to get <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>harder</em></span> to properly use mixins than before you
used them, you should probably stop using mixins. In fact, if you have
to use a complex library/utility to work out all these details, it might
be a sign that you’re going about it the harder way, perhaps
unnecessarily. In Chapter 6, we’ll try to distill a simpler way that
accomplishes the desired outcomes without all the fuss.</p>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
  </section>
</div>


</body>
</html>
