<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Review</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="sbo-corecss">
  <section class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 4. Mixing (Up) “Class” Objects" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" id="chapter-4-mixing-up-class-objects">
    <div class="epub__sect1" title="Review">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2 style="clear: both">Review</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>Classes are a design pattern. Many languages provide syntax that
enables natural class-oriented software design. JS also has a similar
syntax, but it behaves very differently from what you’re used to with
classes in those other languages.</p>
      <p>Classes mean copies.</p>
      <p>When traditional classes are instantiated, a copy of behavior from class
to instance occurs. When classes are inherited, a copy of behavior from
parent to child also occurs.</p>
      <p>Polymorphism (having different functions at multiple levels of an
inheritance chain with the same name) may seem like it implies a
referential relative link from child back to parent, but it’s still just
a result of copy behavior.</p>
      <p>JavaScript does not automatically create copies (as classes imply)
between objects.</p>
      <p>The mixin pattern (both explicit and implicit) is often used to <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>sort
of</em></span> emulate class copy behavior, but this usually leads to ugly and
brittle syntax like explicit pseudopolymorphism
(<code class="epub__literal">OtherObj.methodName.call(this, ...)</code>), which often results in code that is harder
to understand and maintain.</p>
      <p>Explicit mixins are also not exactly the same as class-copy behavior, since
objects (and functions!) only have shared references duplicated, not the
objects/functions themselves. Not paying attention to such
nuance is the source of a variety of gotchas.</p>
      <p>In general, faking classes in JS often sets more landmines for future
coding than solving present <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>real</em></span> problems.</p>
    </div>
  </section>
</div>


</body>
</html>
