<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>[[Prototype]]</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="sbo-corecss">
  <section class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 5. Prototypes" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" id="chapter-5-prototypes">
    <div class="epub__sect1" title="[[Prototype]]">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2 style="clear: both">[[Prototype]]</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>Objects in JavaScript have an internal property, denoted in the
specification as <code class="epub__literal">[[Prototype]]</code>, which is simply a reference to another
object. Almost all objects are given a non-<code class="epub__literal">null</code> value for this
property, at the time of their creation.</p>
      <p>Note: we will see shortly that it <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>is</em></span> possible for an object to have an
empty <code class="epub__literal">[[Prototype]]</code> linkage, though this is somewhat less common.</p>
      <p>Consider:</p>
      <pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">myObject</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">a</code><code class="epub__o">:</code> <code class="epub__mi">2</code>
<code class="epub__p">};</code>

<code class="epub__nx">myObject</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">a</code><code class="epub__p">;</code> <code class="epub__c1">// 2</code></pre>
      <p>What is the <code class="epub__literal">[[Prototype]]</code> reference used for? In Chapter 3, we
examined the <code class="epub__literal">[[Get]]</code> operation that is invoked when you reference a
property on an object, such as <code class="epub__literal">myObject.a</code>. For that default <code class="epub__literal">[[Get]]</code>
operation, the first step is to check if the object itself has a
property <code class="epub__literal">a</code> on it, and if so, it’s used.</p>
      <div class="epub__note" title="Note">
        <h3>Note</h3>
        <p>ES6 Proxies are outside of our discussion scope in this book
(they will be covered in a later book in the series), but everything we
discuss here about normal <code class="epub__literal">[[Get]]</code> and <code class="epub__literal">[[Put]]</code> behavior does not
apply if a <code class="epub__literal">Proxy</code> is involved.</p>
      </div>
      <p>But it’s what happens if <code class="epub__literal">a</code> <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>isn’t</em></span> present on <code class="epub__literal">myObject</code> that brings
our attention now to the <code class="epub__literal">[[Prototype]]</code> link of the object.</p>
      <p>The default <code class="epub__literal">[[Get]]</code> operation proceeds to follow the <code class="epub__literal">[[Prototype]]</code>
link of the object if it cannot find the requested property on the
object directly:</p>
      <pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">anotherObject</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">a</code><code class="epub__o">:</code> <code class="epub__mi">2</code>
<code class="epub__p">};</code>

<code class="epub__c1">// create an object linked to `anotherObject`</code>
<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">myObject</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nb">Object</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">create</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">anotherObject</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>

<code class="epub__nx">myObject</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">a</code><code class="epub__p">;</code> <code class="epub__c1">// 2</code></pre>
      <div class="epub__note" title="Note">
        <h3>Note</h3>
        <p>We will explain what <code class="epub__literal">Object.create(..)</code> does, and how it
operates, shortly. For now, just assume it creates an object with the
<code class="epub__literal">[[Prototype]]</code> linkage we’re examining to the object specified.</p>
      </div>
      <p>So, we have <code class="epub__literal">myObject</code> that is now <code class="epub__literal">[[Prototype]]</code> linked to
<code class="epub__literal">anotherObject</code>. Clearly <code class="epub__literal">myObject.a</code> doesn’t actually exist, but
nevertheless, the property access succeeds (being found on
<code class="epub__literal">anotherObject</code> instead) and indeed finds the value <code class="epub__literal">2</code>.</p>
      <p>But, if <code class="epub__literal">a</code> weren’t found on <code class="epub__literal">anotherObject</code> either, its <code class="epub__literal">[[Prototype]]</code>
chain, if nonempty, is again consulted and followed.</p>
      <p>This process continues until either a matching property name is found,
or the <code class="epub__literal">[[Prototype]]</code> chain ends. If no matching property is <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>ever</em></span>
found by the end of the chain, the return result from the <code class="epub__literal">[[Get]]</code>
operation is <code class="epub__literal">undefined</code>.</p>
      <p>Similar to this <code class="epub__literal">[[Prototype]]</code> chain lookup process, if you use a
<code class="epub__literal">for..in</code> loop to iterate over an object, any property that can be
reached via its chain (and is also <code class="epub__literal">enumerable</code>—see Chapter 3) will
be enumerated. If you use the <code class="epub__literal">in</code> operator to test for the existence of
a property on an object, <code class="epub__literal">in</code> will check the entire chain of the object
(regardless of <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>enumerability</em></span>):</p>
      <pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">anotherObject</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">a</code><code class="epub__o">:</code> <code class="epub__mi">2</code>
<code class="epub__p">};</code>

<code class="epub__c1">// create an object linked to `anotherObject`</code>
<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">myObject</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nb">Object</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">create</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">anotherObject</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>

<code class="epub__k">for</code> <code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">k</code> <code class="epub__k">in</code> <code class="epub__nx">myObject</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__s2">"found: "</code> <code class="epub__o">+</code> <code class="epub__nx">k</code><code class="epub__p">);</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>
<code class="epub__c1">// found: a</code>

<code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__s2">"a"</code> <code class="epub__k">in</code> <code class="epub__nx">myObject</code><code class="epub__p">);</code> <code class="epub__c1">// true</code></pre>
      <p>So, the <code class="epub__literal">[[Prototype]]</code> chain is consulted, one link at a time, when you
perform property lookups in various fashions. The lookup stops once
the property is found or the chain ends.</p>
      <div class="epub__sect2" title="Object.prototype">
        <div class="epub__titlepage">
          <div>
            <div>
              <h3>Object.prototype</h3>
            </div>
          </div>
        </div>
        <p>But <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>where</em></span> exactly does the <code class="epub__literal">[[Prototype]]</code> chain “end”?</p>
        <p>The top end of every <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>normal</em></span> <code class="epub__literal">[[Prototype]]</code> chain is the built-in
<code class="epub__literal">Object.prototype</code>. This object includes a variety of common utilities
used all over JS, because all normal (built-in, not host-specific
extension) objects in JavaScript “descend from” (aka have at the top of
their <code class="epub__literal">[[Prototype]]</code> chain) the <code class="epub__literal">Object.prototype</code> object.</p>
        <p>Some utilities found here you may be familiar with include <code class="epub__literal">.toString()</code>
and <code class="epub__literal">.valueOf()</code>. In Chapter 3, we introduced another:
<code class="epub__literal">.hasOwnProperty(..)</code>. And yet another function on <code class="epub__literal">Object.prototype</code>
you may not be familiar with is <code class="epub__literal">.isPrototypeOf(..)</code>, which we’ll address later in this
chapter.</p>
      </div>
      <div class="epub__sect2" title="Setting and Shadowing Properties">
        <div class="epub__titlepage">
          <div>
            <div>
              <h3>Setting and Shadowing Properties</h3>
            </div>
          </div>
        </div>
        <p>Back in Chapter 3, we mentioned that setting properties on an object was
more nuanced than just adding a new property to the object or changing
an existing property’s value. We will now revisit this situation more
completely:</p>
        <pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__nx">myObject</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">foo</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__s2">"bar"</code><code class="epub__p">;</code></pre>
        <p>If the <code class="epub__literal">myObject</code> object already has a normal data accessor property
called <code class="epub__literal">foo</code> directly present on it, the assignment is as simple as
changing the value of the existing property.</p>
        <p>If <code class="epub__literal">foo</code> is not already present directly on <code class="epub__literal">myObject</code>, the
<code class="epub__literal">[[Prototype]]</code> chain is traversed, just like for the <code class="epub__literal">[[Get]]</code>
operation. If <code class="epub__literal">foo</code> is not found anywhere in the chain, the property
<code class="epub__literal">foo</code> is added directly to <code class="epub__literal">myObject</code> with the specified value, as
expected.</p>
        <p>However, if <code class="epub__literal">foo</code> is already present somewhere higher in the chain,
nuanced (and perhaps surprising) behavior can occur with the
<code class="epub__literal">myObject.foo = "bar"</code> assignment. We’ll examine that more in just a
moment.</p>
        <p>If the property name <code class="epub__literal">foo</code> ends up both on <code class="epub__literal">myObject</code> itself and at a
higher level of the <code class="epub__literal">[[Prototype]]</code> chain that starts at <code class="epub__literal">myObject</code>,
this is called <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>shadowing</em></span>. The <code class="epub__literal">foo</code> property directly on <code class="epub__literal">myObject</code>
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>shadows</em></span> any <code class="epub__literal">foo</code> property that appears higher in the chain, because
the <code class="epub__literal">myObject.foo</code> lookup would always find the <code class="epub__literal">foo</code> property that’s
lowest in the chain.</p>
        <p>As we just hinted, shadowing <code class="epub__literal">foo</code> on <code class="epub__literal">myObject</code> is not as simple as it
may seem. We will now examine three scenarios for the
<code class="epub__literal">myObject.foo = "bar"</code> assignment when <code class="epub__literal">foo</code> is not already on
<code class="epub__literal">myObject</code> directly, but <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>is</em></span> at a higher level of <code class="epub__literal">myObject</code>’s
<code class="epub__literal">[[Prototype]]</code> chain:</p>
        <div class="epub__orderedlist">
          <ol class="epub__orderedlist" type="1">
            <li class="epub__listitem">
If a normal data accessor (see Chapter 3) property named <code class="epub__literal">foo</code> is
found anywhere higher on the <code class="epub__literal">[[Prototype]]</code> chain, and it’s not marked
as read-only (<code class="epub__literal">writable:false</code>), then a new property called <code class="epub__literal">foo</code> is
added directly to <code class="epub__literal">myObject</code>, resulting in a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>shadowed property</em></span>.
</li>
            <li class="epub__listitem">
If a <code class="epub__literal">foo</code> is found higher on the <code class="epub__literal">[[Prototype]]</code> chain, but it’s
marked as read-only (<code class="epub__literal">writable:false</code>), then both the setting of that
existing property as well as the creation of the shadowed property on
<code class="epub__literal">myObject</code> are disallowed. If the code is running in <code class="epub__literal">strict mode</code>, an
error will be thrown. Otherwise, the setting of the property value will
silently be ignored. Either way, no shadowing occurs.
</li>
            <li class="epub__listitem">
If a <code class="epub__literal">foo</code> is found higher on the <code class="epub__literal">[[Prototype]]</code> chain and it’s a
setter (see Chapter 3), then the setter will always be called. No <code class="epub__literal">foo</code>
will be added to (aka shadowed on) <code class="epub__literal">myObject</code>, nor will the <code class="epub__literal">foo</code>
setter be redefined.
</li>
          </ol>
        </div>
        <p>Most developers assume that assignment of a property (<code class="epub__literal">[[Put]]</code>) will
always result in shadowing if the property already exists higher on the
<code class="epub__literal">[[Prototype]]</code> chain, but as you can see, that’s only true in one of the three situations just described (case 1).</p>
        <p>If you want to shadow <code class="epub__literal">foo</code> in cases 2 and 3, you cannot use <code class="epub__literal">=</code>
assignment, but must instead use <code class="epub__literal">Object.defineProperty(..)</code> (see
Chapter 3) to add <code class="epub__literal">foo</code> to <code class="epub__literal">myObject</code>.</p>
        <div class="epub__note" title="Note">
          <h3>Note</h3>
          <p>Case 2 may be the most surprising of the three. The presence of
a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>read-only</em></span> property prevents a property of the same name from being
implicitly created (shadowed) at a lower level of a <code class="epub__literal">[[Prototype]]</code>
chain. The reason for this restriction is primarily to reinforce the
illusion of class-inherited properties. If you think of the <code class="epub__literal">foo</code> at a
higher level of the chain as having been inherited (copied down) to
<code class="epub__literal">myObject</code>, then it makes sense to enforce the nonwritable nature of
that <code class="epub__literal">foo</code> property on <code class="epub__literal">myObject</code>. If you however separate the illusion
from the fact, and recognize that no such inheritance copying <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>actually</em></span>
occured (see Chapters 4 and 5), it’s a little unnatural that <code class="epub__literal">myObject</code>
would be prevented from having a <code class="epub__literal">foo</code> property just because some other
object had a nonwritable <code class="epub__literal">foo</code> on it. It’s even stranger that this
restriction only applies to <code class="epub__literal">=</code> assignment, but is not enforced when
using <code class="epub__literal">Object.defineProperty(..)</code>.</p>
        </div>
        <p>Shadowing methods leads to ugly explicit pseudopolymorphism
(see Chapter 4) if you need to delegate between them. Usually, shadowing
is more complicated and nuanced than it’s worth, so you should try to
avoid it if possible. See Chapter 6 for an alternative design pattern,
which among other things, discourages shadowing in favor of cleaner
alternatives.</p>
        <p>Shadowing can even occur implicitly in subtle ways, so care must be
taken if trying to avoid it. Consider:</p>
        <pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">anotherObject</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">a</code><code class="epub__o">:</code> <code class="epub__mi">2</code>
<code class="epub__p">};</code>

<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">myObject</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nb">Object</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">create</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">anotherObject</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>

<code class="epub__nx">anotherObject</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">a</code><code class="epub__p">;</code> <code class="epub__c1">// 2</code>
<code class="epub__nx">myObject</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">a</code><code class="epub__p">;</code> <code class="epub__c1">// 2</code>

<code class="epub__nx">anotherObject</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">hasOwnProperty</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"a"</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code> <code class="epub__c1">// true</code>
<code class="epub__nx">myObject</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">hasOwnProperty</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"a"</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code> <code class="epub__c1">// false</code>

<code class="epub__nx">myObject</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">a</code><code class="epub__o">++</code><code class="epub__p">;</code> <code class="epub__c1">// oops, implicit shadowing!</code>

<code class="epub__nx">anotherObject</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">a</code><code class="epub__p">;</code> <code class="epub__c1">// 2</code>
<code class="epub__nx">myObject</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">a</code><code class="epub__p">;</code> <code class="epub__c1">// 3</code>

<code class="epub__nx">myObject</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">hasOwnProperty</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"a"</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code> <code class="epub__c1">// true</code></pre>
        <p>Though it may appear that <code class="epub__literal">myObject.a++</code> should (via delegation) look up
and just increment the <code class="epub__literal">anotherObject.a</code> property itself <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>in place</em></span>,
instead the <code class="epub__literal">++</code> operation corresponds to <code class="epub__literal">myObject.a = myObject.a + 1</code>.
The result is <code class="epub__literal">[[Get]]</code> looking up <code class="epub__literal">a</code> property via <code class="epub__literal">[[Prototype]]</code> to
get the current value <code class="epub__literal">2</code> from <code class="epub__literal">anotherObject.a</code>, incrementing the value
by one, then <code class="epub__literal">[[Put]]</code> assigning the <code class="epub__literal">3</code> value to a new shadowed
property <code class="epub__literal">a</code> on <code class="epub__literal">myObject</code>. Oops!</p>
        <p>Be very careful when dealing with delegated properties that you modify.
If you wanted to increment <code class="epub__literal">anotherObject.a</code>, the only proper way is
<code class="epub__literal">anotherObject.a++</code>.</p>
      </div>
    </div>
  </section>
</div>


</body>
</html>
