<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>“Constructors”</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="sbo-corecss">
  <section class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 5. Prototypes" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" id="chapter-5-prototypes">
    <div class="epub__sect1" title="“Class”">
      <div class="epub__sect2" title="“Constructors”">
        <div class="epub__titlepage">
          <div>
            <div>
              <h3>“Constructors”</h3>
            </div>
          </div>
        </div>
        <p>Let’s go back to some earlier code:</p>
        <pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">Foo</code><code class="epub__p">()</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// ...</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__k">new</code> <code class="epub__nx">Foo</code><code class="epub__p">();</code></pre>
        <p>What exactly leads us to think <code class="epub__literal">Foo</code> is a “class”?</p>
        <p>For one, we see the use of the <code class="epub__literal">new</code> keyword, just as we see in class-oriented
languages when they construct class instances. For another, it
appears that we are in fact executing a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>constructor</em></span> method of a class,
because <code class="epub__literal">Foo()</code> is actually a method that gets called, just like how a
real class’s constructor gets called when you instantiate that class.</p>
        <p>To further the confusion of “constructor” semantics, the arbitrarily
labeled <code class="epub__literal">Foo.prototype</code> object has another trick up its sleeve. Consider
this code:</p>
        <pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">Foo</code><code class="epub__p">()</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__c1">// ...</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__nx">Foo</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">prototype</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">constructor</code> <code class="epub__o">===</code> <code class="epub__nx">Foo</code><code class="epub__p">;</code> <code class="epub__c1">// true</code>

<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__k">new</code> <code class="epub__nx">Foo</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>
<code class="epub__nx">a</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">constructor</code> <code class="epub__o">===</code> <code class="epub__nx">Foo</code><code class="epub__p">;</code> <code class="epub__c1">// true</code></pre>
        <p>The <code class="epub__literal">Foo.prototype</code> object by default (at declaration-time on line 1 of
the snippet!) gets a public, nonenumerable (see Chapter 3) property
called <code class="epub__literal">.constructor</code>, and this property is a reference back to the
function (<code class="epub__literal">Foo</code> in this case) that the object is associated with.
Moreover, we see that object <code class="epub__literal">a</code> created by the “constructor” call
<code class="epub__literal">new Foo()</code> <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>seems</em></span> to also have a property on it called <code class="epub__literal">.constructor</code>,
which similarly points to “the function which created it.”</p>
        <div class="epub__note" title="Note">
          <h3>Note</h3>
          <p>This is not actually true. <code class="epub__literal">a</code> has no <code class="epub__literal">.constructor</code> property on
it, and though <code class="epub__literal">a.constructor</code> does in fact resolve to the <code class="epub__literal">Foo</code>
function, “constructor” does not actually mean “was constructed by,”
as it appears. We’ll explain this strangeness shortly.</p>
        </div>
        <p>Oh, yeah, also…by convention in the JavaScript world, a “class” is
named with a capital letter, so the fact that it’s <code class="epub__literal">Foo</code> instead of
<code class="epub__literal">foo</code> is a strong clue that we intend it to be a “class.” That’s totally
obvious to you, right!?</p>
        <div class="epub__note" title="Note">
          <h3>Note</h3>
          <p>This convention is so strong that many JS linters actually
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>complain</em></span> if you call <code class="epub__literal">new</code> on a method with a lowercase name, or if we
don’t call <code class="epub__literal">new</code> on a function that happens to start with a capital
letter. It sort of boggles the mind that we struggle so much to get
(fake) “class orientation” <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>right</em></span> in JavaScript that we create linter
rules to ensure we use capital letters, even though the capital letter
doesn’t mean anything at all to the JS engine.</p>
        </div>
        <div class="epub__sect3" title="Constructor or call?">
          <div class="epub__titlepage">
            <div>
              <div>
                <h4>Constructor or call?</h4>
              </div>
            </div>
          </div>
          <p>In the previous snippet, it’s tempting to think that <code class="epub__literal">Foo</code> is a
constructor, because we call it with <code class="epub__literal">new</code> and we observe that it
“constructs” an object.</p>
          <p>In reality, <code class="epub__literal">Foo</code> is no more a “constructor” than any other function in
your program. Functions themselves are <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>not</em></span> constructors. However, when
you put the <code class="epub__literal">new</code> keyword in front of a normal function call, that makes
that function call a “constructor call.” In fact, <code class="epub__literal">new</code> sort of hijacks
any normal function and calls it in a fashion that constructs an object,
in addition to whatever else it was going to do.</p>
          <p>For example:</p>
          <pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">NothingSpecial</code><code class="epub__p">()</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"Don't mind me!"</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__k">new</code> <code class="epub__nx">NothingSpecial</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>
<code class="epub__c1">// "Don't mind me!"</code>

<code class="epub__nx">a</code><code class="epub__p">;</code> <code class="epub__c1">// {}</code></pre>
          <p><code class="epub__literal">NothingSpecial</code> is just a plain old normal function, but when called
with <code class="epub__literal">new</code>, it <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>constructs</em></span> an object, almost as a side effect, which we
happen to assign to <code class="epub__literal">a</code>. The call was a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>constructor call</em></span>, but
<code class="epub__literal">NothingSpecial</code> is not, in and of itself, a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>constructor</em></span>.</p>
          <p>In other words, in JavaScript, it’s most appropriate to say that a
“constructor” is any function called with the <code class="epub__literal">new</code> keyword in front
of it.</p>
          <p>Functions aren’t constructors, but function calls are “constructor
calls” if and only if <code class="epub__literal">new</code> is used.</p>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
  </section>
</div>


</body>
</html>
