<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Review</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="sbo-corecss">
  <section class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 5. Prototypes" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" id="chapter-5-prototypes">
    <div class="epub__sect1" title="Review">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2 style="clear: both">Review</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>When attempting a property access on an object that doesn’t have that
property, the object’s internal <code class="epub__literal">[[Prototype]]</code> linkage defines where
the <code class="epub__literal">[[Get]]</code> operation (see Chapter 3) should look next. This cascading
linkage from object to object essentially defines a “prototype chain”
(somewhat similar to a nested scope chain) of objects to traverse for
property resolution.</p>
      <p>All normal objects have the built-in <code class="epub__literal">Object.prototype</code> as the top of
the prototype chain (like the global scope in scope lookup), where
property resolution will stop if not found anywhere prior in the chain.
<code class="epub__literal">toString()</code>, <code class="epub__literal">valueOf()</code>, and several other common utilities exist on
this <code class="epub__literal">Object.prototype</code> object, explaining how all objects in the
language are able to access them.</p>
      <p>The most common way to get two objects linked to each other is using the
<code class="epub__literal">new</code> keyword with a function call, which among its four steps (see
Chapter 2) creates a new object linked to another object.</p>
      <p>The “another object” that the new object is linked to happens to be the
object referenced by the arbitrarily named <code class="epub__literal">.prototype</code> property of the
function called with <code class="epub__literal">new</code>. Functions called with <code class="epub__literal">new</code> are often called
“constructors,” despite the fact that they are not actually
instantiating a class as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>constructors</em></span> do in traditional class-oriented
languages.</p>
      <p>While these JavaScript mechanisms can seem to resemble “class
instantiation” and “class inheritance” from traditional class-oriented
languages, the key distinction is that in JavaScript, no copies are
made. Rather, objects end up linked to each other via an internal
<code class="epub__literal">[[Prototype]]</code> chain.</p>
      <p>For a variety of reasons, not the least of which is terminology
precedent, “inheritance” (and “prototypal inheritance”) and all the
other OO terms just do not make sense when considering how JavaScript
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>actually</em></span> works (not just applied to our forced mental models).</p>
      <p>Instead, “delegation” is a more appropriate term, because these
relationships are not <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>copies</em></span> but delegation links.</p>
    </div>
  </section>
</div>


</body>
</html>
