<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 6. Behavior Delegation</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="sbo-corecss">
  <section class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 6. Behavior Delegation" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" id="chapter-6-behavior-delegation">
    <div class="epub__titlepage">
      <div>
        <div>
          <h2>Chapter 6. Behavior Delegation</h2>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    <p>In Chapter 5, we addressed the <code class="epub__literal">[[Prototype]]</code> mechanism in
detail, and <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>why</em></span> it’s confusing and inappropriate (despite countless
attempts for nearly two decades) to describe it in the context of “class” or
“inheritance.” We trudged through not only the fairly verbose syntax
(<code class="epub__literal">.prototype</code> littering the code), but the various gotchas (like
surprising <code class="epub__literal">.constructor</code> resolution or ugly pseudopolymorphic syntax).
We explored variations of the “mixin” approach, which many people use to
attempt to smooth over such rough areas.</p>
    <p>It’s a common reaction at this point to wonder why it has to be so
complex to do something seemingly so simple. Now that we’ve pulled back
the curtain and seen just how dirty it all gets, it’s not a surprise
that most JS developers never dive this deep, and instead relegate such
mess to a “class” library to handle it for them.</p>
    <p>I hope by now you’re not content to just gloss over and leave such
details to a “black box” library. Let’s now dig into how we <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>could and
should be</em></span> thinking about the object <code class="epub__literal">[[Prototype]]</code> mechanism in JS, in
a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>much simpler and more straightforward way</em></span> than the confusion of
classes.</p>
    <p>As a brief review of our conclusions from Chapter 5, the <code class="epub__literal">[[Prototype]]</code>
mechanism is an internal link that exists on one object that references
another object.</p>
    <p>This linkage is exercised when a property/method reference is made
against the first object, and no such property/method exists. In that
case, the <code class="epub__literal">[[Prototype]]</code> linkage tells the engine to look for the
property/method on the linked-to object. In turn, if that object cannot
fulfill the lookup, its <code class="epub__literal">[[Prototype]]</code> is followed, and so on. This
series of links between objects forms what is called the “prototype
chain.”</p>
    <p>In other words, the actual mechanism, the essence of what’s important to
the functionality we can leverage in JavaScript, is <span class="epub__strong"><strong>all about objects
being linked to other objects</strong></span>.</p>
    <p>That single observation is fundamental and critical to understanding the
motivations and approaches for the rest of this chapter!</p>
  </section>
</div>


</body>
</html>
