<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Delegation Theory</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="sbo-corecss">
  <section class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 6. Behavior Delegation" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="chapter" id="chapter-6-behavior-delegation">
    <div class="epub__sect1" title="Toward Delegation-Oriented Design">
      <div class="epub__sect2" title="Delegation Theory">
        <div class="epub__titlepage">
          <div>
            <div>
              <h3>Delegation Theory</h3>
            </div>
          </div>
        </div>
        <p>But now let’s try to think about the same problem domain, using
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>behavior delegation</em></span> instead of <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>classes</em></span>.</p>
        <p>You will first define an <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>object</em></span> (not a class, nor a <code class="epub__literal">function</code> as most
JSers would lead you to believe) called <code class="epub__literal">Task</code>, and it will have
concrete behavior on it that includes utility methods that various tasks
can use (read: <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>delegate to</em></span>!). Then, for each task (“XYZ,” “ABC”), you
define an object to hold that task-specific data/behavior. You <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>link</em></span>
your task-specific object(s) to the <code class="epub__literal">Task</code> utility object, allowing them
to delegate to it when they need to.</p>
        <p>Basically, think about needing behaviors from two sibling/peer objects (<code class="epub__literal">XYZ</code> and <code class="epub__literal">Task</code>) to perform task “XYZ.” But
rather than needing to compose them together, via class copies, we can
keep them in their separate objects, and we can allow the <code class="epub__literal">XYZ</code> object to
delegate to <code class="epub__literal">Task</code> when needed.</p>
        <p>Here’s some simple code to suggest how you accomplish that:</p>
        <pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__nx">Task</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">setID</code><code class="epub__o">:</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">ID</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code> <code class="epub__k">this</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">id</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">ID</code><code class="epub__p">;</code> <code class="epub__p">},</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">outputID</code><code class="epub__o">:</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">()</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code> <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__k">this</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">id</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code> <code class="epub__p">}</code>
<code class="epub__p">};</code>

<code class="epub__c1">// make `XYZ` delegate to `Task`</code>
<code class="epub__nx">XYZ</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nb">Object</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">create</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">Task</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>

<code class="epub__nx">XYZ</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">prepareTask</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">ID</code><code class="epub__p">,</code><code class="epub__nx">Label</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__k">this</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">setID</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">ID</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
    <code class="epub__k">this</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">label</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">Label</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
<code class="epub__p">};</code>

<code class="epub__nx">XYZ</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">outputTaskDetails</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code><code class="epub__p">()</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__k">this</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">outputID</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__k">this</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">label</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
<code class="epub__p">};</code>

<code class="epub__c1">// ABC = Object.create( Task );</code>
<code class="epub__c1">// ABC ... = ...</code></pre>
        <p>In this code, <code class="epub__literal">Task</code> and <code class="epub__literal">XYZ</code> are not classes (or functions), they’re
just objects. <code class="epub__literal">XYZ</code> is set up via <code class="epub__literal">Object.create(..)</code> to
<code class="epub__literal">[[Prototype]]</code>-delegate to the <code class="epub__literal">Task</code> object (see Chapter 5).</p>
        <p>As compared to class orientation (aka object orientation), <span class="epub__strong"><strong>I call
this style of code <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>OLOO</em></span> (objects linked to other objects)</strong></span>. All we
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>really</em></span> care about is that the <code class="epub__literal">XYZ</code> object delegates to the <code class="epub__literal">Task</code>
object (as does the <code class="epub__literal">ABC</code> object).</p>
        <p>In JavaScript, the <code class="epub__literal">[[Prototype]]</code> mechanism links objects to other
objects. There are no abstract mechanisms like “classes,” no matter
how much you try to convince yourself otherwise. It’s like paddling a
canoe upstream: you <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>can</em></span> do it, but you’re <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>choosing</em></span> to go against the
natural current, so it’s obviously going to be harder to get where
you’re going.</p>
        <p>Some other differences to note with OLOO-style code:</p>
        <div class="epub__orderedlist">
          <ol class="epub__orderedlist" type="1">
            <li class="epub__listitem">
Both the <code class="epub__literal">id</code> and <code class="epub__literal">label</code> data members from the previous class example
are data properties directly on <code class="epub__literal">XYZ</code> (neither is on <code class="epub__literal">Task</code>). In
general, with <code class="epub__literal">[[Prototype]]</code> delegation, you want state to be
on the delegators (<code class="epub__literal">XYZ</code>, <code class="epub__literal">ABC</code>), not on the delegate (<code class="epub__literal">Task</code>).
</li>
            <li class="epub__listitem">
              <p class="epub__simpara">
With the class design pattern, we intentionally named <code class="epub__literal">outputTask</code>
the same on both parent (<code class="epub__literal">Task</code>) and child (<code class="epub__literal">XYZ</code>), so that we could
take advantage of overriding (polymorphism). In behavior delegation, we
do the opposite: we avoid if at all possible naming things the same at
different levels of the <code class="epub__literal">[[Prototype]]</code> chain (called shadowing—see
Chapter 5), because having those name collisions creates awkward/brittle
syntax to disambiguate references (see Chapter 4), and we want to avoid
that if we can.
</p>
              <p class="epub__simpara">This design pattern calls for less use of general method names that are
prone to overriding and instead more use of descriptive method names,
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>specific</em></span> to the type of behavior each object is doing. This can
actually create easier to understand/maintain code, because the names
of methods (not only at the definition location but strewn throughout other
code) are more obvious (self-documenting).</p>
            </li>
            <li class="epub__listitem">
              <p class="epub__simpara">
<code class="epub__literal">this.setID(ID);</code> inside
of a method on the <code class="epub__literal">XYZ</code> object first looks on <code class="epub__literal">XYZ</code> for <code class="epub__literal">setID(..)</code>,
but since it doesn’t find a method of that name on <code class="epub__literal">XYZ</code>,
<code class="epub__literal">[[Prototype]]</code> <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>delegation</em></span> means it can follow the link to <code class="epub__literal">Task</code> to
look for <code class="epub__literal">setID(..)</code>, which it of course finds. Moreover, because of
implicit call-site <code class="epub__literal">this</code> binding rules (see Chapter 2), when
<code class="epub__literal">setID(..)</code> runs, even though the method was found on <code class="epub__literal">Task</code>, the <code class="epub__literal">this</code>
binding for that function call is <code class="epub__literal">XYZ</code>, exactly as we’d expect and want.
We see the same thing with <code class="epub__literal">this.outputID()</code> later in the code listing.
</p>
              <p class="epub__simpara">In other words, the general utility methods that exist on <code class="epub__literal">Task</code> are
available to us while interacting with <code class="epub__literal">XYZ</code>, because <code class="epub__literal">XYZ</code> can delegate
to <code class="epub__literal">Task</code>.</p>
            </li>
          </ol>
        </div>
        <p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Behavior delegation</em></span> means to let some object (<code class="epub__literal">XYZ</code>) provide a
delegation (to <code class="epub__literal">Task</code>) for property or method references if they are not found on
the object (<code class="epub__literal">XYZ</code>).</p>
        <p>This is an <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>extremely powerful</em></span> design pattern, very distinct from the
ideas of parent and child classes, inheritance, polymorphism, etc. Rather
than organizing the objects in your mind vertically, with parents
flowing down to children, think of objects side by side, as peers, with
any direction of delegation links between the objects as necessary.</p>
        <div class="epub__note" title="Note">
          <h3>Note</h3>
          <p>Delegation is more properly used as an internal implementation
detail rather than exposed directly in the API interface design. In the
previous example, we don’t necessarily <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>intend</em></span> with our API design for
developers to call <code class="epub__literal">XYZ.setID()</code> (though we can, of course!). We sorta
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>hide</em></span> the delegation as an internal detail of our API, where
<code class="epub__literal">XYZ.prepareTask(..)</code> delegates to <code class="epub__literal">Task.setID(..)</code>. See Links as Fallbacks? in Chapter 5 for more detail.</p>
        </div>
        <div class="epub__sect3" title="Mutual delegation (disallowed)">
          <div class="epub__titlepage">
            <div>
              <div>
                <h4>Mutual delegation (disallowed)</h4>
              </div>
            </div>
          </div>
          <p>You cannot create a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>cycle</em></span> where two or more objects are mutually
delegated (bidirectionally) to each other. If you link <code class="epub__literal">B</code> to
<code class="epub__literal">A</code>, and then try to link <code class="epub__literal">A</code> to <code class="epub__literal">B</code>, you will get an error.</p>
          <p>It’s a shame (not terribly surprising, but mildly annoying) that this is
disallowed. If you made a reference to a property/method that didn’t
exist in either place, you’d have an infinite
recursion on the <code class="epub__literal">[[Prototype]]</code> loop. But if all references were
strictly present, then <code class="epub__literal">B</code> could delegate to <code class="epub__literal">A</code>, and vice versa, and it
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>could</em></span> work. This would mean you could use either object to delegate to
the other, for various tasks. There are a few niche use cases where this
might be helpful.</p>
          <p>But it’s disallowed because engine implementors have observed that it’s
more performant to check for (and reject!) the infinite circular
reference once at set-time rather than needing to have the performance
hit of that guard check every time you look up a property on an object.</p>
        </div>
        <div class="epub__sect3" title="Debugged">
          <div class="epub__titlepage">
            <div>
              <div>
                <h4>Debugged</h4>
              </div>
            </div>
          </div>
          <p>We’ll briefly cover a subtle detail that can be confusing to developers.
In general, the JS specification does not control how browser developer
tools should represent specific values/structures to a developer, so
each browser/engine is free to interpret such things as it sees fit. As
such, browsers/tools <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>don’t always agree</em></span>. Specifically, the behavior we
will now examine is currently observed only in Chrome’s Developer Tools.</p>
          <p>Consider this traditional “class constructor” style JS code, as it would
appear in the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>console</em></span> of Chrome Developer Tools:</p>
          <pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">Foo</code><code class="epub__p">()</code> <code class="epub__p">{}</code>

<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">a1</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__k">new</code> <code class="epub__nx">Foo</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>

<code class="epub__nx">a1</code><code class="epub__p">;</code> <code class="epub__c1">// Foo {}</code></pre>
          <p>Let’s look at the last line of that snippet: the output of evaluating
the <code class="epub__literal">a1</code> expression, which prints <code class="epub__literal">Foo {}</code>. If you try this same code in
Firefox, you will likely see <code class="epub__literal">Object {}</code>. Why the difference? What do
these outputs mean?</p>
          <p>Chrome is essentially saying “{} is an empty object that was
constructed by a function with name <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Foo</em></span>.” Firefox is saying “{} is an
empty object of general construction from <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Object</em></span>.” The subtle difference
is that Chrome is actively tracking, as an <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>internal property</em></span>, the name
of the actual function that did the construction, whereas other browsers
don’t track that additional information.</p>
          <p>It would be tempting to attempt to explain this with JavaScript
mechanisms:</p>
          <pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">Foo</code><code class="epub__p">()</code> <code class="epub__p">{}</code>

<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">a1</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__k">new</code> <code class="epub__nx">Foo</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>

<code class="epub__nx">a1</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">constructor</code><code class="epub__p">;</code> <code class="epub__c1">// Foo(){}</code>
<code class="epub__nx">a1</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">constructor</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">name</code><code class="epub__p">;</code> <code class="epub__c1">// "Foo"</code></pre>
          <p>So, is that how Chrome is outputting <code class="epub__literal">Foo</code>, by simply examining the
object’s <code class="epub__literal">.constructor.name</code>? Confusingly, the answer is both yes and
no.</p>
          <p>Consider this code:</p>
          <pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">Foo</code><code class="epub__p">()</code> <code class="epub__p">{}</code>

<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">a1</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__k">new</code> <code class="epub__nx">Foo</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>

<code class="epub__nx">Foo</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">prototype</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">constructor</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">Gotcha</code><code class="epub__p">(){};</code>

<code class="epub__nx">a1</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">constructor</code><code class="epub__p">;</code> <code class="epub__c1">// Gotcha(){}</code>
<code class="epub__nx">a1</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">constructor</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">name</code><code class="epub__p">;</code> <code class="epub__c1">// "Gotcha"</code>

<code class="epub__nx">a1</code><code class="epub__p">;</code> <code class="epub__c1">// Foo {}</code></pre>
          <p>Even though we change <code class="epub__literal">a1.constructor.name</code> to legitimately be something
else (<code class="epub__literal">Gotcha</code>), Chrome’s console still uses the <code class="epub__literal">Foo</code> name.</p>
          <p>So, it would appear the answer to previous question (does it use
<code class="epub__literal">.constructor.name</code>?) is <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>no</em></span>; it must track it somewhere else,
internally.</p>
          <p>But not so fast! Let’s see how this kind of behavior works with
OLOO-style code:</p>
          <pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">Foo</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__p">{};</code>

<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">a1</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nb">Object</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">create</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">Foo</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>

<code class="epub__nx">a1</code><code class="epub__p">;</code> <code class="epub__c1">// Object {}</code>

<code class="epub__nb">Object</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">defineProperty</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">Foo</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__s2">"constructor"</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">enumerable</code><code class="epub__o">:</code> <code class="epub__kc">false</code><code class="epub__p">,</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">value</code><code class="epub__o">:</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">Gotcha</code><code class="epub__p">(){}</code>
<code class="epub__p">});</code>

<code class="epub__nx">a1</code><code class="epub__p">;</code> <code class="epub__c1">// Gotcha {}</code></pre>
          <p>Ah-ha! Gotcha! Here, Chrome’s console <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>did</em></span> find and use the
<code class="epub__literal">.constructor.name</code>. Actually, while writing this book, this exact
behavior was identified as a bug in Chrome, and by the time you’re
reading this, it may have already been fixed. So you may instead have
seen the corrected <code class="epub__literal">a1; // Object {}</code>.</p>
          <p>Aside from that bug, the internal tracking (apparently only for debug
output purposes) of the “constructor name” that Chrome does (shown in
the earlier snippets) is an intentional Chrome-only extension of
behavior beyond what the JS specification calls for.</p>
          <p>If you don’t use a “constructor” to make your objects, as we’ve
discouraged with OLOO-style code here in this chapter, then you’ll get
objects that Chrome does <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>not</em></span> track an internal “constructor name” for,
and such objects will correctly only be outputted as <code class="epub__literal">Object {}</code>,
meaning “object generated from Object() construction.”</p>
          <p>Don’t think this represents a drawback of OLOO-style coding. When you
code with OLOO and behavior delegation as your design pattern, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>who</em></span>
“constructed” (that is, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>which function</em></span> was called with <code class="epub__literal">new</code>?) some
object is an irrelevant detail. Chrome’s specific internal “constructor
name” tracking is really only useful if you’re fully embracing
class-style coding, but is moot if you’re instead embracing OLOO
delegation.</p>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
  </section>
</div>


</body>
</html>
