<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Static &gt; Dynamic?</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="sbo-corecss">
  <section class="epub__appendix" title="Appendix A. ES6 Class" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="appendix" id="appendix-a-es6-class">
    <div class="epub__sect1" title="Static &gt; Dynamic?">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2 style="clear: both">Static &gt; Dynamic?</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>But the biggest problem of all for the ES6 <code class="epub__literal">class</code> is that all these
various gotchas mean <code class="epub__literal">class</code> sorta opts you into a syntax that seems to
imply (like traditional classes) that once you declare a <code class="epub__literal">class</code>, it’s a
static definition of a (future instantiated) thing. You completely lose
sight of the fact <code class="epub__literal">C</code> is an object, a concrete thing, which you can
directly interact with.</p>
      <p>In traditional class-oriented languages, you never adjust the definition
of a class later, so the class design pattern doesn’t suggest such
capabilities. But one of the most powerful parts of JS is that it <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>is</em></span>
dynamic, and the definition of any object is (unless you make it
immutable) a fluid and mutable <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>thing</em></span>.</p>
      <p><code class="epub__literal">class</code> seems to imply you shouldn’t do such things, by forcing you into
the uglier <code class="epub__literal">.prototype</code> syntax to do so, or forcing you think about
<code class="epub__literal">super</code> gotchas, etc. It also offers <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>very little</em></span> support for any of
the pitfalls that this dynamicism can bring.</p>
      <p>In other words, it’s as if <code class="epub__literal">class</code> is telling you: “Dynamic is too hard,
so it’s probably not a good idea. Here’s a static-looking syntax, so
code your stuff statically.”</p>
      <p>What a sad commentary on JavaScript: <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>dynamic is too hard, let’s
pretend to be (but not actually be!) static</em></span>.</p>
      <p>These are the reasons why the ES6 <code class="epub__literal">class</code> is masquerading as a nice solution
to syntactic headaches, but it’s actually muddying the waters further
and making things worse for JS and for clear and concise understanding.</p>
      <div class="epub__note" title="Note">
        <h3>Note</h3>
        <p>If you use the <code class="epub__literal">.bind(..)</code> utility to make a hard-bound function (see Chapter 2), the function created is not subclassable with ES6 <code class="epub__literal">extend</code> like normal functions are.</p>
      </div>
    </div>
  </section>
</div>


</body>
</html>
