<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Preface</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <h2>Preface</h2>
		
<blockquote>
			
			<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">A successful book is not made of what is in it, but what is left out of it.</span></p>
		<p class="docText">—Mark Twain</p></blockquote>
		
<blockquote>
			
			<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">...as simple as possible, but no simpler.</span></p>
		<p class="docText">—Albert Einstein</p></blockquote>
		
<blockquote>
			
			<p class="docText"><span style="" class="docEmphasis">...a writer who questions the capacity of the person at the other end of the line is not a writer at all, merely a schemer.</span></p>
		<p class="docText">—E.B. White</p></blockquote>
		
<p class="docText">When he took over the editorship of the late <span class="docEmphasis">C++ Report</span>,
 the quick Herb Sutter asked me to write a column on a topic of my 
choosing. I agreed, and I chose to call the column “Common Knowledge.” 
It was supposed to be, in Herb’s words, “a regular summary of basic lore
 that every working C++ programmer should know—but can’t always.” After a
 couple of columns in that vein, however, I became interested in 
template metaprogramming techniques, and the topics treated in “Common 
Knowledge” from that point on were far from common.</p>
		
<p class="docText">However, the problem in the C++ programming 
industry that motivated my original choice of column remains. I commonly
 encounter the following types of individuals in my training and 
consulting work:</p>
		
<ul>
  <li>
    <p class="docList">Domain experts who are expert C programmers but who have only basic knowledge of (and perhaps some animosity toward) C++</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docList">Talented
 new hires direct from university who have an academic appreciation for 
the C++ language but little production C++ experience</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docList">Expert
 Java programmers who have little C++ experience and who have a tendency
 to program in C++ the way one would program in Java</p>
  </li>
  <li>
    <p class="docList">C++
 programmers with several years of experience maintaining existing C++ 
applications but who have not been challenged to learn anything beyond 
the basics required for maintenance</p>
  </li>
</ul>
		
<p class="docText">I want to be immediately productive, but many of 
the people with whom I’m working or who I’m training require preliminary
 education in various C++ language features, patterns, and coding 
techniques before we can get down to business. Worse, I suspect that 
most C++ code is written in ignorance of at least some of these basics 
and is therefore not what most C++ experts would consider to be 
production quality.</p>
		
<p class="docText">This book addresses this pervasive problem by 
providing essential, common knowledge that every professional C++ 
programmer needs to know, in a form that is pared to its essentials and 
that can be efficiently and accurately absorbed. Much of the information
 is already available from other sources or is part of that compendium 
of unwritten information that all expert C++ programmers know. The 
advantage is that this material resides in one place and was selected 
according to what my training and consulting experience over many years 
has shown are the most commonly misunderstood and most useful language 
features, concepts, and techniques.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Perhaps the most important aspect of the 
sixty-three short items that make up this book is what they leave out, 
rather than what they contain. Many of these topics have the potential 
to become complex. An author’s ignorance of these complexities could 
result in an uninformed description that could mislead the reader, but 
an expert discussion of a topic in its full complexity could inundate 
the reader. The approach used here is to filter out <span class="docEmphasis">needless</span>
 complexity in the discussion of each topic. What remains, I hope, is a 
clear distillation of the essentials required for production C++ 
programming. C++ language wonks will recognize, therefore, that I’ve 
left out discussion of some issues that are interesting and even 
important from a theoretical perspective, but the ignorance of which 
does not commonly affect one’s ability to read and write production C++ 
code.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Another motivation for this book came as I was 
engaged in conversation with a group of well-known C++ experts at a 
conference. There was a general
 pall or depression among these experts that modern C++ is so complex 
that the “average” programmer can no longer understand it. (The specific
 issue was name binding in the context of templates and namespaces. Yes,
 getting worked up about such a topic does imply the need for more play 
with normal children.) On reflection, I’d have to say our attitude was 
pretentious and our gloom unwarranted. We “experts” have no such 
problems, and it’s as easy to program in C++ as it is to speak a (vastly
 more complex) natural language, even if you can’t diagram the deep 
structure of your every utterance. A recurring theme of this book is 
that while the full description of the minutia of a particular language 
feature may be daunting, day-to-day use of the feature is 
straightforward and natural.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Consider function overloading. A full description 
occupies a large chunk of the standard and whole or multiple chapters in
 many C++ texts. And yet, when faced with</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>void f( int );
void f( const char * );
//...
f( "Hello" );
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">not a single practicing C++ programmer will be unable to determine which <tt>f</tt>
 is called. Full knowledge of the rules by which a call to an overloaded
 function is resolved is useful but only rarely necessary. The same 
applies to many other ostensibly complex areas of C++ language and 
idiom.</p>
		
<p class="docText">This is not to say that all the material presented 
here is easy; it’s “as simple as possible, but no simpler.” In C++ 
programming, as in any other worthwhile intellectual activity, many 
important details can’t be written on an index card. Moreover, this is 
not a book for “dummies.” I feel a great deal of responsibility to those
 who grant a portion of their valuable time to reading my books. I 
respect these readers and try to communicate with them as I would in 
person to any of my colleagues. Writing at an eighth-grade level to a 
professional isn’t writing. It’s pandering.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Many of the book’s items treat simple 
misunderstandings that I’ve seen over and over again, which just need to
 be pointed out (for example, scope order for member function lookup and
 the difference between overriding and overloading). Others deal with 
topics that are in the process of becoming essential knowledge for C++ 
professionals but are often incorrectly assumed to be difficult and are 
avoided (for example, class template partial specialization and template
 template parameters). I’ve received some criticism from the expert 
reviewers of the manuscript that I’ve spent too much space 
(approximately one third of the book) on template issues that are not 
really common knowledge. However, each of these experts pointed out one,
 two, or several of the template topics they thought did belong in the 
book. The telling observation is, I think, that there was little overlap
 among these suggestions, and every template-related item had at least 
one supporter.</p>
		
<p class="docText">This is the crux of the issue with the items that 
make up this book. I don’t expect any reader to be ignorant of every 
item’s topic, and it’s likely that some readers will be familiar with 
all of them. Obviously, if a reader is not familiar with a particular 
topic, there would be (I presume) some benefit in reading about it. 
However, even if a reader is already familiar with a topic, I’d hope 
that reading about it from a new perspective might clear up a slight 
misunderstanding or lead to a deeper understanding. This book may also 
have a role in saving the more experienced C++ programmer precious time.
 Competent C++ programmers often find themselves (as described 
previously) answering the same questions over and over again to the 
detriment of their own work. I’d suggest that the approach of “read this
 first, and <span class="docEmphasis">then</span> let’s talk” would save
 these C++ gurus countless hours and direct their expertise instead to 
the complex problems for which it’s really needed.</p>
		
<p class="docText">I initially tried to group these sixty-three items 
into neat chapters, but the items had other ideas. They instead tended 
to clump themselves together in ways that ranged from the obvious to the
 unexpected. For example, the items related to exceptions and resource 
management form a rather natural group. Less obviously, the items <span class="docEmphasis">Capability Queries</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">Meaning of Pointer Comparison</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">Virtual Constructors and Prototype</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">Factory Method</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">Covariant Return Types</span> are strongly and somewhat surprisingly interrelated and are best grouped in close proximity to each other. <span class="docEmphasis">Pointer Arithmetic</span> decided to hang with <span class="docEmphasis">Smart Pointers</span>
 rather than with the pointer and array material earlier in the book. 
Rather than attempt to impose an arbitrary chapter structure on these 
natural groupings, I decided to grant the individual items freedom of 
association. Of course, many other interrelationships exist among the 
topics treated by the items than can be represented in a simple linear 
ordering, so the items make frequent internal references among 
themselves. It’s a clumped but connected community.</p>
		
<p class="docText">While the main idea is to be
 brief, discussion of a topic sometimes includes ancillary details that 
are not directly related to the subject at hand. These details are never
 necessary to follow the discussion, but the reader is put on notice 
that a particular facility or technique exists. For instance, the <tt>Heap</tt>
 template example that appears in several items informs the reader in 
passing about the existence of the useful but rarely discussed STL heap 
algorithms, and the discussion of placement new outlines the technical 
basis of the sophisticated buffer management techniques employed by much
 of the standard library. I also try to take the opportunity, whenever 
it seems natural to do so, to fold the discussion of subsidiary topics 
into the discussion of a particular, named item. Therefore, <span class="docEmphasis">RAII</span> contains a short discussion of the order of constructor and destructor activation, <span class="docEmphasis">Template Argument Deduction</span> discusses the use of helper functions for specializing class templates, and <span class="docEmphasis">Assignment and Initialization Are Different</span>
 folds in a discussion of computational constructors. This book could 
easily have twice the number of items, but, like the clumping of the 
items themselves, correlation of a subsidiary topic with a specific item
 puts the topic in context and helps the reader to absorb the material 
efficiently and accurately.</p>
		
<p class="docText">I’ve reluctantly included several topics that 
cannot reasonably be treated in this book’s format of short items. In 
particular, the items on design patterns and the design of the standard 
template library are laughably short and incomplete. Yet they make an 
appearance simply to put some common misconceptions to rest, emphasize 
the importance of the topics, and encourage the reader to learn more.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Stock examples are part of our programming culture,
 like the stories that families swap when they gather for holidays. 
Therefore, <tt>Shape</tt>, <tt>String</tt>, <tt>Stack</tt>, and many of 
the other usual suspects put in an appearance. The common appreciation 
of these baseline examples confers the same efficiencies as design 
patterns in communication, as in “Suppose I want to rotate a <tt>Shape</tt>, except...” or “When you concatenate two <tt>Strings</tt>...”
 Simply mentioning a common example orients the conversation and avoids 
the need for time-consuming background discussion. “You know how your 
brother acts whenever he’s arrested? Well, the other day...”</p>
		
<p class="docText">Unlike my previous books, this one tries to avoid 
passing judgment on certain poor programming practices and misuses of 
C++ language features; that’s a goal for other books, the best of which I
 list in the bibliography. (I was, however, not entirely successful in 
avoiding the tendency to preach; some bad programming practices just 
have to be mentioned, even if only in passing.) The goal of this book is
 to inform the reader of the technical essentials of production-level 
C++ programming in as efficient a manner as possible.</p>
		
<p class="docText">—Stephen C. Dewhurst<br/>Carver, Massachusetts<br/>January 2005</p>
		


</body>
</html>
