<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 1. Data Abstraction</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 1. Data Abstraction</h2>
		
<p class="docText">A
 “type” is a set of operations, and an “abstract data type” is a set of 
operations with an implementation. When we identify objects in a problem
 domain, the first question we should ask about them is, “What can I do 
with this object?” not “How is this object implemented?” Therefore, if a
 natural description of a problem involves employees, contracts, and 
payroll records, then the programming language used to solve the problem
 should contain <tt>Employee</tt>, <tt>Contract</tt>, and <tt>PayrollRecord</tt>
 types. This allows an efficient, two-way translation between the 
problem domain and the solution domain, and software written this way 
has less “translation noise” and is simpler and more correct.</p>
		
<p class="docText">In a general-purpose programming language like C++, we don’t have application-specific types like <tt>Employee</tt>.
 Instead, we have something better: the language facilities to create 
sophisticated abstract data types. The purpose of an abstract data type 
is, essentially, to extend the programming language into a particular 
problem domain.</p>
		
<p class="docText">No universally accepted 
procedure exists for designing abstract data types in C++. This aspect 
of programming still has its share of inspiration and artistry, but most
 successful approaches follow a set of similar steps.</p>
		
			
			
			
			
		
<table class="docText" border="0">
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td valign="top" width="25">
        <div class="docText">
          <b>1. </b>
        </div>
      </td>
      <td>
        <div class="docText">Choose
 a descriptive name for the type. If you have trouble choosing a name 
for the type, you don’t know enough about what you want to implement. Go
 think some more. An abstract data type should represent a single, 
well-defined concept, and the name for that concept should be obvious.<br/><br/>
			</div>
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td valign="top" width="25">
        <div class="docText">
          <b>2. </b>
        </div>
      </td>
      <td>
        <div class="docText">List
 the operations that the type can perform. An abstract data type is 
defined by what you can do with it. Remember initialization 
(constructors), cleanup (destructor), copying (copy operations), and 
conversions (nonexplicit single-argument constructors and conversion 
operators). Never, ever, simply provide a bunch of get/set operations on
 the data members of the implementation. That’s not data abstraction; 
that’s laziness and lack of imagination.<br/><br/>
			</div>
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td valign="top" width="25">
        <div class="docText">
          <b>3. </b>
        </div>
      </td>
      <td>
        <div class="docText">Design
 an interface for the type. The type should be, as Scott Meyers tells 
us, “easy to use correctly and hard to use incorrectly.” An abstract
 data type extends the language; do proper language design. Put yourself
 in the place of the user of your type, and write some code with your 
interface. Proper interface design is as much a question of psychology 
and empathy as technical prowess.<br/><br/>
			</div>
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td valign="top" width="25">
        <div class="docText">
          <b>4. </b>
        </div>
      </td>
      <td>
        <div class="docText">Implement
 the type. Don’t let the implementation affect the interface of the 
type. Implement the contract promised by the type’s interface. Remember 
that the implementations of most abstract data types will change much 
more frequently than their interfaces.<br/><br/>
			</div>
      </td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>
		


</body>
</html>
