<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 3. Design Patterns</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 3. Design Patterns</h2>
		
<p class="docText">Anyone
 who is not already familiar with design patterns may, after a brief 
survey of the field, come away with the impression that design patterns 
are a lot of marketing hype, are just some simple coding techniques, or 
are the playthings of computer scientists who really should get out 
more. While each of these impressions carries a grain of truth, design 
patterns are an essential component of the professional C++ programmer’s
 toolkit.</p>
		
<p class="docText">A “design 
pattern” is a recurring architectural theme that provides a solution to a
 common design problem within a particular context and describes the 
consequences of this solution. A design pattern is more than a simple 
description of a technique; it’s a named capsule of design wisdom 
gleaned from successful existing practice, written in such a way that it
 can be easily communicated and reused. Patterns are about programmer to
 programmer communication.</p>
		
<p class="docText">From a 
practical perspective, design patterns have two important properties. 
First, they describe proven, successful design techniques that can be 
customized in a context-dependent way to new design situations. Second, 
and perhaps more important, mentioning the application of a particular 
pattern serves to document not only the technique that is applied but 
also the reasons for its application and the effect of having applied 
it.</p>
		
<p class="docText">This sort of thing is 
nothing new. Consider an analogy from the field of algorithms. 
(Algorithms are not design patterns, and they’re not “code patterns.” 
They’re algorithms, and this is an analogy.) Consider the following 
statement that I might make to a colleague: “I have an unsorted sequence
 that I have to search a number of times. Therefore, I’m going to quick 
sort it and use binary search to perform each lookup.” The ability to 
use the terms “quick sort” and “binary search” is of inestimable value 
not only in design but also in communicating that design to an educated 
colleague. When I say “quick sort,” my colleague knows that the sequence
 I’m sorting is in a random access structure, that it will probably be 
sorted within O(nlg<sub>2</sub>n) time, and that the elements in the sequence may be compared with a less-than-like operator. When I say “binary search,” my colleague
 knows (even if I hadn’t earlier mentioned “quick sort”) that the 
sequence is sorted, that I will locate the item of interest within O(lg<sub>2</sub>n)
 comparisons, and that an appropriate operation is available to compare 
sequence elements. Shared knowledge of, and a standard vocabulary for, 
standard algorithms permits not only efficient documentation but also 
efficient criticism. For example, if I planned to perform this search 
and sort procedure on a singly linked list structure, my colleague would
 immediately smirk and point out that I couldn’t use quick sort and 
probably wouldn’t want to use binary search.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Until the advent of 
design patterns, we missed these advantages in documentation, 
communication, and efficient smirking with our object-oriented designs. 
We were forced into low-level descriptions of our designs, with all the 
inefficiency and imprecision that entails. It’s not that techniques for 
sophisticated object-oriented design didn’t exist; it’s that the 
techniques were not readily available to the entire programming 
community under a shared, common terminology. Design patterns address 
that problem, and we can now describe object-oriented designs as 
efficiently and unambiguously as algorithmic designs.</p>
		
<p class="docText">For example, when we see 
that the Bridge pattern has been applied to a design, we know that at a 
simple mechanical level an abstract data type implementation has been 
separated into an interface class and an implementation class. 
Additionally, we know that the reason this was done was to separate 
strongly the interface from the implementation so that changes to the 
implementation would not affect users of the interface. We also know a 
runtime cost exists for this separation, how the source code for the 
abstract data type should be arranged, and many other details. A pattern
 name is an efficient, unambiguous handle to a wealth of information and
 experience about a technique, and careful, accurate use of patterns and
 pattern terminology in design and documentation clarifies code and 
designs.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Patterns wonks 
sometimes describe design patterns as a form of literature (they really 
do) that follows a certain formal structure. Several common variants are
 in use, but all forms contain four essential parts.</p>
		
<p class="docText">First, a design pattern must
 have an unambiguous name. For example, the term “wrapper” is useless 
for a design pattern, because it is already in common use and has dozens
 of meanings. Using a term like “Wrapper” as a pattern name would lead 
only to confusion and misunderstanding. Instead, the different design 
techniques that formerly went under the name “wrapper” are now 
designated by the pattern names “Bridge,” “Strategy,” “Façade,” “Object 
Adapter,” and probably several others. Use of a precise pattern name has
 a clear advantage over using a less precise term, in the same way that 
“binary search” is a more precise and useful term than “lookup.”</p>
		
<p class="docText">Second, the pattern 
description must define the problem addressed by the pattern. This 
description may be relatively broad or narrow.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Third, the 
pattern description describes the problem’s solution. Depending on the 
statement of the problem, the solution may be rather high level or 
relatively low level, but it should still be general enough to customize
 according to the various contexts in which the problem may occur.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Fourth, the 
pattern description describes the consequences of applying the pattern 
to the context. How has the context changed for better or worse after 
application of the pattern?</p>
		
<p class="docText">Will knowledge of patterns 
make a bad designer a good designer? Time for another analogy: Consider 
one of those painful mathematics courses you may have been forced to 
undergo, in which the final examination is to prove a number of theorems
 in a certain area of mathematics. How do you get out of such a course 
alive? One obvious way is to be a genius. Starting from first 
principles, you develop the underpinnings of an entire branch of 
mathematics and eventually prove the theorems. A more practical approach
 would be to memorize and internalize a large number of theorems in that
 area of mathematics and use whatever native mathematical ability, 
inspiration, or good luck you have at your disposal to select the 
appropriate subsidiary theorems and combine them with some logical glue 
to prove the new theorems. This approach is advantageous even for our 
fictitious genius, because a proof built upon established theorems is 
more efficient to construct and easier to communicate to mere mortals. 
Familiarity with subsidiary theorems does not, of course, guarantee that
 a poor mathematician will be able to pass the test, but such knowledge 
will at least enable that person to understand the proof once it has 
been produced.</p>
		
<p class="docText">In a similar vein, 
developing a complex object-oriented design from first principles is 
probably going to be tedious, and communication of the eventual design 
difficult. Composition of design patterns to produce an object-oriented 
design is similar to use of subsidiary theorems in mathematics to prove
 a new theorem. Design patterns are often described as 
“micro-architectures” that can be composed with other patterns to 
produce a new architecture. Of course, selecting appropriate patterns 
and composing them effectively requires design expertise and native 
ability. However, even your manager will be able to understand the 
completed design if he or she has the requisite knowledge of patterns.</p>
		


</body>
</html>
