<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 4. The Standard Template Library</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 4. The Standard Template Library</h2>
		
<p class="docText">A
 short description of the standard template library (STL) cannot do its 
design justice. What follows is an appetizer to encourage you to study 
the STL in depth.</p>
		
<p class="docText">The STL isn’t really a library. It’s an inspired idea and a set of conventions.</p>
		
<p class="docText">The STL consists of three
 major kinds of components: containers, algorithms, and iterators. 
Containers contain and organize elements. Algorithms perform operations.
 Iterators are used to access the elements of a container. This is 
nothing new, as many traditional libraries have these components, and 
many traditional libraries are implemented with templates. The STL’s 
inspired idea is that containers and the algorithms that operate on them
 need no knowledge of each other. This sleight of hand is accomplished 
with iterators.</p>
		
<p class="docText">An iterator is like a 
pointer. (In fact, pointers are one kind of STL iterator.) Like a 
pointer, an iterator can refer to an element of a sequence, can be 
dereferenced to get the value of the object to which it refers, and can 
be manipulated like a pointer to refer to different elements of a 
sequence. STL iterators may be predefined pointers, or they may be 
user-defined class types that overload the appropriate operators to have
 the same syntax of use as a predefined pointer (see <span class="docEmphasis">Smart Pointers</span> [42, 145]).</p>
		
<p class="docText">An STL container is an
 abstraction of a data structure, implemented as a class template. As 
with different data structures, different containers organize their 
elements in different ways to optimize access or manipulation. The STL 
defines seven (or, if you count <tt>string</tt>, eight) standard containers, and several widely accepted nonstandard containers are available.</p>
		
<p class="docText">An STL algorithm is an abstraction of a function, implemented as a function template (see <span class="docEmphasis">Generic Algorithms</span> [60,
 221]). Most STL algorithms work with one or more sequences of values, 
where a sequence is defined by an ordered pair of iterators. The first 
iterator refers to the first element of the sequence, and the second 
iterator refers to one past the last element of the sequence (<span class="docEmphasis">not</span> to the last element). If the iterators refer to the same location, they define an empty sequence.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Iterators
 are the mechanism by which containers and algorithms work together. A 
container can produce a pair of iterators that indicates a sequence of 
its elements (either all its elements or a subrange), and an algorithm 
operates on that sequence. In this way, containers and algorithms can 
work closely together while remaining ignorant of each other. (The 
beneficial effect of ignorance is a recurring theme in advanced C++ 
programming. See <span class="docEmphasis">Polymorphism</span> [2, 3], <span class="docEmphasis">Factory Method</span> [30, 103], <span class="docEmphasis">Commands and Hollywood</span> [19, 67], and <span class="docEmphasis">Generic Algorithms</span> [60, 221].)</p>
		
<p class="docText">In addition to 
containers, algorithms, and iterators, the STL defines a number of 
ancillary capabilities. Algorithms and containers may be customized with
 function pointers and function objects (see <span class="docEmphasis">STL Function Objects</span> [20, 71]), and these function objects may be adapted and combined with various function object adapters.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Containers may also be 
adapted with container adapters that modify the interface of the 
container to be that of a stack, queue, or priority queue.</p>
		
<p class="docText">The STL relies heavily 
on convention. Containers and function objects must describe themselves 
through a standard set of nested type names (see <span class="docEmphasis">Embedded Type Information</span> [53, 189], <span class="docEmphasis">Traits</span> [54, 193], and <span class="docEmphasis">STL Function Objects</span> [20,
 71]). Both container and function object adapters require that member 
functions have specific names and contain specific type information. 
Algorithms require that iterators passed to them be able to support 
certain operations and be able to identify what these operations are. If
 you abandon convention when using or extending the STL, abandon all 
hope as well. If you adhere to convention when using the STL, you’ll 
have an easy life.</p>
		
<p class="docText">The STL conventions do not 
specify implementation details, but they do specify efficiency 
constraints on the implementation. In addition, because the STL is a 
template library, much optimization and tuning can take place at compile
 time. Many of the naming and information conventions mentioned 
previously are there precisely to allow significant compile-time 
optimization. Use of the STL generally rivals the efficiency of 
hand-coding by an expert, and it beats hand-coding by the average 
nonexpert or by any team of programmers hands down. The result is also 
generally clearer and more maintainable.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Learn the STL, and use it extensively.</p>
		


</body>
</html>
