<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 5. References Are Aliases, Not Pointers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 5. References Are Aliases, Not Pointers</h2>
		
<p class="docText">A
 reference is another name for an existing object. Once a reference is 
initialized with an object, either the object name or the reference name
 may be used to refer to the object.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>int a = 12;
int &amp;ra = a; // ra is another name for a
--ra; // a == 11
a = 10; // ra == 10
int *ip = &amp;ra; // ip points to a
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">References are often 
confused with pointers, perhaps because C++ compilers often implement 
references as pointers, but they are not pointers and do not behave like
 pointers.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Three major 
differences between references and pointers are that there are no null 
references, all references require initialization, and a reference 
always refers to the object with which it is initialized. In the 
previous example, the reference <tt>ra</tt> will refer to <tt>a</tt> for its entire lifetime. Most erroneous uses of references stem from misunderstanding these differences.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Some compilers may catch an obvious attempt to create a null reference:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>				<span class="docEmphMark">Employee &amp;anEmployee = *static_cast&lt;Employee*&gt;(0); // error!</span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">However, the compiler may 
not detect less obvious attempts to create a null reference, which will 
cause undefined behavior at runtime:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>Employee *getAnEmployee();
//...
<span class="docEmphMark">Employee &amp;anEmployee = *getAnEmployee(); // probably bad code </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">if( &amp;anEmployee == 0 ) // undefined behavior                  </span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">If <tt>getAnEmployee</tt>
 returns a null pointer, then the behavior of this code is undefined. In
 this case, it’s better to use a pointer to hold the result of <tt>getAnEmployee</tt>.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>Employee *employee = getAnEmployee();
if( employee ) //...
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The requirement 
that a reference must be initialized implies that the object to which it
 refers must be in existence when the reference is initialized. This is 
important, so I’ll say it again: A reference is an alias for an object 
that already exists prior to the initialization of the reference. Once a
 reference is initialized to refer to a particular object, it cannot 
later be made to refer to a different object; a reference is bound to 
its initializer for its whole lifetime. In effect, after initialization a
 reference disappears and is simply another name for its initializer 
thereafter. This aliasing property is why references are often a good 
choice for function formal arguments; in the following <tt>swap</tt> template function, the formal arguments <tt>a</tt> and <tt>b</tt> become aliases for the actual arguments to the call:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T&gt;
void swap( T &amp;a, T &amp;b ) {
    T temp(a);
    a = b;
    b = temp;
}
//...
int x = 1, y = 2;
swap( x, y ); // x == 2, y == 1
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">In the call to <tt>swap</tt> above, <tt>a</tt> aliases <tt>x</tt>, and <tt>b</tt> aliases <tt>y</tt>,
 for the duration of the call. Note that the object to which a reference
 refers needn’t have a name, so a reference may be used to give a 
convenient name to an unnamed object:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>int grades[MAX];
//...
swap( grades[i], grades[j] );
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">After the formal arguments <tt>a</tt> and <tt>b</tt> of <tt>swap</tt> are initialized with the actual arguments <tt>grades[i]</tt> and <tt>grades[j]</tt>, respectively, those two nameless array elements can be manipulated through the aliases <tt>a</tt> and <tt>b</tt>. This property may be used more directly in order to simplify and optimize.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Consider the following function that sets a particular element of a two-dimensional array:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>inline void set_2d( float *a, int m, int i, int j ) {
<span class="docEmphMark">    a[i*m+j] = a[i*m+j] * a[i*m+i] + a[i*m+j]; // oops!  </span>
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">We can replace the line 
commented “oops!” with a simpler version that employs a reference and 
that has the additional advantage of being correct. (Did you catch the 
error? I didn’t the first time around.)</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>inline void set_2d( float *a, int m, int i, int j ) {
    float &amp;r = a[i*m+j];
    r = r * r + r;
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">A reference to a non-const cannot be initialized with a literal or temporary value.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>				<span class="docEmphMark">double &amp;d = 12.3; // error!                                     </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">swap( std::string("Hello"), std::string(", World") ); // errors!</span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">However, a reference to const can:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>const double &amp;cd = 12.3; // OK
template &lt;typename T&gt;
T add( const T &amp;a, const T &amp;b ) {
    return a + b;
}
//...
const std::string &amp;greeting
    = add(std::string("Hello"),std::string(", World")); // OK
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">When a reference to 
const is initialized with a literal, the reference is set to refer to a 
temporary location that is initialized with the literal. Therefore, <tt>cd</tt> does not actually refer to the literal <tt>12.3</tt> but to a temporary of type <tt>double</tt> that has been initialized with <tt>12.3</tt>. The reference <tt>greeting</tt> refers to the unnamed temporary <tt>string</tt> return value of the call to <tt>add</tt>.
 Ordinarily, such temporaries are destroyed (that is, go out of scope 
and have their destructors called) at the end of the expression in which
 they’re created. However, when such a temporary is used to initialize a
 reference to const, the temporary will exist as long as the reference 
that refers to it.</p>
		


</body>
</html>
