<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 6. Array Formal Arguments</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 6. Array Formal Arguments</h2>
		
<p class="docText">Array
 formal arguments are problematic. The major surprise in store for the 
C/C++ novice is that there are no array formal arguments, because an 
array is passed as a pointer to its first element.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>void average( int ary[12] ); // formal arg is int *
//...
int anArray[] = { 1, 2, 3 }; // three-element array
const int anArraySize =
    sizeof(anArray)/sizeof(anArray[0]); // == 3
average( anArray ); // legal!
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">This automatic 
transformation from array to pointer is given the charming technical 
term “decay”; an array decays to a pointer to its first element. The 
same thing happens to functions, by the way. A function argument decays 
to a pointer to a function, but, unlike an array that loses its bound, a
 decaying function has the good sense to hold onto its argument and 
return types. (Note also the proper compile-time calculation of <tt>anArraySize</tt> that can withstand changes both to the set of initializers of the array and to the array’s element type.)</p>
		
<p class="docText">Because the array bound 
is ignored in an array formal argument, it’s usually best to omit it. 
However, if the function is expecting a pointer to a sequence of 
elements (that is, an array) as an argument, rather than a pointer to a 
single object, then it’s probably best to say so:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>void average( int ary[] ); // formal arg is still int *
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">If, on the other hand, 
the precise value of the array bound is important, and you want the 
function to accept only arrays with a particular number of elements, you
 may consider a reference formal argument:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>void average( int (&amp;ary)[12] );
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Now our function will accept only integer arrays of size 12.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>				<span class="docEmphMark">average( anArray ); // error! anArray is int [3]!</span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Templates can help to generalize somewhat,</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;int n&gt;
void average( int (&amp;ary)[n] ); // let compiler deduce n for us
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">but a more traditional solution is to pass the size of the array explicitly.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>void average_n( int ary[], int size );
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Of course, we can combine the two approaches:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;int n&gt;
inline void average( int (&amp;ary)[n] )
    { average_n( ary, n ); }
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">It should be clear 
from this discussion that one of the major problems with using arrays as
 function arguments is that the size of the array must be encoded 
explicitly in the type of the formal argument, passed as a separate 
argument, or indicated by a “terminator” value within the array itself 
(such as the <tt>'\0'</tt> that is used to indicate 
the end of a character array used as a string). Another difficulty is 
that—no matter how it is declared—an array is often manipulated through a
 pointer to its first element. If that pointer is passed as the actual 
argument to a function, our previous trick of declaring a reference 
formal argument will not help us.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>int *anArray2 = new int[anArraySize];
//...
<span class="docEmphMark">average( anArray2 ); // error! can't init int(&amp;)[n] with int *</span>
average_n( anArray, anArraySize ); // OK...
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">For these reasons, one of the standard containers (typically <tt>vector</tt> or <tt>string</tt>) is often a good substitute for most traditional uses of arrays and should generally be considered first. See also the <tt>Array</tt> class template in <span class="docEmphasis">You Instantiate What You Use</span> [61, 225].</p>
		
<p class="docText">Multidimensional array formal arguments are not essentially more difficult than simple arrays, but they look more challenging:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>void process( int ary[10][20] );
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">As
 in the single-dimensional case, the formal argument is not an array but
 a pointer to the array’s first element. However, a multidimensional 
array is an array of arrays, so the formal argument is a pointer to an 
array (see <span class="docEmphasis">Dealing with Function and Array Declarators</span> [17, 61] and <span class="docEmphasis">Pointer Arithmetic</span> [44, 149]).</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>void process( int (*ary)[20] ); // ptr to array of 20 ints
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Note that the second (and 
subsequent) bounds are not decayed, because otherwise it would not be 
possible to perform pointer arithmetic with the formal argument (see <span class="docEmphasis">Pointer Arithmetic</span> [44, 149]). As noted previously, it’s often a good idea to let your reader know you expect the actual argument to be an array:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>void process( int ary[][20] ); // still a pointer, but clearer
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Effective processing of 
multidimensional array arguments often decays into an exercise in 
low-level coding, with the programmer taking the compiler’s place in 
performing index calculations:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>void process_2d( int *a, int n, int m ) { // a is an n by m array
    for( int i = 0; i &lt; n; ++i )
        for( int j = 0; j &lt; m; ++j )
            a[i*m+j] = 0; // calculate index "by hand"!
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">As usual, a template can sometimes help to clean things up.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;int n, int m&gt;
inline void process( int (&amp;ary)[n][m] )
    { process_2d( &amp;ary[0][0], n, m ); }
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Simply put, array formal arguments are a pain in the neck. Approach with caution.</p>
		


</body>
</html>
