<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 8. Pointers to Pointers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 8. Pointers to Pointers</h2>
		
<p class="docText">It’s legal to declare a pointer to a pointer. This is what the C++ standard calls a “multilevel” pointer.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>int *pi; // a ptr
int **ppi; // a two-level multilevel ptr
int ***pppi; // a three-level multilevel ptr
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Although it’s 
rare to encounter multilevel pointers with more than two levels, we do 
see pointers to pointers in two common situations. The first is when we 
declare an array of pointers.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>Shape *picture[MAX]; // array of ptr to Shape
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Because an array name decays into a pointer to its first element (see <span class="docEmphasis">Array Formal Arguments</span> [6, 17]), the name of an array of pointers is also a pointer to a pointer.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>Shape **pic1 = picture;
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">We most often see this usage in the implementation of a class that manages a buffer of pointers:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T&gt;
class PtrVector {
  public:
    explicit PtrVector( size_t capacity )
        : buf_(new T *[capacity]), cap_(capacity), size_(0) {}
    //...
  private:
    T **buf_; // ptr to array of ptr to T
    size_t cap_; // capacity
    size_t size_; // size
};
//...
PtrVector&lt;Shape&gt; pic2( MAX );
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">As the implementation of <tt>PtrVector</tt> implies, pointers to pointers can be complex and are best kept hidden.</p>
		
<p class="docText">The second common use of 
multilevel pointers occurs when a function needs to change the value of a
 pointer that is passed to it. Consider the following function that 
moves a pointer to refer to the next occurrence of a character in a 
string:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>				<span class="docEmphMark">void scanTo( const char **p, char c ) {                      </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">    while( **p &amp;&amp; **p != c )                                 </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">        ++*p;                                                </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">}                                                            </span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The first argument to <tt>scanTo</tt> is a pointer to the pointer whose value we want to change. That means we have to pass the address of the pointer:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>char s[] = "Hello, World!";
const char *cp = s;
scanTo( &amp;cp, ',' ); // move cp to first comma
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">This usage is reasonable in C, 
but in C++ it is more conventional, simpler, and safer to use a 
reference to a pointer as a function argument rather than a pointer to a
 pointer.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>void scanTo( const char *&amp;p, char c ) {
    while( *p &amp;&amp; *p != c )
        ++p;
}
//...
char s[] = "Hello, World!";
const char *cp = s;
scanTo( cp, ',' );
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">In C++, using a reference to pointer function argument should nearly always be preferred to a pointer to pointer argument.</p>
		
<p class="docText">A common misconception is 
that conversions that apply to pointers also apply to pointers to 
pointers. This is not the case. For instance, we know that a pointer to a
 derived class can be converted to a pointer to its public base class:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>Circle *c = new Circle;
Shape *s = c; // fine...
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Because a <tt>Circle</tt> is-a <tt>Shape</tt>, it follows that a pointer to a <tt>Circle</tt> is also a pointer to a <tt>Shape</tt>. However, a pointer to a pointer to a <tt>Circle</tt> is not a pointer to a pointer to a <tt>Shape</tt>:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>Circle **cc = &amp;c;
<span class="docEmphMark">Shape **ss = cc; // error!              </span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The same confusion often occurs when <tt>const</tt> is involved. We know that it’s legal to convert a pointer to non-const to a pointer to const (see <span class="docEmphasis">Const Pointers and Pointers to Const</span> [7, 21]), but we may not convert a pointer to pointer to non-const to a pointer to pointer to const:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>char *s1 = 0;
const char *s2 = s1; // OK...
char *a[MAX]; // aka char **
<span class="docEmphMark">const char **ps = a; // error!          </span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		


</body>
</html>
