<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 9. New Cast Operators</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 9. New Cast Operators</h2>
		
<p class="docText">There’s
 something sneaky and underhanded about old-style casts. Their syntax is
 such that they can often pass unnoticed in a section of code, but they 
can do terrible damage, like an unexpected sucker punch from a bully. 
Let’s clarify what we mean by “old-style” cast. Obviously, the original C
 syntax consisting of a parenthesized type applied to an expression is 
an old-style cast:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>				<span class="docEmphMark">char *hopeItWorks = (char *)0x00ff0000; // old-style cast</span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">C++ introduced another way of saying the same thing with the function-style cast syntax:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>typedef char *PChar;
<span class="docEmphMark">hopeItWorks =                                            </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">    PChar( 0x00ff0000 ); // function-style/old-style cast</span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">A function-style cast may 
look more civilized than its dread forebear, but it’s just as nasty; 
avoid both of them like the plague.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Honest programmers use the 
new cast operators because they allow you to say more precisely what you
 mean, and mean more accurately what you say. There are four of them, 
and each has a specific purpose.</p>
		
<p class="docText">The <tt>const_cast</tt> operator allows you to add or remove <tt>const</tt> and <tt>volatile</tt> type qualifiers in an expression’s type:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>const Person *getEmployee() { ... }
//...
<span class="docEmphMark">Person *anEmployee = const_cast&lt;Person *&gt;(getEmployee());</span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">In this code, we’ve used <tt>const_cast</tt> to strip a <tt>const</tt> type qualifier from the return type of <tt>getEmployee</tt>. We could have used an old-style cast to achieve the same result,</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>				<span class="docEmphMark">anEmployee = (Person *)getEmployee();                    </span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">but the <tt>const_cast</tt>
 is superior for a couple of reasons. First, it’s obvious and hideous. 
It sticks out of the code like a sore thumb, and that’s a good thing, 
because casts in any form are dangerous. They should be painful to 
write, because you should use them only if you have to use them. They 
should be easy to find, because casts are the “usual suspects” one 
examines first whenever a bug appears. Second, a <tt>const_cast</tt>
 is less powerful than an old-style cast because it will affect only 
type qualifiers. This restriction is a good thing as well, because it 
allows us to say more precisely what our intent is. Using an old-style 
cast tells the compiler to shut up because you intend that the return 
type of <tt>getEmployee</tt> be converted to <tt>Person *</tt>. Use of a <tt>const_cast</tt> tells the compiler to shut up because you intend to strip a <tt>const</tt> from the return type of <tt>getEmployee</tt>.
 There is not a big difference in these two statements (although they’re
 both pretty disrespectful, really) unless some maintenance occurs to 
the <tt>getEmployee</tt> function:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>const Employee *getEmployee(); // big change!
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The gag rule enforced by the old-style cast is still in effect; the improper conversion of <tt>const Employee *</tt> to <tt>Person *</tt> will not be flagged by the compiler, but the compiler will complain about the <tt>const_cast</tt>, because that drastic a conversion is beyond its capabilities. In short, the <tt>const_cast</tt> is preferred to the old-style cast because it’s more hideous, harder to use, and less powerful.</p>
		
<p class="docText">The <tt>static_cast</tt>
 operator is used for casts that are relatively portable across 
platforms. Most commonly, it is used to cast “down” an inheritance 
hierarchy from a base class pointer or reference toward a derived class 
pointer or reference (see also <span class="docEmphasis">Capability Queries</span> [27, 93]):</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>Shape *sp = new Circle;
Circle *cp = static_cast&lt;Circle *&gt;(sp); // downcast
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">In this case, the <tt>static_cast</tt> will result in correct code, because <tt>sp</tt> actually does refer to a <tt>Circle</tt> object. However, if <tt>sp</tt> had pointed instead to some other type of <tt>Shape</tt>, we would have likely gotten a runtime error of some sort when we used <tt>cp</tt>. To reiterate, these new cast operators are safer than old-style casts, but they’re not necessarily safe.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Note that a <tt>static_cast</tt> may not change type qualifiers the way a <tt>const_cast</tt> can. This implies that it is sometimes necessary to use a sequence of two new cast operators to achieve what a single old-style cast could do:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>const Shape *getNextShape() { ... }
//...
Circle *cp =
    static_cast&lt;Circle *&gt;(const_cast&lt;Shape *&gt;(getNextShape()));
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The standard doesn’t guarantee much about the behavior of <tt>reinterpret_cast</tt>,
 but it generally does just what its name says; it looks at the bits of 
an object and lets you pretend they represent something else entirely:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>hopeItWorks = // pretend int is pointer
    reinterpret_cast&lt;char *&gt;(0x00ff0000);
int *hopeless = // pretend char * is int *
    reinterpret_cast&lt;int *&gt;(hopeItWorks);
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">This sort of thing is 
occasionally necessary in low-level code, but it’s not likely to be 
portable. Proceed with caution. Note the difference between <tt>reinterpret_cast</tt> and <tt>static_cast</tt> when down casting from a pointer to a base class to a pointer to a derived class. A <tt>reinterpret_cast</tt> will typically just pretend the base class pointer is a derived class pointer without changing its value whereas a <tt>static_cast</tt> (and an old style cast, for that matter) will perform the correct address manipulation (see <span class="docEmphasis">Meaning of Pointer Comparison</span> [28, 97]).</p>
		
<p class="docText">Speaking of casting within a hierarchy brings us to <tt>dynamic_cast</tt>. A <tt>dynamic_cast</tt> is used typically to perform a safe down cast from a pointer to a base to a derived class (but see <span class="docEmphasis">Capability Queries</span> [27, 93]). The difference from <tt>static_cast</tt> is that a <tt>dynamic_cast</tt>
 used as a down cast may be performed only on a polymorphic type (that 
is, the type of the expression being cast has to be a pointer to class 
type with a virtual function), and the cast actually performs a runtime 
check to see that the cast is correct. This safety comes at a cost, 
though; a <tt>static_cast</tt> typically has no or minimal runtime cost whereas using a <tt>dynamic_cast</tt> implies significant runtime overhead.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>const Circle *cp =
     dynamic_cast&lt;const Circle *&gt;( getNextShape() );
if( cp ) { ... }
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">If <tt>getNextShape</tt> returns a pointer to a <tt>Circle</tt> (or something publicly derived from <tt>Circle</tt>, that is, something that is-a <tt>Circle</tt>; see <span class="docEmphasis">Polymorphism</span> [2, 3]), the cast will succeed and <tt>cp</tt> will point to a <tt>Circle</tt>. Otherwise <tt>cp</tt> will be null. Note that we can combine the declaration and test in the same expression:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>if( const Circle *cp
    = dynamic_cast&lt;const Circle *&gt;(getNextShape()) ) { ... }
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">This is advantageous because it restricts the scope of the variable <tt>cp</tt> to the if-statement, so <tt>cp</tt> will just go out of scope when we no longer need it.</p>
		
<p class="docText">A less common use of <tt>dynamic_cast</tt> is to perform a down cast to a reference type:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>const Circle &amp;rc = dynamic_cast&lt;const Circle &amp;&gt;(*getNextShape());
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The operation is similar to that of a <tt>dynamic_cast</tt> to a pointer type, but if the cast fails, the operator throws a <tt>std::bad_cast</tt> exception rather than simply returning a null pointer. (Remember, there are no null references; see <span class="docEmphasis">References Are Aliases, Not Pointers</span> [5, 13].) Idiomatically, a <tt>dynamic_cast</tt> to a pointer is asking a question (“Is this <tt>Shape</tt> pointer actually pointing to a <tt>Circle?</tt> If not, I can deal with it.”), whereas a <tt>dynamic_cast</tt> to a reference is stating an invariant (“This <tt>Shape</tt> is supposed to be a <tt>Circle</tt>. If it’s not, something is seriously wrong!”).</p>
		
<p class="docText">As with the other new cast operators, use of <tt>dynamic_cast</tt> is occasionally necessary, but it is often overused because of its reputation for being a “safe” cast. See <span class="docEmphasis">Factory Method</span> [30, 103] for an example of such overuse.</p>
		


</body>
</html>
