<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 10. Meaning of a Const Member Function</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 10. Meaning of a Const Member Function</h2>
		
<p class="docText">Technically, const member functions are trivial. Socially, they can be complex.</p>
		
<p class="docText">The type of the <tt>this</tt> pointer in a non-const member function of a class X is X <tt>* const</tt>. That is, it’s a constant pointer to a non-constant X (see <span class="docEmphasis">Const Pointers and Pointers to Const</span> [7, 21]). Because the object to which <tt>this</tt> refers is not const, it can be modified. The type of <tt>this</tt> in a const member function of a class X is <tt>const X * const</tt>. That is, it’s a constant pointer to a constant X. Because the object to which <tt>this</tt> refers is const, it cannot be modified. That’s the difference between const and non-const member functions.</p>
		
<p class="docText">This is why it’s 
possible to change the logical state of an object with a const member 
function even if the physical state of the object does not change. 
Consider the following somewhat uninspired implementation of a class X 
that uses a pointer to an allocated buffer to hold some portion of its 
state:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre class="preFixedHeight">class X {
  public:
    X() : buffer_(0), isComputed_(false) {}
    //...
    void setBuffer() {
        int *tmp = new int[MAX];
        delete [] buffer_;
        buffer_ = tmp;
    }
<span class="docEmphMark">    void modifyBuffer( int index, int value ) const // immoral!</span>
        { buffer_[index] = value; }
    int getValue() const {
        if( !isComputed_ ) {
<span class="docEmphMark">            computedValue_ = expensiveOperation(); // error!    </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">isComputed_ = true; // error!                         </span>
        }
        return computedValue_;
    }
  private:
    static int expensiveOperation();
    int *buffer_;
    bool isComputed_;
    int computedValue_;
};


					  </pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The <tt>setBuffer</tt> member function must be non-const because it’s modifying a data member of its X object. However, <tt>modifyBuffer</tt> can legally be const because it’s not changing the X object; it’s changing only some data to which the <tt>buffer_</tt> member of X refers.</p>
		
<p class="docText">That’s legal, but it’s not 
moral. Like a shyster lawyer who follows the letter of the law while 
violating its intent, a C++ programmer who writes a const member 
function that changes the logical state of its object will be judged 
guilty by his or her peers, if not by the compiler. It’s just wrong.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Conversely, sometimes
 a member function that really should be declared to be const must 
modify its object. This is a common situation where a value is computed 
by “lazy evaluation.” That is, the value is not computed until the first
 request for it in order to speed things up in the event that the 
request isn’t made at all. The function <tt>X::getValue</tt>
 is attempting to perform a lazy evaluation of an expensive computation,
 but, because it is declared to be a const member function, it is not 
allowed to set the values of the <tt>isComputed_</tt> and <tt>computedValue_</tt>
 data members of its X object. There is a temptation in cases like this 
to commit the crime of casting in order to promote the greater good of 
being able to declare the member function to be const:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>int getValue() const {
    if( !isComputed_ ) {
<span class="docEmphMark">        X *const aThis = const_cast&lt;X *const&gt;(this); // bad idea!</span>
        aThis-&gt;computedValue_ = expensiveOperation();
        aThis-&gt;isComputed_ = true;
    }
    return computedValue_;
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Resist the temptation. The proper way to handle this situation is to declare the relevant data members to be <tt>mutable</tt>:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>class X {
  public:
    //...
    int getValue() const {
        if( !isComputed_ ) {
            computedValue_ = expensiveOperation(); // fine...
            isComputed_ = true; // also fine...
        }
        return computedValue_;
    }
  private:
    //...
    mutable bool isComputed_; // can now be modified
    mutable int computedValue_; // can now be modified
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Non-static data members of a class may be declared to be <tt>mutable</tt>,
 which will allow their values to be modified by const member functions 
of the class (as well as by non-const member functions). This in turn 
allows a “logically const” member function to be declared to be const 
even though its implementation requires modification of its object.</p>
		
<p class="docText">The effect of const on the type of a member function’s <tt>this</tt>
 pointer also explains how function overload resolution can distinguish 
between const and non-const versions of a member function. Consider the 
following omnipresent example of an overloaded index operator:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>class X {
  public:
    //...
    int &amp;operator [](int index);
    const int &amp;operator [](int index) const;
    //...
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Recall that the left argument of a binary overloaded member operator is passed as the <tt>this</tt> pointer. Therefore, in indexing an X object, the address of the X object is passed as the <tt>this</tt> pointer:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>int i = 12;
X a;
a[7] = i; // this is X *const because a is non-const
const X b;
i = b[i]; // this is const X *const because b is const
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Overload resolution will match the address of a const object with a <tt>this</tt> pointer that points to a const. As another example, consider the following non-member binary operator with two const arguments:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>X operator +( const X &amp;, const X &amp; );
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">If we decide to declare a 
member analog to this overloaded operator, we should declare it to be a 
const member function in order to preserve the constness of the left 
argument:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>class X {
  public:
    //...
<span class="docEmphMark">    X operator +( const X &amp;rightArg ); // left arg is non-const! </span>
    X operator +( const X &amp;rightArg ) const; // left arg is const
    //...
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Like many areas of social life, proper programming with const in C++ is technically simple but morally challenging.</p>
		


</body>
</html>
