<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 11. The Compiler Puts Stuff in Classes</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 11. The Compiler Puts Stuff in Classes</h2>
		
<p class="docText">C
 programmers are used to knowing everything there is to know about the 
internal structure and layout of their structs, and they have a habit of
 writing code that depends on a particular layout. Java programmers are 
used to programming in ignorance of the structural layout of their 
objects and sometimes assume their days of ignorance are over when they 
start programming in C++. In fact, safe and portable coding practices in
 C++ do require a certain level of healthful agnosticism about the 
structure and layout of class objects.</p>
		
<p class="docText">With a class, it’s not always
 “what you see is what you get.” For example, most C++ programmers know 
that if a class declares one or more virtual functions, then the 
compiler will insert in each object of that class a pointer to a virtual
 function table. (Actually, we are guaranteed no such thing by the 
standard, but that’s the way all existing C++ compilers implement 
virtual functions.) However, C++ programmers on that dangerous verge 
between competence and expertise often assume that the location of the 
virtual function table pointer is the same from platform to platform and
 write code based on that assumption—a deadly error. Some compilers will
 place the pointer at the start of the object, some will place it at the
 end of the object, and, if multiple inheritance is involved, several 
virtual function table pointers may be scattered throughout an object. 
Never ass|u|me.</p>
		
<p class="docText">That’s not the end of it, 
either. If you use virtual inheritance, your objects may keep track of 
the locations of their virtual base subobjects with embedded pointers, 
embedded offsets, or nonembedded information. You might end up with a 
virtual function table pointer even if your class has no virtual 
functions! Did I mention that the compiler is also allowed to rearrange 
your data members in limited ways, no matter the order in which they 
were declared? Is there no end to this madness?</p>
		
<p class="docText">There
 is. If it’s important to have a class type that is guaranteed to be 
like a C struct, you can define a POD (standardese for “plain old 
data”). Certainly, built-in types such as <tt>int</tt>, <tt>double</tt>, and the like are PODs, but a C <tt>struct</tt> or <tt>union</tt>-like declaration is also a POD.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>struct S { // a POD-struct
    int a;
    double b;
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Such PODs can be as
 safely manipulated as the corresponding C constructs (how safe that is 
is as questionable in C++ as it is in C). However, if you plan to get 
low level with your POD, it’s important that it remain a POD under 
maintenance, or all bets are off:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>struct S { // no longer a POD-struct!
    int a;
    double b;
  private:
    std::string c; // some maintenance
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">If you’re not willing to 
deal only with PODs, what does all this meddling by the compiler imply 
about how you should manipulate class objects? It implies that you 
should manipulate class objects at a high level rather than as 
collections of bits. A higher-level operation will do “the same thing” 
from platform to platform, but it may accomplish it differently.</p>
		
<p class="docText">For example, if you want to copy a class object, never use a block copy such as the standard <tt>memcpy</tt> function or the hand-coded equivalent, because that’s for copying storage, not objects (<span class="docEmphasis">Placement New</span> [35,
 119] discusses this difference). Rather, you should use the object’s 
own initialization or assignment operations. An object’s constructor is 
where the compiler sets up the hidden mechanism that implements the 
object’s virtual functions, and the like. Simply blasting a bunch of 
bits into uninitialized storage may not do the right thing. Similarly, a
 copy of one object to another must take care not to overwrite these 
internal class mechanisms. For example, assignment never changes the 
value of an object’s virtual function table pointers; they’re set by the
 constructor and never changed for the life of the object. A bit blast 
may well destroy that delicate internal structure. (See also <span class="docEmphasis">Copy Operations</span> [13, 45].)</p>
		
<p class="docText">Another
 common problem is the assumption that a particular member of a class is
 resident at a given offset within an object. In particular, it’s not 
uncommon for overly clever code to assume either that the virtual 
function table pointer is at offset zero (that is, it’s the first thing 
in the class) or that the first declared data member is at offset zero. 
Neither of these assumptions is correct more than about half the time, 
and both are (of course) never correct simultaneously.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>struct T { // not a POD
    int a_; // offset of a_ unknown
    virtual void f(); // offset of vptr unknown
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">I’m not going to continue 
in this vein, because such a list of no-no’s would be long, tedious, and
 possibly tasteless. But the next time you find yourself making 
low-level assumptions about the internal structure of your classes, 
pause, reflect, and get your mind out of the gutter!</p>
		


</body>
</html>
