<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 12. Assignment and Initialization Are Different</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 12. Assignment and Initialization Are Different</h2>
		
<p class="docText">Initialization and assignment are different operations, with different uses and different implementations.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Let’s get it 
absolutely straight. Assignment occurs when you assign. All the other 
copying you run into is initialization, including initialization in a 
declaration, function return, argument passing, and catching exceptions.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Assignment and 
initialization are essentially different operations not only because 
they’re used in different contexts but also because they do different 
things. This difference in operation is not so obvious in the built-in 
types such as <tt>int</tt> or <tt>double</tt>, because, in that case, both assignment and initialization consist simply of copying some bits (but see also <span class="docEmphasis">References Are Aliases, Not Pointers</span> [5, 13]):</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>int a = 12; // initialization, copy 0X000C to a
a = 12; // assignment, copy 0X000C to a
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">However, things can be quite different for user-defined types. Consider the following simple, nonstandard string class:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>class String {
  public:
    String( const char *init ); // intentionally not explicit!
    ~String();
    String( const String &amp;that );
    String &amp;operator =( const String &amp;that );
    String &amp;operator =( const char *str );
    void swap( String &amp;that );
    friend const String // concatenate
        operator +( const String &amp;, const String &amp; );
    friend bool operator &lt;( const String &amp;, const String &amp; );
    //...
  private:
    String( const char *, const char * ); // computational
    char *s_;
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Initializing a <tt>String</tt>
 object with a character string is straightforward. We allocate a buffer
 big enough to hold a copy of the character string and then copy.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>String::String( const char *init ) {
    if( !init ) init = "";
    s_ = new char[ strlen(init)+1 ];
    strcpy( s_, init );
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The destructor does what it does:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>String::~String() { delete [] s_; }
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Assignment is a somewhat more difficult job than construction:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>String &amp;String::operator =( const char *str ) {
    if( !str ) str = "";
    char *tmp = strcpy( new char[ strlen(str)+1 ], str );
    delete [] s_;
    s_ = tmp;
    return *this;
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">An assignment is 
somewhat like destruction followed by a construction. For a complex 
user-defined type, the target (left side, or <tt>this</tt>) must be cleaned up before it is reinitialized with the source (right side, or <tt>str</tt>). In the case of our <tt>String</tt> type, the <tt>String</tt>’s existing character buffer must be freed before a new character buffer is attached. See <span class="docEmphasis">Exception Safe Functions</span> [39,
 135] for an explanation of the ordering of the statements. (By the way,
 just about every week somebody reinvents the bright idea of 
implementing assignment with an explicit destructor call and using 
placement new to call a constructor. It doesn’t always work, and it’s 
not exception safe. Don’t do it.)</p>
		
<p class="docText">Because a proper assignment
 operation cleans up its left argument, one should never perform a 
user-defined assignment on uninitialized storage:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>String *names = static_cast&lt;String *&gt;(::operator new( BUFSIZ ));
<span class="docEmphMark">names[0] = "Sakamoto"; // oops! delete [] uninitialized pointer!</span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">In this case, <tt>names</tt> refers to uninitialized storage because we called <tt>operator new</tt> directly, avoiding implicit initialization by <tt>String</tt>’s default constructor; <tt>names</tt> refers to a hunk of memory filled with random bits. When the <tt>String</tt> assignment operator is called in the second line, it will attempt to perform an array delete on an uninitialized pointer. (See <span class="docEmphasis">Placement New</span> [35, 119] for a safe way to perform an operation similar to such an assignment.)</p>
		
<p class="docText">Because a constructor has 
less work to do than an assignment operator (in that a constructor can 
assume it’s working with uninitialized storage), an implementation will 
sometimes employ what’s known as a “computational constructor” for 
efficiency:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>const String operator +( const String &amp;a, const String &amp;b )
    { return String( a.s_, b.s_ ); }
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The two-argument computational constructor is not intended to be part of the interface of the <tt>String</tt> class, so it’s declared to be private.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>String::String( const char *a, const char *b ) {
    s_ = new char[ strlen(a)+strlen(b)+1 ];
    strcat( strcpy( s_, a ), b );
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		


</body>
</html>
