<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 13. Copy Operations</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 13. Copy Operations</h2>
		
<p class="docText">Copy
 construction and copy assignment are different operations. Technically,
 they have nothing to do with each other, but socially they hang out 
together and must be compatible.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>class Impl;
class Handle {
  public:
    //...
    Handle( const Handle &amp; ); // copy constructor
    Handle &amp;operator =( const Handle &amp; ); // copy assignment
    void swap( Handle &amp; );
    //...
  private:
    Impl *impl_; // pointer to implementation of Handle
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Copying is such a 
pervasive operation that it’s even more important than usual to follow 
convention. These operations are always declared as a pair, with the 
signatures above (but see <span class="docEmphasis">auto_ptr Is Unusual</span> [43, 147] and <span class="docEmphasis">Preventing Copying</span> [32, 111]). That is, for a class <tt>X</tt>, the copy constructor should be declared <tt>X(const X &amp;)</tt>, and the copy assignment operator should be declared <tt>X &amp;operator =(const X &amp;)</tt>. It’s common and often a good idea to define a member <tt>swap</tt> function if a member implementation of <tt>swap</tt> has a performance or exception safety advantage over a traditional non-member <tt>swap</tt>. An implementation of a typical non-member <tt>swap</tt> is straightforward:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T&gt;
void swap( T &amp;a, T &amp;b ) {
    T temp(a); // T's copy ctor
    a = b; // T's copy assignment
    b = temp; // T's copy assignment
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">This <tt>swap</tt> (identical to the standard library <tt>swap</tt>) is defined in terms of the type <tt>T</tt>’s copy operations, and it works well if <tt>T</tt>’s implementation is small and simple but may be expensive otherwise. We can do better for a class such as <tt>Handle</tt> by just swapping the pointer to its implementation.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>inline void Handle::swap( Handle &amp;that )
    { std::swap( impl_, that.impl_ ); }
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Remember the old comedy 
routine in which we’re told how to get a million dollars and never pay 
any taxes on it? First, you get a million dollars.... In a similar vein,
 we can show how to write an exception safe copy assignment operation. 
First, you get an exception safe copy constructor and an exception safe 
swap operation. The rest is easy:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>Handle &amp;Handle::operator =( const Handle &amp;that ) {
    Handle temp( that ); // exception safe copy construction
    swap( temp ); // exception safe swap
    return *this; // we assume temp's destruction won't throw
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">This technique works 
particularly well for “handle” classes, that is, classes that consist 
mostly or entirely of a pointer to their implementations. As we saw in 
an earlier example in this item, writing exception safe swaps for such 
classes is both trivial and efficient.</p>
		
<p class="docText">The subtle point of this 
implementation of copy assignment is that the behavior of copy 
construction must be compatible with that of copy assignment; they’re 
different operations, but there is a pervasive, idiomatic assumption 
that they will produce indistinguishable results. That is, whether one 
writes</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>Handle a = ...
Handle b;
b = a; // assign a to b
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">or</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>Handle a = ...
Handle b( a ); // initialize b with a
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">the resulting value and future behavior of <tt>b</tt> should be indistinguishable whether it received that value through an assignment or an initialization.</p>
		
<p class="docText">This
 compatibility is particularly important when using the standard 
containers, because their implementations will often substitute copy 
construction for copy assignment, with the expectation that either 
operation will produce identical results (see <span class="docEmphasis">Placement New</span> [35, 119]).</p>
		
<p class="docText">A perhaps more common implementation of copy assignment has the following structure:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>Handle &amp;Handle::operator =( const Handle &amp;that ) {
    if( this != &amp;that ) {
        // do assignment...
    }
    return *this;
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">It’s often necessary for 
correctness, and occasionally more efficient, to perform a check for 
assignment to self, that is, ensure the left side (<tt>this</tt>) and right side (<tt>that</tt>) of the assignment have different addresses.</p>
		
<p class="docText">At one time or 
another in their careers, most C++ programmers toy with the idea of 
implementing virtual copy assignment. It’s legal but subtly complex, so 
don’t do it. Clone instead (see <span class="docEmphasis">Virtual Constructors and Prototype</span> [29, 99]).</p>
		


</body>
</html>
