<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 14. Function Pointers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 14. Function Pointers</h2>
		
<p class="docText">It’s possible to declare a pointer to a function of a particular type.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>void (*fp)(int); // ptr to function
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Note the required use of parentheses to indicate that <tt>fp</tt> is a pointer to a function that returns <tt>void</tt>, not a function that returns <tt>void*</tt> (see <span class="docEmphasis">Dealing with Function and Array Declarators</span> [17, 61]). Like a pointer to data, a pointer to function may be null, or it may refer to a function of the appropriate type.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>extern int f( int );
extern void g( long );
extern void h( int );
//...
<span class="docEmphMark">fp = f; // error! &amp;f is of type int(*)(int), not void(*)(int)   </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">fp = g; // error! &amp;g is of type void(*)(long), not void(*)(int) </span>
fp = 0; // OK, set to null
fp = h; // OK, point to h
fp = &amp;h; // OK, take address explicitly
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Note that it is not 
necessary to take the address of a function explicitly when initializing
 or assigning its address to a pointer to function; the compiler knows 
implicitly to take the function’s address, so using the <tt>&amp;</tt> operator is optional in this case and is usually omitted.</p>
		
<p class="docText">In a similar fashion, it
 is not necessary to dereference a function pointer to call the function
 to which it refers, because the compiler will dereference it for you:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>(*fp)(12); // explicit dereference
fp(12); // implicit dereference, same result
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Note that no “generic” pointer exists that can point to any type of function the way a <tt>void*</tt>
 pointer can refer to any kind of data. Also note that the address of a 
non-static member function is not a pointer, so we can’t point to a non-static member function with a function pointer (see <span class="docEmphasis">Pointers to Member Functions Are Not Pointers</span> [16, 57]).</p>
		
<p class="docText">One traditional use of function pointers is to implement callbacks (but see <span class="docEmphasis">Function Objects</span> [18, 63] and <span class="docEmphasis">Commands and Hollywood</span> [19,
 67] for generally more effective callback techniques). A “callback” is a
 potential action that is set up in an initialization stage to be 
invoked in response to a future event. For example, if one were to catch
 on fire, it’s best if one has planned out in advance how one should 
react:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>extern void stopDropRoll();
inline void jumpIn() { ... }
//...
void (*fireAction)() = 0;
//...
if( !fatalist ) { // if you care that you're on fire...
    // then set an appropriate action, just in the event!
    if( nearWater )
        fireAction = jumpIn;
    else
        fireAction = stopDropRoll;
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Once we’ve determined our 
course of action, a different part of our code can focus on if and when 
to execute the action, without being concerned with what the action is:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>if( ftemp &gt;= 451 ) { // if there's a fire...
    if( fireAction ) // ...and an action to execute...
        fireAction(); // ...execute it!
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Note that it is legal to 
point to an inline function. However, calling an inline function through
 a function pointer will not result in an inline function call, because 
the compiler will not be able, in general, to determine at compile time 
precisely what function will be called. In our previous example, <tt>fireAction</tt>
 may point to either of two functions (or neither), so at the point of 
call the compiler has no choice but to generate code for an indirect, 
non-inline function call.</p>
		
<p class="docText">It’s also legal to take the address of an overloaded function:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>void jumpIn();
void jumpIn( bool canSwim );
//...
fireAction = jumpIn;
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The type of the pointer is used to select among the various candidate functions. In this case, <tt>fireAction</tt> has type <tt>void(*)()</tt>, so the first <tt>jumpIn</tt> is selected.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Function pointers are used as callbacks in several places in the standard library, most notably by the standard <tt>set_new_handler</tt> function that sets a callback to be invoked if the global <tt>operator new</tt> function is unable to fulfill a memory request.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>void begForgiveness() {
    logError( "Sorry!" );
    throw std::bad_alloc();
}
//...
std::new_handler oldHandler =
    std::set_new_handler(begForgiveness);
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The standard typename <tt>new_handler</tt> is a typedef:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>typedef void (*new_handler)();
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The callback, therefore, must be a function that takes no argument and returns <tt>void</tt>. The <tt>set_new_handler</tt>
 function sets the callback to its argument and returns the previous 
callback; no separate functions exist for getting and setting. Simply 
getting the current callback requires some idiomatic gyrations:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>std::new_handler current
    = std::set_new_handler( 0 ); // get...
std::set_new_handler( current ); // ...and restore!
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The standard <tt>set_terminate</tt> and <tt>set_unexpected</tt> functions also use this combined get/set callback idiom.</p>
		


</body>
</html>
