<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 15. Pointers to Class Members Are Not Pointers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 15. Pointers to Class Members Are Not Pointers</h2>
		
<p class="docText">It’s
 unfortunate that pointers to class members have the term “pointer” in 
their descriptions, because they don’t contain addresses and don’t 
behave like pointers.</p>
		
<p class="docText">The syntax for declaring a
 pointer to member is really not too horrible (if you’re already 
resigned to the declarator syntax for regular pointers):</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>int *ip; // pointer to an int
int C::*pimC; // pointer to an int member of C
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">All you have to do is use <tt>classname::*</tt> rather than a plain <tt>*</tt> to indicate you’re referring to a member of <tt>classname</tt>. Otherwise, the syntax is the same as for a regular pointer declarator.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>void *   *   *const* weird1;
void *A::*B::*const* weird2;
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The name <tt>weird1</tt> has the type pointer to const pointer to pointer to pointer to <tt>void</tt>. The name <tt>weird2</tt> has the type pointer to const pointer to a member of <tt>B</tt> to a pointer to a member of <tt>A</tt>, which is a pointer to <tt>void</tt>. (This is just an example, and you wouldn’t normally expect to see a declaration this complex or this silly.)</p>
		
<p class="docText">A regular pointer contains an address. If you dereference a pointer, you get the object at that address:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>int a = 12;
ip = &amp;a;
*ip = 0;
a = *ip;
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">A pointer to member, unlike
 a regular pointer, does not refer to a specific memory location. 
Rather, it refers to a particular member of a class but not to a 
particular member of a particular object. Mechanically, it’s usually clearest
 to consider a pointer to data member to be an offset. This is not 
necessarily the case, because the C++ standard says nothing about how a 
pointer to data member should be implemented; it says only what its 
syntax and behavior must be. However, most compilers implement pointers 
to data members as integers that contain the offset of the member 
referred to, plus one. (The offset is incremented so that the value 0 
can represent a null pointer to data member.) The offset tells you how 
many bytes from the start of an object a particular member is located.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>class C {
  public:
    //...
    int a_;
};
int C::*pimC; // pointer to an int member of C
C aC;
C *pC = &amp;aC;
pimC = &amp;C::a_;
aC.*pimC = 0;
int b = pC-&gt;*pimC;
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">When we set the value of <tt>pimC</tt> to <tt>&amp;C::a_</tt>, we’re effectively setting <tt>pimC</tt> with the offset of <tt>a_</tt> within <tt>C</tt>. Let’s be clear: Unless <tt>a_</tt> is a static member, using <tt>&amp;</tt> in the expression <tt>&amp;C::a_</tt> does not give us an address; it gives us an offset. Note that this offset applies to any object of type <tt>C</tt>; that is, if the member <tt>a_</tt> can be found 12 bytes from the start of one <tt>C</tt> object, it will be found 12 bytes from the start of any other <tt>C</tt> object.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Given an offset of a member 
within a class, we need the address of an object of that class in order 
to get to the data member at that offset. That’s where the 
unusual-looking <tt>.*</tt> and <tt>-&gt;*</tt> operators enter. When we write <tt>pC-&gt;*pimC</tt>, we are requesting that the address in <tt>pC</tt> be augmented by the offset in <tt>pimC</tt> in order to access the appropriate data member in the <tt>C</tt> object referred to by <tt>pC</tt>. When we write <tt>aC.*pimC</tt>, we are requesting that the address of <tt>aC</tt> be augmented by the offset in <tt>pimC</tt> in order to access the appropriate data member in the <tt>C</tt> object referred to by <tt>pC</tt>.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Pointers to data members 
are not as commonly used as pointers to member functions, but they are 
handy for illustrating the concept of contravariance. There
 is a predefined conversion from a pointer to a derived class to a 
pointer to any of its public base classes. We often say that there is an
 is-a relationship from the derived class to its public base classes, 
and this relationship often arises naturally from an analysis of the 
problem domain (see <span class="docEmphasis">Polymorphism</span> [2, 3]). Therefore, we can state (for example) that a <tt>Circle</tt> is-a <tt>Shape</tt> through public inheritance, and C++ backs us up by providing an implicit conversion from <tt>Circle *</tt> to <tt>Shape *</tt>. No implicit conversion exists from a <tt>Shape *</tt> to a <tt>Circle *</tt> because such a conversion would not make sense; many different types of <tt>Shape</tt> may exist, and not all of them are <tt>Circle</tt>s. (It also just sounds silly to say, “A <tt>Shape</tt> is a <tt>Circle</tt>.”)</p>
		
<p class="docText">In the case of 
pointers to class members, the opposite situation holds: There is an 
implicit conversion from a pointer to a member of a base class to a 
pointer to a member of a publicly derived class, but there is no 
conversion from a pointer to a member of a derived class to a pointer to
 a member of any of its bases. This concept of contravariance seems 
counterintuitive until we remember that a pointer to data member is not a
 pointer to an object; it’s an offset <span class="docEmphasis">into</span> an object.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>class Shape {
    //...
    Point center_;
    //...
};
class Circle : public Shape {
    //...
    double radius_;
    //...
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">A <tt>Circle</tt> is-a <tt>Shape</tt>, so a <tt>Circle</tt> object contains a <tt>Shape</tt> subobject. Therefore, any offset within <tt>Shape</tt> is also a valid offset within <tt>Circle</tt>.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>Point Circle::*loc = &amp;Shape::center_; // OK, base to derived
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">However, a <tt>Shape</tt> is not (necessarily) a <tt>Circle</tt>, so the offset of a member of <tt>Circle</tt> is not (necessarily) a valid offset within a <tt>Shape</tt>.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>				<span class="docEmphMark">double Shape::*extent =                                 </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">    &amp;Circle::radius_; // error! derived to base         </span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">It makes sense to say that a <tt>Circle</tt> contains all the data members of its <tt>Shape</tt> base class (that is, it inherits those members from <tt>Shape</tt>), and C++ backs us up with an implicit conversion from a pointer to member of a <tt>Shape</tt> to a pointer to member of a <tt>Circle</tt>. It doesn’t make sense to say that a <tt>Shape</tt> contains all the data members of a <tt>Circle</tt> (<tt>Shape</tt> doesn’t inherit anything from <tt>Circle</tt>), and C++ reminds us of that by disallowing the conversion from pointer to member of <tt>Circle</tt> to pointer to member of <tt>Shape</tt>.</p>
		


</body>
</html>
