<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 16. Pointers to Member Functions Are Not Pointers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 16. Pointers to Member Functions Are Not Pointers</h2>
		
<p class="docText">When you take the address of a non-static member function, you don’t get an address; you get a pointer to member function.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>class Shape {
  public:
    //...
    void moveTo( Point newLocation );
    bool validate() const;
    virtual bool draw() const = 0;
    //...
};
class Circle : public Shape {
    //...
    bool draw() const;
    //...
};
//...
void (Shape::*mf1)( Point ) = &amp;Shape::moveTo; // not a pointer
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The declaration syntax of a 
pointer to member function is really no more difficult than that of a 
pointer to a regular function (which, admittedly, is bad enough as it 
is; see <span class="docEmphasis">Dealing with Function and Array Declarators</span> [17, 61]). As with pointers to data members, all that’s necessary is to use <tt>classname::*</tt> rather than <tt>*</tt> to indicate that the function referred to is a member of <tt>classname</tt>. Unlike a regular pointer to function, though, a pointer to member function can refer to a const member function:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>bool (Shape::*mf2)() const = &amp;Shape::validate;
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">As with a pointer to data 
member, we need an object or pointer to an object in order to 
dereference a pointer to member function. In the case of a pointer to 
data member, we need to add the object’s address to the member’s
 offset (contained in the pointer to data member) in order to access the
 member. In the case of a pointer to member function, we need the 
object’s address to use as (or to calculate; see <span class="docEmphasis">Meaning of Pointer Comparison</span> [28, 97]) the value of the <tt>this</tt> pointer for the function call and possibly for other reasons as well.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>Circle circ;
Shape *pShape = &amp;circ;
(pShape-&gt;*mf2)(); // call Shape::validate
(circ.*mf2)(); // call Shape::validate
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The <tt>-&gt;*</tt> and <tt>.*</tt> operators must be parenthesized because they have lower precedence than the <tt>()</tt>
 operator, and we have to first find out what function to call before we
 call it! This is entirely analogous to the use of parentheses in an 
expression such as <tt>(a+b)*c</tt>, where we want to ensure that the lower-precedence addition is carried out before the higher-precedence multiplication.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Note that there is no such 
thing as a “virtual” pointer to member function. Virtualness is a 
property of the member function itself, not the pointer that refers to 
it.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>mf2 = &amp;Shape::draw; // draw is virtual
(pShape-&gt;*mf2)(); // call Circle::draw
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">This is one reason why a 
pointer to member function cannot be implemented, in general, as a 
simple pointer to function. The implementation of the pointer to member 
function must store within itself information as to whether the member 
function to which it refers is virtual or nonvirtual, information about 
where to find the appropriate virtual function table pointer (see <span class="docEmphasis">The Compiler Puts Stuff in Classes</span> [11, 37]), an offset to be added to or subtracted from the function’s <tt>this</tt> pointer (see <span class="docEmphasis">Meaning of Pointer Comparison</span> [28,
 97]), and possibly other information. A pointer to member function is 
commonly implemented as a small structure that contains this 
information, although many other implementations are also in use. 
Dereferencing and calling a pointer to member function usually involves 
examining the stored information and conditionally executing the 
appropriate virtual or nonvirtual function calling sequence.</p>
		
<p class="docText">As with pointers to 
data members, pointers to member functions exhibit contravariance: there
 is a predefined conversion from a pointer to a member function of a 
base class to a pointer to a member function of a derived class,
 not the reverse. This makes sense if you consider that a base class 
member function will attempt to access only base class members through 
its <tt>this</tt> pointer whereas a derived class function may attempt to access members that are not present in the base class.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>class B {
  public:
    void bset( int val ) { bval_ = val; }
  private
    int bval_;
};
class D : public B {
  public:
    void dset( int val ) { dval_ = val; }
  private:
    int dval_;
};
B b;
D d;
<span class="docEmphMark">void (B::*f1)(int) = &amp;D::dset; // error! derived func in base ptr</span>
(b.*f1)(12); // oops! access nonexistent dval member!
void (D::*f2)(int) = &amp;B::bset; // OK, base func in derived ptr
(d.*f2)(11); // OK, set inherited bval data member
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		


</body>
</html>
