<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 17. Dealing with Function and Array Declarators</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 17. Dealing with Function and Array Declarators</h2>
		
<p class="docText">The
 main confusion with pointer to function and pointer to array 
declarations arises because the function and array modifiers have higher
 precedence than the pointer modifier, so parentheses are often 
required.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>int *f1(); // function that returns int *
int (*fp1)(); // ptr to function that returns int
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The same problem obtains with the high-precedence array modifier:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>const int N = 12;
int *a1[N]; // array of N int *
int (*ap1)[N]; // ptr to array of N ints
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Of course, once one can have a pointer to a function or to an array, one can have a pointer to such a pointer:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>int (**ap2)[N]; // ptr to ptr to array of N ints
int *(*ap3)[N]; // ptr to array of N int *
int (**const fp2)() = 0; // const ptr to ptr to func
int *(*fp3)(); // ptr to func that returns int *
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Note that both the argument and return types contribute to the type of a function or function pointer.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>char *(*fp4)(int,int);
char *(*fp5)(short,short) = 0;
<span class="docEmphMark">fp4 = fp5; // error! type mismatch                                    </span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Things can become 
immeasurably more complex when function and array modifiers appear in 
the same declaration. Consider the following common, incorrect attempt 
to declare an array of function pointers:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>				<span class="docEmphMark">int (*)()afp1[N]; // syntax error!                                    </span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">In the (erroneous) declaration above, the appearance of the function modifier <tt>()</tt> signaled the end of the declaration, and the appended name <tt>afp1</tt> signaled the start of a syntax error. It’s analogous to writing an array declaration</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>				<span class="docEmphMark">int[N] a2; // syntax error!                                           </span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">that works just fine in Java 
but is not legal C++. The correct declaration of an array of function 
pointers puts the name being declared in the same location that it 
appears in a simple pointer to function. Then we say we want an array of
 those things:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>int (*afp2[N])(); // array of N ptr to func that returns int
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Things are starting to get unwieldy here, so it’s time to reach for <tt>typedef</tt>.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>typedef int (*FP)(); // ptr to func that returns int
FP afp3[N]; // array of N FP, same type as afp2
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The use of <tt>typedef</tt> to simplify the syntax of complex declarations is a sign of caring for those poor maintainers who come after you. Using <tt>typedef</tt>, even the declaration of the standard <tt>set_new_handler</tt> function becomes simple:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>typedef void (*new_handler)();
new_handler set_new_handler( new_handler );
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">So, a <tt>new_handler</tt> (see <span class="docEmphasis">Function Pointers</span> [14, 49]) is a pointer to a function that takes no argument and returns <tt>void</tt>, and <tt>set_new_handler</tt> is a function that takes a <tt>new_handler</tt> as an argument and returns a <tt>new_handler</tt> as a result. Simple. If you try it without <tt>typedef</tt>, your popularity with those who maintain your code will plummet:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>				<span class="docEmphMark">void (*set_new_handler(void (*)()))(); // correct, but evil           </span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">It’s also possible to declare a reference to a function.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>int aFunc( double ); // func
int (&amp;rFunc)(double) = aFunc; // ref to func
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">References to functions are rarely used and fill pretty much the same niche as constant pointers to functions:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>int (*const pFunc)(double) = aFunc; // const ptr to func
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">References to arrays do provide some additional capability not provided by pointers to arrays and are discussed in <span class="docEmphasis">Array Formal Arguments</span> [6, 17].</p>
		


</body>
</html>
