<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 19. Commands and Hollywood</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 19. Commands and Hollywood</h2>
		
<p class="docText">When a function object is used as a callback, that’s an instance of the Command pattern.</p>
		
<p class="docText">What’s a callback? Suppose 
you’re taking a long trip, and I lend you my car for the purpose. Given 
the condition of my car, I’ll probably also hand you a sealed envelope 
with a telephone number in it, along with instructions to call the 
number in the envelope if you experience any engine problems. That’s a 
callback. You do not have to know the number in advance (it may be the 
number of a good repair shop, a bus line, or the city dump), and in fact
 you may never have to call the number. In effect, the task of handling 
the “engine trouble” event has been partitioned between you (also known 
as the “framework”) and me (also known as the “client of the 
framework”). You know when it’s time to do something but not what to do.
 I know what to do if a particular event occurs but not when to do it. 
Together we make a complete application.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Callbacks are a common programming technique and have traditionally been implemented as simple pointers to functions (see <span class="docEmphasis">Function Pointers</span> [14,
 49]). For example, consider an interactive button type that displays a 
labeled button on the screen and executes an action if it’s clicked.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>				<span class="docEmphMark">class Button {                                                        </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">    public:                                                           </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">      Button( const string &amp;label )                                   </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">          : label_(label), action_(0) {}                              </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">      void setAction( void (*newAction)() )                           </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">          { action_ = newAction; }                                    </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">      void onClick() const                                            </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">          { if( action_ ) action_(); }                                </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">    private:                                                          </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">      string label_;                                                  </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">      void (*action_)();                                              </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">    //...                                                             </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">};                                                                    </span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">A user of a <tt>Button</tt> would set a callback function and then hand the <tt>Button</tt> over to framework code that could detect when the <tt>Button</tt> is clicked and execute the action.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>extern void playMusic();
//...                                                 
Button *b = new Button( "Anoko no namaewa" );
b-&gt;setAction( playMusic );                 
registerButtonWithFramework( b );
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">This partitioning of 
responsibility is often called the “Hollywood Principle,” as in “Don’t 
call us; we’ll call you.” We set up the button to perform the correct 
action if it should ever be clicked, and the framework code knows to 
invoke that action if the button is clicked.</p>
		
<p class="docText">However, using a simple 
function pointer as a callback has severe limitations. Functions often 
need data with which to work, but a function pointer has no associated 
data. In the example above, how does the <tt>playMusic</tt> function know what song to play? The usual quick fix is either to severely limit the scope of the function</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre class="preFixedWidth">				<span class="docEmphMark">extern void playAnokoNoNamaewa();                                       </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">//...                                                                   </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">b-&gt;setAction( playAnokoNoNamaewa );                                     </span>
			

					  </pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">or to resort to disreputable and dangerous coding practices, such as the use of a global variable:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>				<span class="docEmphMark">extern const MP3 *theCurrentSong = 0;                                  </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">//...                                                                  </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">const MP3 anokoNoNamaewa ( "AnokoNoNamaewa.mp3" );                     </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">theCurrentSong = &amp;anokoNoNamaewa;                                      </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">b-&gt;setAction( playMusic );                                             </span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">A better approach is 
typically to use a function object rather than a function pointer. Use 
of a function object—or more typically a function object hierarchy—in 
conjunction with the Hollywood Principle is an instance of the Command 
pattern.</p>
		
<p class="docText">One
 obvious benefit of the object-oriented approach is that a function 
object can have encapsulated data. Another advantage is that a function 
object can have dynamic behavior though virtual members; that is, we can
 have a hierarchy of related function objects (see <span class="docEmphasis">Function Objects</span> [18, 63]). We gain a third advantage as well, but we’ll get to that later. First let’s redesign our <tt>Button</tt> to employ the Command pattern:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre class="preFixedHeight">class Action { // Command
  public:
    virtual ~Action();
    virtual void operator ()() = 0;
    virtual Action *clone() const = 0; // Prototype
};
class Button {
  public:
    Button( const std::string &amp;label )
        : label_(label), action_(0) {}
    void setAction( const Action *newAction ) {
        Action *temp = newAction-&gt;clone();
        delete action_;
        action_ = temp;
    }
    void onClick() const
        { if( action_ ) (*action_)(); }
  private:
    std::string label_;
    Action *action_; // Command
    //...
};


					  </pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">A <tt>Button</tt> can now work with any function object that is-a <tt>Action</tt>, like this one:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>class PlayMusic : public Action {
  public:
    PlayMusic( const string &amp;songFile )
        : song_(songFile) {}
    void operator ()(); // plays the song
//...
  private:
    MP3 song_;
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The encapsulated data (in this case, the song to play) preserves both the flexibility and safety of the <tt>PlayMusic</tt> function object.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>Button *b = new Button( "Anoko no namaewa" );
auto_ptr&lt;PlayMusic&gt;
    song( new PlayMusic( "AnokoNoNamaewa.mp3" ) );
b-&gt;setAction( song.get() );
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">So what’s the mysterious 
third advantage of Command to which we referred earlier? Simply that 
it’s advantageous to work with a class hierarchy rather than a more 
primitive, less flexible structure like a function pointer. Because of 
the presence of a Command hierarchy, we’ve already been able to compose 
the Prototype pattern with Command in order to produce clonable commands
 (see <span class="docEmphasis">Virtual Constructors and Prototype</span> [29, 99]). We can continue in this vein and compose additional patterns with Command and Prototype for additional flexibility.</p>
		


</body>
</html>
