<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 20. STL Function Objects</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 20. STL Function Objects</h2>
		
<p class="docText">How
 did we ever get by without the STL? Not only is it easier and faster to
 write complex code, but that code is both standard and highly 
optimized.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>std::vector&lt;std::string&gt; names;
//...
std::sort( names.begin(), names.end() );
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Another nice thing about the STL is that it’s highly configurable. In the code above, we used <tt>string</tt>’s
 less-than operator to sort a vector of strings, but we don’t always 
have a less-than operator to work with, or we may not want to sort in 
ascending order.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>class State {
  public:
    //...
    int population() const;
    float aveTempF() const;
    //...
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The <tt>State</tt> class 
(which represents a state of the union) doesn’t have a less-than 
operator, and we probably don’t want to implement one because it’s not 
clear what it would mean for one state to be less than another (do we 
compare names, population, percentage of elected officials under 
indictment, ...?). Fortunately, the STL generally allows us to specify 
an alternate less-than-like operation in situations like this. Such an 
operation is called a “comparator,” because it compares two values:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>inline bool popLess( const State &amp;a, const State &amp;b )
    { return a.population() &lt; b.population(); }
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Once we have a comparator for <tt>State</tt>s, we can use it to sort them:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>State states[50];
//...
std::sort( state, states+50, popLess ); // by population
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Here we’ve passed a pointer to the <tt>popLess</tt>
 function as the comparator (recall that a function name “decays” into a
 pointer to function when passed as an argument, just as the array name <tt>state</tt> decays into a pointer to its first element). Because <tt>popLess</tt> is passed as a function pointer, it will not be inlined in <tt>sort</tt>, which is unfortunate if we want a fast sort operation (see <span class="docEmphasis">Function Pointers</span> [14, 49]).</p>
		
<p class="docText">We can do better if we use a function object as a comparator:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>struct PopLess : public std::binary_function&lt;State,State,bool&gt; {
    bool operator ()( const State &amp;a, const State &amp;b ) const
        { return popLess( a, b ); }
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The <tt>PopLess</tt> 
type is a typical example of a properly constructed STL function object.
 First, it’s a function object. It overloads the function call operator 
so that it may be called with the usual function call syntax. This is 
important, because STL generic algorithms like <tt>sort</tt>
 are written in such a way that either a function pointer or function 
object may be used to instantiate them, provided that they may be called
 with the typical function call syntax; a function object with an 
overloaded <tt>operator ()</tt> satisfies this syntactic requirement.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Second, it’s derived from the standard <tt>binary_function</tt>
 base class. This is a mechanism that allows other parts of the STL 
implementation to ask compile-time questions of the function object (see
 <span class="docEmphasis">Embedded Type Information</span> [53, 189]). In this case, deriving from <tt>binary_function</tt>
 allows one to find out the argument and return types of the function 
object. We’re not using that capability here, but you can bet that 
somebody else will, and we want our <tt>PopLess</tt> type to be used by others.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Third, the function
 object has no data members, no virtual functions, and no explicitly 
declared constructors or destructor, and the implementation of <tt>operator ()</tt>
 is inline. Function objects used as STL comparators are assumed to be 
small, simple, and fast. It’s possible to design STL function objects
 with significant implementations, but it’s rarely advisable. Another 
reason to avoid or minimize the use of data members in a function object
 to be used with the STL is that STL implementations may make several 
copies of a function object and may assume that all the copies are 
identical. One easy way to ensure that all copies of an object are 
identical is for the object to have no data at all.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Now we can sort this country out by using a function object:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>sort( states, states+50, PopLess() );
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Note the parentheses that follow <tt>PopLess</tt> in this call to <tt>sort</tt>. <tt>PopLess</tt> is a type, but we have to pass an object of that type as a function argument. By appending parentheses to the <tt>PopLess</tt> type name, we create an unnamed temporary <tt>PopLess</tt>
 object that exists for the duration of the function call. (These 
nameless objects are known as “anonymous temporaries,” a term I’ve 
always enjoyed because it sounds vaguely racy.) We could have declared 
and passed a named object:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>PopLess comp;
sort( states, states+50, comp );
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">However, it’s more conventional, and less typing, simply to pass an anonymous temporary object.</p>
		
<p class="docText">A beneficial side effect 
of using a function object as our comparator is that the comparison will
 be inlined whereas use of a function pointer did not permit inlining. 
The reason the call is inlined is that the compiler knows that the type 
of the comparator is <tt>PopLess</tt> when the <tt>sort</tt> function template is instantiated, which in turn allows it to know that <tt>PopLess::operator ()</tt> will be called, which in turn allows it to inline that function, which in turn allows it to inline the nested call to <tt>popLess</tt>.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Another common use of a 
function object in the STL is as a predicate. A predicate is an 
operation that asks a true/false question about a single object. (You 
can think of a comparator as a kind of binary predicate.)</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>struct IsWarm : public std::unary_function&lt;State,bool&gt; {
    bool operator ()( const State &amp;a ) const
        { return a.aveTempF() &gt; 60; }
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The design guidelines 
for STL predicates are identical to those for STL comparators with the 
exception, of course, that they’re unary rather than binary functions. 
Starting with our previous sorted <tt>State</tt> results, the appropriate predicate makes it trivial to find a warm place without too many dang people:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>State *warmandsparse = find_if( states, states+50, IsWarm() );
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		


</body>
</html>
