<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 21. Overloading and Overriding Are Different</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 21. Overloading and Overriding Are Different</h2>
		
<p class="docText">Overloading
 and overriding have nothing whatsoever to do with each other. Nothing. 
They are entirely different concepts. Ignorance of this difference, or 
simply sloppy use of terminology, has caused untold confusion and given 
rise to countless bugs.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Overloading occurs when two or
 more functions in the same scope have the same name and different 
signatures. A function’s signature consists of the number and type of 
its declared arguments (otherwise known as “formal” arguments). When the
 compiler looks up a function name and finds more than one function with
 that name in a scope, it selects among the available candidates in that
 scope for the one whose formal arguments best match the actual 
arguments of the function call (see also <span class="docEmphasis">Member Function Lookup</span> [24, 87] and <span class="docEmphasis">Argument Dependent Lookup</span> [25, 89]). That’s overloading.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Overriding occurs when a 
derived class function has the same name and signature as a base class 
virtual function. In that case, the implementation of the derived class 
function will replace that of the inherited base class function for 
virtual calls to a derived object. Overriding changes the behavior of a 
class but not its interface (but see <span class="docEmphasis">Covariant Return Types</span> [31, 107]).</p>
		
<p class="docText">Consider the following simple base class:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre class="preFixedWidth">class B {
  public:
    //...
<span class="docEmphMark">    virtual int f( int );                                                </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">    void f( B * );                                                       </span>
    //...
};


					  </pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The name <tt>f</tt> is overloaded in <tt>B</tt> because two different functions named <tt>f</tt>
 are in the same scope. (The overloading is highlighted as bad code for 
two reasons. You probably don’t want to overload a virtual function, and
 you probably don’t want to overload on both an integral and a pointer 
type. See <span class="docEmphasis">C++ Gotchas</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">Effective C++</span>, respectively, to see why.)</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>class D : public B {
  public:
    int f( int );
    int f( B * );
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The member function <tt>D::f(int)</tt> overrides the base class virtual function <tt>B::f(int)</tt>. The member function <tt>D::f(B *)</tt> doesn’t override anything, because <tt>B::f(B *)</tt> is not virtual. It does, however, overload <tt>D::f(int)</tt>. Note that it does not overload the base class members <tt>B::f</tt>, because it’s in a different scope (see also <span class="docEmphasis">Optional Keywords</span> [63, 231]).</p>
		
<p class="docText">Overloading and 
overriding are different concepts, and a technical understanding of 
their differences is essential if you want to grok advice on advanced 
base class interface design.</p>
		


</body>
</html>
