<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 22. Template Method</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 22. Template Method</h2>
		
<p class="docText">The
 Template Method pattern has nothing whatsoever to do with C++ 
templates. Rather, it’s a way for a base class designer to give clear 
instructions to derived class designers concerning how the base class 
contract may be implemented (see <span class="docEmphasis">Polymorphism</span> [2,
 3]). However, even if you think this pattern should go by a different 
name, please continue to use the standard name “Template Method.” Much 
of the benefit of using patterns derives from the standard technical 
vocabulary they establish (see <span class="docEmphasis">Design Patterns</span> [3, 7]).</p>
		
<p class="docText">A base class 
specifies its contract to the world at large through its public member 
functions and specifies additional details for classes derived from it 
through its protected member functions. Private member functions may 
also be used as part of the implementation of a class (see <span class="docEmphasis">Assignment and Initialization Are Different</span> [12, 41]). Data members should be private, so we’ll leave them out of this discussion.</p>
		
<p class="docText">The decision as to 
whether a base class’s member function should be nonvirtual, virtual, or
 pure virtual is driven primarily by considering how the behavior of 
that function is to be customized by derived classes. After all, code 
that uses a base class’s interface doesn’t really care how a particular 
operation is implemented by the object; it wants to perform an operation
 on the object, and it’s up to the object to implement that operation 
appropriately.</p>
		
<p class="docText">If a base class member 
function is nonvirtual, the base class designer is specifying an 
invariant over the hierarchy rooted at the base class. Derived classes 
should not hide a base class nonvirtual function with a derived class 
member of the same name (see <span class="docEmphasis">Member Function Lookup</span> [24,
 87]). If you don’t like the contract specified by the base class, find a
 different base class. Don’t attempt to rewrite its contract.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Virtual and pure 
virtual functions specify operations whose implementations can be 
customized by derived classes through overriding. A non-pure virtual 
function provides a default implementation and does not require
 overriding whereas a pure virtual function must be overridden in a 
concrete (that is, nonabstract) derived class. Either kind of virtual 
function allows a derived class to plug replace its entire 
implementation while preserving its interface.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Use of a Template Method 
gives the base class designer an intermediate level of control between 
the “take it or leave it” nonvirtual function and the “if you don’t like
 it, replace the whole thing” approach of a virtual function. A Template
 Method fixes the overall structure of its implementation but defers 
some portion of its implementation to derived classes. Typically, a 
Template Method is implemented as a public, nonvirtual function that 
calls protected virtual functions. The derived classes must accept the 
overall implementation specified in the inherited, nonvirtual base class
 function but may customize its behavior in limited ways by overriding 
the protected virtual functions it invokes.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>class App {
  public:
    virtual ~App();
    //...
    void startup() { // Template Method
        initialize();
        if( !validate() )
            altInit();
    }
  protected:
    virtual bool validate() const = 0;
    virtual void altInit();
    //...
  private:
    void initialize();
    //...
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The nonvirtual <tt>startup</tt> Template Method calls down to customizations provided by derived classes:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>class MyApp : public App {
  public:
    //...
  private:
    bool validate() const;
    void altInit();
    //...
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Template Method is an example of the Hollywood Principle at work; that is, “Don’t call us; we’ll call you” (see <span class="docEmphasis">Commands and Hollywood</span> [19, 67]). The overall flow of the <tt>startup</tt> function is determined by the base class, and <tt>startup</tt> is invoked by clients of the base class’s interface, so derived class designers don’t know when <tt>validate</tt> or <tt>altInit</tt> will be called. But they do know what <tt>validate</tt> and <tt>altInit</tt>
 should do when they are called, and together the base and derived 
classes cooperate to produce a complete function implementation.</p>
		


</body>
</html>
