<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 23. Namespaces</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 23. Namespaces</h2>
		
<p class="docText">Global
 scope was getting overly crowded. Everybody and his brother implemented
 libraries that reused the same names for different classes and 
functions. For example, many libraries wanted to include a class named <tt>String</tt>, but if you used two different libraries that defined a <tt>String</tt>
 type, you’d get a multiple definition error or worse. Various 
extra-language approaches used to address this problem (naming 
conventions, the preprocessor, ...) only made things worse. Namespaces 
to the rescue.</p>
		
<p class="docText">In some ways, namespaces introduce complexity (see <span class="docEmphasis">Argument Dependent Lookup</span> [25, 89]), but most uses of namespaces are simple and simplifying. A namespace is a subdivision of global scope:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>namespace org_semantics {
    class String { ... };
    String operator +( const String &amp;, const String &amp; );
    // other classes, functions, typedefs, etc...
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">This code snippet opens a namespace called <tt>org_semantics</tt>,
 declares some useful things, and then closes the namespace with a 
closing curly brace. You can always add more to a namespace by just 
repeating the process; namespaces are “open.”</p>
		
<p class="docText">Note that some of the names in the <tt>org_semantics</tt> namespace are declared but not defined. To define these names, we can reopen the namespace:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>namespace org_semantics {
<span class="docEmphMark">    String operator +( const String &amp;a, String &amp;b ) { // oops!</span>
        //...
    }
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Alternatively, we can simply qualify the definition with the namespace name without reopening the namespace:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>org_semantics::String
org_semantics::operator +(
    const org_semantics::String &amp;a,
    const org_semantics::String &amp;b ) {
    //...
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">This has the advantage of not allowing one to inadvertently declare a new namespace name (as we did when we left out the <tt>const</tt> in the second argument of our first definition of <tt>operator +</tt>) rather than define an already declared one. Admittedly, the seemingly endless repetition of <tt>org_semantics</tt> in this case can be tedious, but that’s the price of security! We’ll discuss some approaches that can improve this situation.</p>
		
<p class="docText">If you want to use a name 
that’s defined in a particular namespace, you have to tell the compiler 
in what namespace the name is to be found:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>org_semantics::String s( "Hello, World!" );
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Although some of the C++ standard library has remained in global scope (the standard global <tt>operator new</tt>s, <tt>operator delete</tt>s, array news, and array deletes come to mind), the bulk of the standard library is now resident in the <tt>std</tt> (that is, “standard”) namespace, and most standard library use requires qualification with the <tt>std</tt> namespace name:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;vector&gt;
//...
void aFunc() {
<span class="docEmphMark">    vector&lt;int&gt; a; // error! I don't see a vector!           </span>
    std::vector&lt;int&gt; b; // Oh, there it is!
<span class="docEmphMark">    cout &lt;&lt; "Oops!" &lt;&lt; endl; // errors!                      </span>
    std::cout &lt;&lt; "Better!" &lt;&lt; std::endl; // OK
    //...
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Clearly, continual explicit qualification can be tedious. One way to relieve the tedium is to employ a “using directive.”</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>void aFunc() {
    using namespace std; // using directive
    vector&lt;int&gt; a; // OK
    cout &lt;&lt; "Hello!" &lt;&lt; endl; // OK
    //...
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">A
 using directive essentially “imports” the names from the namespace, 
making them accessible without qualification in the scope of the using 
directive. In this case, the using directive is in force until the end 
of the function body, and then you’re back to explicit qualification. 
For this reason, many C++ programmers (even many who should know better)
 suggest putting the using directive at global scope:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;vector&gt;
<span class="docEmphMark">using namespace std;                              </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">using namespace org_semantics;                    </span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">That’s a bad idea. Now 
we’re back nearly to square one, with all the names from a namespace 
available everywhere, sowing confusion and disarray. This is a 
particularly bad idea in a header file, where you can leverage your bad 
decision over any file that includes your header. In header files, we 
usually prefer to stick with explicit qualification and reserve using 
directives for smaller scopes (such as function bodies or blocks within a
 function) where their effects are bounded and easier to control. 
Basically, you have to be on your best behavior in header files and on 
pretty good behavior in source files, but you can kick back and relax 
inside a function.</p>
		
<p class="docText">One interesting aspect of 
using directives is that they make the names of a namespace available, 
but as if they were declared at global scope, not necessarily at the 
scope in which the using directive occurs. Local names will hide 
namespace names:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>void aFunc() {
    using namespace std; // using directive
    //...
    int vector = 12; // a poorly named local variable...
<span class="docEmphMark">    vector&lt;int&gt; a; // error! std::vector is hidden               </span>
    std::vector&lt;int&gt; b; // OK, can use explicit qualification
    //...
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">An alternative is a “using declaration” that provides access to a namespace name through an actual declaration:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>void aFunc() {
    using std::vector; // using declaration
    //...
<span class="docEmphMark">    int vector = 12; // error! redeclaration of vector          </span>
    vector&lt;int&gt; a; // OK
    //...
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Using declarations
 are often a good middle ground between tedious explicit qualification 
and unrestrained use of using directives, particularly if a given 
section of code uses only a few names from two or more namespaces but 
uses them repeatedly:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>void aFunc() {
    using std::cout;
    using std::endl;
    using org_semantics::String;
    String a, b, c;
    //...
    cout &lt;&lt; a &lt;&lt; b &lt;&lt; c &lt;&lt; endl;
    // etc.
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Another way to deal with long, tedious namespace names is to employ an alias:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>namespace S = org_semantics;
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Now <tt>S</tt> may be used in place of <tt>org_semantics</tt> within the scope of the alias. Like a using directive, a namespace alias is best avoided in a header file. (<tt>S</tt> is likely to conflict with other names more often than <tt>org_semantics</tt>, after all...)</p>
		
<p class="docText">Let’s finish up our quick tour of namespaces with a look at anonymous namespaces:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>namespace {
    int anInt = 12;
    int aFunc() { return anInt; }
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">This anonymous namespace behaves identically to the following, where <tt>__compiler_generated_name__</tt> is unique for each anonymous namespace:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>namespace __compiler_generated_name__ {
    int anInt = 12;
    int aFunc() { return anInt; }
}
using namespace __compiler_generated_name__;
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">This is the 
trendy new way to avoid declaring functions and variables with static 
linkage. In the anonymous namespace above, both <tt>anInt</tt> and <tt>aFunc</tt>
 have external linkage, but they can be accessed only within the 
translation unit (that is, preprocessed file) in which they occur, just 
like a static.</p>
		


</body>
</html>
