<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 24. Member Function Lookup</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 24. Member Function Lookup</h2>
		
<p class="docText">When
 you call a member function, there are three steps involved. First, the 
compiler looks up the name of the function. Second, it chooses the best 
matching function from the available candidates. Third, it checks that 
you have access to the matched function. That’s it. Admittedly, each of 
these steps (especially the first two; see <span class="docEmphasis">Argument Dependent Lookup</span> [25, 89] and <span class="docEmphasis">Operator Function Lookup</span> [26, 91]) can be complex, but the overall function matching mechanism is as simple as one, two, three.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Most errors related to 
function matching stem not from misunderstanding the compiler’s complex 
name lookup and overloaded function matching algorithms but from 
misunderstanding the simple, sequential nature of these three steps. 
Consider the following:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>class B {
  public:
    //...
    void f( double );
};
class D : public B {
    void f( int );
};
//...
D d;
d.f( 12.3 ); // confusing
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Which member <tt>f</tt> is called?</p>
		
			
			
			
		
<table class="docText" border="0">
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td valign="top" width="70">
        <div class="docText">
          <b>Step 1. </b>
        </div>
      </td>
      <td>
        <div class="docText">Look up the name of the function. Because we’re calling a member of a <tt>D</tt> object, we’ll start in the scope of <tt>D</tt> and immediately locate <tt>D::f</tt>.<br/><br/>
			</div>
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td valign="top" width="70">
        <div class="docText">
          <b>Step 2. </b>
        </div>
      </td>
      <td>
        <div class="docText">Choose the best matching function from the available candidates. We have only one candidate <tt>D::f</tt>, so we attempt to match that one. We can do this by converting the actual argument <tt>12.3</tt> from <tt>double</tt> to <tt>int</tt>. (This is legal, but generally undesirable, because we’ll lose precision.)<br/><br/>
			</div>
      </td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td valign="top" width="70">
        <div class="docText">
          <b>Step 3. </b>
        </div>
      </td>
      <td>
        <div class="docText">Check access. We (may) have an error, because <tt>D::f</tt> is private.<br/><br/>
			</div>
      </td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>
		
<p class="docText">The existence of a 
better-matching, accessible function in the base class is immaterial, 
because the compiler does not continue searching for a name in outer 
scopes once it has found one in an inner scope. An inner scope name <span class="docEmphasis">hides</span> the same name in an outer scope; it does not overload it as it does in Java.</p>
		
<p class="docText">In fact, the name does not even have to be the name of a function:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>class E : public D {
    int f;
};
//...
E e;
<span class="docEmphMark">e.f( 12 ); // error!                              </span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">In this case, we have a compile-time error because our lookup of the name <tt>f</tt> in the scope of <tt>E</tt>
 netted us a data member, not a member function. This is, by the way, 
one of many reasons to establish and adhere to a simple naming 
convention. If the data member <tt>E::f</tt> had been named <tt>f_</tt> or <tt>m_f</tt>, it would not have hidden the inherited base class function <tt>f</tt>.</p>
		


</body>
</html>
