<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 25. Argument Dependent Lookup</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 25. Argument Dependent Lookup</h2>
		
<p class="docText">Namespaces have a pervasive influence on modern C++ programs and designs (see <span class="docEmphasis">Namespaces</span> [23,
 81]). Some of these influences are immediately obvious, such as the 
presence of using declarations and directives and qualification of names
 with namespace scope. However, namespaces have less syntactically 
obvious influences that are nevertheless as basic and important. 
Argument dependent lookup (ADL) is one of these. Like many C++ features,
 ADL has the potential to be complex, but in common use it is 
straightforward and solves many more problems than it introduces.</p>
		
<p class="docText">The idea behind ADL is 
simple. When looking up the name of a function in a function call 
expression, the compiler will also examine namespaces that contain the 
types of the function call’s arguments. For example, consider the 
following:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>namespace org_semantics {
    class X { ... };
    void f( const X &amp; );
    void g( X * );
    X operator +( const X &amp;, const X &amp; );
    class String { ... };
    std::ostream operator &lt;&lt;( std::ostream &amp;, const String &amp; );
}
//...
int g( org_semantics::X * );
void aFunc() {
    org_semantics::X a;
    f( a ); // call org_semantics::f
<span class="docEmphMark">    g( &amp;a ); // error! ambiguous...                                </span>
    a = a + a; // call org_semantics::operator +
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Ordinary lookup would not find the function <tt>org_semantics::f</tt>, because it is nested in a namespace and the use of <tt>f</tt> is not qualified with the namespace. However, the type of the argument <tt>a</tt> is defined in the <tt>org_semantics</tt> namespace, so the compiler also examines that namespace for any candidate functions.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Of course, a complex rule such as ADL can also cause some head scratching. The call to <tt>g</tt> with a pointer to an <tt>org_semantics::X</tt> is a case in point. In this case, it’s possible that the coder thought the compiler would find the global <tt>g</tt>, but because the type of the actual argument was <tt>org_semantics::X *</tt>, candidate <tt>g</tt>’s
 from that namespace were included, and the call was ambiguous. On 
reflection, this ambiguity is actually a good thing, because it’s just 
as likely that the coder intended to call the function <tt>org_semantics::g</tt> rather than <tt>::g</tt>. With the ambiguity made clear, the coder can either disambiguate the call or rename one of the functions.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Note that, even though the call to <tt>g</tt> resulted in two candidate functions for overload resolution, <tt>::g</tt> does not overload <tt>org_semantics::g</tt> because they are not declared in the same scope (see <span class="docEmphasis">Overloading and Overriding Are Different</span> [21, 75]). ADL is a property of how a function is called, and overloading is a property of how a function is declared.</p>
		
<p class="docText">We can see the real utility of ADL with infix calls of overloaded operators, such as the use of <tt>operator +</tt> in <tt>aFunc</tt>. Here the infix expression <tt>a+a</tt> is equivalent to the call <tt>operator +(a,a)</tt>, and ADL will find the overloaded <tt>operator</tt> + in the <tt>org_semantics</tt> namespace (see also <span class="docEmphasis">Operator Function Lookup</span> [26, 91]).</p>
		
<p class="docText">In fact, most C++ programmers use ADL extensively without realizing it. Consider the following common use of <tt>&lt;iostream&gt;</tt>:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>org_semantics::String name( "Qwan" );
std::cout &lt;&lt; "Hello, " &lt;&lt; name;
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">In this case, the first (leftmost) use of <tt>operator &lt;&lt;</tt> is most probably a call of a member function of the class template <tt>std::basic_ostream</tt> whereas the second is a non-member function call of an overloaded <tt>operator &lt;&lt;</tt> function in the <tt>org_semantics</tt> namespace. These details are really of no interest to the author of the greeting, and ADL sorts things out rather nicely.</p>
		


</body>
</html>
