<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 26. Operator Function Lookup</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 26. Operator Function Lookup</h2>
		
<p class="docText">Sometimes
 it looks like a member operator function overloads a non-member 
operator, but this is not the case. It’s not overloading; it’s just a 
different lookup algorithm. Consider the following class that overloads 
an operator as a member function:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>class X {
  public:
    X operator %( const X &amp; ) const; // binary modulus
    X memFunc1( const X &amp; );
    void memFunc2();
    //...
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">We can call an overloaded operator function with either infix or function call syntax:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>X a, b, c;
a = b % c; // infix call to member operator %
a = b.operator %( c ); // member function call
a = b.memFunc1( c ); // another member function call
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">When we use the function call syntax, the usual lookup rules apply (see <span class="docEmphasis">Member Function Lookup</span> [24, 87]), and the call <tt>b.operator %(c)</tt> is treated in the same way as the similar call to <tt>memFunc1</tt>. However, an infix call of an overloaded operator is handled differently:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>X operator %( const X &amp;, int ); // non-member operator
//...
void X::memFunc2() {
     *this % 12; // calls non-member operator %
<span class="docEmphMark">    operator %( *this, 12 ); // error! too many arguments          </span>
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">For an infix operator call, the compiler will consider both member and non-member functions (see also <span class="docEmphasis">Argument Dependent Lookup</span> [25, 89]), so the first, infix call to <tt>operator %</tt>
 will match the non-member. This is not an instance of overloading; it’s
 a question of the compiler looking in two different places for 
candidate functions. The second, non-infix call of <tt>operator %</tt>
 follows the standard function lookup rules and finds the member 
function. We have an error because we are attempting to pass three 
arguments to a binary function. (Remember the implicit <tt>this</tt> argument for member functions!)</p>
		
<p class="docText">In effect, infix calls of 
overloaded operators implement a kind of “degenerate” ADL in which both 
the class of the left (or only) argument of the infix operator and the 
global scope are considered when determining what functions will be 
considered for overload resolution. ADL extends this process to include 
candidate operator functions in other namespaces brought in by the 
arguments of the operator. Note that this is not overloading. 
Overloading is a static property of a function declaration (see <span class="docEmphasis">Overloading and Overriding Are Different</span> [21, 75]). Both ADL and infix operator function lookup are properties of the arguments supplied to a function call.</p>
		


</body>
</html>
