<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 29. Virtual Constructors and Prototype</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 29. Virtual Constructors and Prototype</h2>
		
<p class="docText">Suppose
 you find yourself in a Swedish restaurant, and you’d like to order a 
meal. Unfortunately, your knowledge of Swedish is limited to technical 
correspondence, cursing, or (typically) a combination of the two. The 
menu is in Swedish, and you can’t read Swedish, but you do notice a 
gentleman on the other side of the room who is really enjoying his meal.
 Therefore, you call over the waiter and say</p>
		
<blockquote>
			<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">If
 that gentleman is having fish, I’d like fish. If he’s having spaghetti,
 I’d like spaghetti too. Otherwise, if he’s having eel, then eel it is. 
However, if he has decided on the preserved kumquats, then I’ll have 
those.</span></p>
		</blockquote>
		
<p class="docText">Does this sound 
reasonable? Of course not. (For one thing, you probably don’t want to 
order spaghetti in a Swedish restaurant.) This procedure has two basic 
problems. First, it’s tedious and inefficient. Second, it can fail. What
 would happen if you come to the end of your sequence of questions and 
you still haven’t been able to guess what the other diner is eating? The
 waiter will walk off, leaving you stranded and hungry. Even if you 
happen to know the entire content of the menu and are therefore 
guaranteed of (eventual) success, your list of questions may become 
invalid or incomplete if the menu is modified between your visits to the
 restaurant.</p>
		
<p class="docText">The proper approach, of course, is simply to call the waiter over and say, “I’d like what that gentleman is having.”</p>
		
<p class="docText">If the waiter is a 
literalist, he’ll snatch up the other diner’s half-finished meal and 
bring it to your table. However, that sort of behavior can lead to hurt 
feelings and even a food fight. This is the sort of unpleasantness that 
can occur when two diners try to consume the same meal at the same time.
 If he knows his business, the waiter will deliver an exact copy of the 
other diner’s meal to you, without affecting the state of the meal that 
is copied.</p>
		
<p class="docText">These
 are the two major reasons for cloning: You must (or you prefer to) 
remain in ignorance about the precise type of object you’re dealing 
with, and you don’t want to effect change or be affected by changes to 
the original object.</p>
		
<p class="docText">A member function that 
provides the ability to clone an object is traditionally called a 
“virtual constructor” in C++. Of course, there are no virtual 
constructors, but producing a copy of an object generally involves 
indirect invocation of its class’s copy constructor through a virtual 
function, giving the effect—if not the reality—of virtual construction. 
More recently, this technique has been called an instance of the 
Prototype pattern.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Of course, we have to know <span class="docEmphasis">something</span> about the object to which we refer. In our case, we know that what we want is-a meal.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>class Meal {
   public:
     virtual ~Meal();
     virtual void eat() = 0;
     virtual Meal *clone() const = 0;
     //...
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The <tt>Meal</tt> type provides the ability to clone with the <tt>clone</tt> member function. The <tt>clone</tt> function is actually a specialized kind of Factory Method (see <span class="docEmphasis">Factory Method</span> [30,
 103]) that manufactures an appropriate product while allowing the 
invoking code to remain in ignorance of the exact type of context and 
product class. Concrete classes derived from <tt>Meal</tt> (that is, those meals that actually exist and are listed on the menu) must provide an implementation of the pure virtual <tt>clone</tt> operation.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>class Spaghetti : public Meal {
   public:
     Spaghetti( const Spaghetti &amp; ); // copy ctor
     void eat();
     Spaghetti *clone() const
         { return new Spaghetti( *this ); } // call copy ctor
     //...
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">(For an explanation as to why the return type of the overriding derived class <tt>clone</tt> function differs from that of the base class function, see <span class="docEmphasis">Covariant Return Types</span> [31, 107].)</p>
		
<p class="docText">With this simple framework in place, we have the ability to produce a copy of any type of <tt>Meal</tt> without precise knowledge about the actual type of the <tt>Meal</tt>
 we’re copying. Note that the following code has no mention of concrete 
derived classes and therefore no coupling of the code to any current <span class="docEmphasis">or future</span> types derived from <tt>Meal</tt>.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>const Meal *m = thatGuysMeal(); // whatever he's having...
Meal *myMeal = m-&gt;clone(); // ...I want one too!
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">In fact, we could end up 
ordering something we’ve never even heard of. In effect, with Prototype,
 ignorance of the existence of a type is no barrier to creating an 
object of that type. The polymorphic code above can be compiled and 
distributed, and later augmented with new types of <tt>Meal</tt> without the need for recompilation.</p>
		
<p class="docText">This example 
illustrates some of the advantages of ignorance in software design, 
particularly in the design of software structured as a framework that is
 designed for customization and extension: The less you know, the 
better.</p>
		


</body>
</html>
