<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 32. Preventing Copying</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 32. Preventing Copying</h2>
		
<p class="docText">Access specifiers (<tt>public</tt>, <tt>protected</tt>, and <tt>private</tt>) can be used to express and enforce higher-level constraints on how a type may be used.</p>
		
<p class="docText">The most common of these 
techniques is to disallow copying of an object by declaring its copy 
operations to be private and not defining them:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>class NoCopy {
  public:
    NoCopy( int );
    //...
  private:
    NoCopy( const NoCopy &amp; ); // copy ctor
    NoCopy &amp;operator =( const NoCopy &amp; ); // copy assignment
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">It’s necessary to declare
 the copy constructor and copy assignment operator, since otherwise the 
compiler would declare them implicitly, as public inline members. By 
declaring them to be private, we forestall the compiler’s meddling and 
ensure that any use of the operations—whether explicit or implicit—will 
result in a compile-time error:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>void aFunc( NoCopy );
void anotherFunc( const NoCopy &amp; );
NoCopy a( 12 );
<span class="docEmphMark">NoCopy b( a ); // error! copy ctor                            </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">NoCopy c = 12; // error! implicit copy ctor                   </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">a = b; // error! copy assignment                              </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">aFunc( a ); // error! pass by value with copy ctor            </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">aFunc( 12 ); // error! implicit copy ctor                     </span>
anotherFunc( a ); // OK, pass by reference
anotherFunc( 12 ); // OK
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		


</body>
</html>
