<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 33. Manufacturing Abstract Bases</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 33. Manufacturing Abstract Bases</h2>
		
<p class="docText">Abstract
 base classes typically represent abstract concepts from the problem 
domain, and therefore it doesn’t make sense to declare objects of those 
types. We make a base class abstract by declaring (or inheriting) at 
least one pure virtual function, and the compiler will then ensure that 
no objects of the abstract base class can be created.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>class ABC {
  public:
    virtual ~ABC();
    virtual void anOperation() = 0; // pure
    //...
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">However, there may be 
cases where we have no reasonable candidate for a pure virtual function 
but still want the class to act like an abstract base. In those cases, 
we can approximate the nature of an abstract class by making sure that 
there are no public constructors in the class. This invariably means we 
must explicitly declare at least one constructor, since otherwise the 
compiler will implicitly declare a public inline default constructor. 
Since the compiler will also declare an implicit copy constructor if we 
don’t declare one explicitly, we typically must declare two 
constructors.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>class ABC {
  public:
    virtual ~ABC();
  protected:
    ABC();
    ABC( const ABC &amp; );
    //...
};
class D : public ABC {
    //...
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The
 constructors are declared protected to allow their use by derived class
 constructors, while preventing the creation of standalone <tt>ABC</tt> objects.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>void func1( ABC );
void func2( ABC &amp; );
<span class="docEmphMark">ABC a; // error! protected default ctor                  </span>
D d; // OK
<span class="docEmphMark">func1( d ); // error! protected copy ctor                </span>
func2( d ); // OK, no copy ctor
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Another way to coerce a 
class into being an abstract base class is to bite the bullet and 
designate one of its virtual functions as pure. Often the destructor is a
 good choice:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>class ABC {
  public:
    virtual ~ABC() = 0;
    //...
};
//...
ABC::~ABC() { ... }
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Note that it is 
necessary, in this case, to provide an implementation of the pure 
virtual function since derived class destructors will call their base 
class destructors implicitly. (Note that this implicit call to a base 
class destructor from within a derived class destructor is always a 
non-vitual call.)</p>
		
<p class="docText">A third approach applies when a
 class has no virtual functions at all and no need for explicitly 
declared constructors. In this case, a protected, non-virtual destructor
 is a good approach.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>class ABC {
  protected:
    ~ABC();
  public:
    //...
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">A
 protected destructor has basically the same effect as a protected 
constructor, but the error occurs when the object goes out of scope or 
is explicitly destroyed rather than when it is created:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>void someFunc() {
    ABC a; // no error yet...
    ABC *p = new ABC; // no error yet...
    //...
<span class="docEmphMark">    delete p; // error! protected dtor                   </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">    // error! implicit call to a's dtor                  </span>
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		


</body>
</html>
