<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 34. Restricting Heap Allocation</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 34. Restricting Heap Allocation</h2>
		
<p class="docText">Sometimes
 it’s a good idea to indicate that objects of a particular class should 
not be allocated on the heap. Often this is to ensure that the object’s 
destructor is called, as in the case of a “handle” object that maintains
 a reference count for a “body” object. Local objects with automatic 
storage class will have their destructors called automatically (except 
in the case of abnormal program termination via an <tt>exit</tt> or <tt>abort</tt>), as will objects with static storage class (except in the case of an <tt>abort</tt>), whereas heap-allocated objects must be destroyed explicitly.</p>
		
<p class="docText">One way to indicate such a preference is by defining heap memory allocation to be illegal:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>class NoHeap {
  public:
    //...
  protected:
    void *operator new( size_t ) { return 0; }
    void operator delete( void * ) {}
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Any conventional attempt to allocate a <tt>NoHeap</tt> object on the heap will result in a compile-time error (see <span class="docEmphasis">Class-Specific Memory Mangement</span> [36, 123]):</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>				<span class="docEmphMark">NoHeap *nh = new NoHeap; // error! protected NoHeap::operator new</span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">//...                                                            </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">delete nh; // error! protected NoHeap::operator delete           </span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The <tt>operator new</tt> and <tt>operator delete</tt>
 members are defined (as well as declared) because they may be called 
implicitly from constructors and destructors on some platforms. They are
 declared to be protected for the same reason; they may be invoked implicitly from derived class constructors and destructors. If <tt>NoHeap</tt> is not intended for use as a base class, these functions may be declared to be private.</p>
		
<p class="docText">At the same time, we may also want to pay attention to allocation of arrays of <tt>NoHeap</tt> objects (see <span class="docEmphasis">Array Allocation</span> [37,
 127]). In this case, we can simply declare array new and array delete 
to be private and undefined, similar to the way we deny copy operations 
(see <span class="docEmphasis">Preventing Copying</span> [32, 111]).</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>class NoHeap {
  public:
    //...
  protected:
    void *operator new( size_t ) { return 0; }
    void operator delete( void * ) {}
  private:
    void *operator new[]( size_t );
    void operator delete[]( void * );
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">It’s also possible to encourage, rather than discourage, heap allocation. Just make the destructor private:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>class OnHeap {
   ~OnHeap();
  public:
    void destroy()
        { delete this; }
    //...
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Any ordinary attempt to declare an automatic or static <tt>OnHeap</tt> object will result in an implicit destructor call when the object’s name goes out of scope.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>				<span class="docEmphMark">OnHeap oh1; // error! implicit call of private dtor                 </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">void aFunc() {                                                      </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">    OnHeap oh2;                                                     </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">    //...                                                           </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">    // error! implicit dtor call for oh2                            </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">}                                                                   </span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		


</body>
</html>
