<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 35. Placement New</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 35. Placement New</h2>
		
<p class="docText">It’s
 impossible to call a constructor directly. However, we can trick the 
compiler into calling a constructor for us through the use of placement 
new.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>void *operator new( size_t, void *p ) throw()
    { return p; }
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Placement new is a standard, global, overloaded version of <tt>operator new</tt> that cannot be replaced with a user-defined version (unlike the standard, global, “usual” <tt>operator new</tt> and <tt>operator delete</tt>
 that can be replaced but probably shouldn’t be). The implementation 
ignores the size argument and returns its second argument. This has the 
effect of allowing one to “place” an object at a particular location, 
giving the effect of being able to call a constructor.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>class SPort { ... }; // represents a serial port
const int comLoc = 0x00400000; // location of a port
//...
void *comAddr = reinterpret_cast&lt;void *&gt;(comLoc);
SPort *com1 = new (comAddr) SPort; // create object at comLoc
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">It’s important to distinguish the <tt>new</tt> operator from functions that are named <tt>operator new</tt>. The <tt>new</tt> operator can’t be overloaded and so always behaves in the same way; it calls a function named <tt>operator new</tt>
 and then initializes the returned storage. Any variation of behavior we
 achieve with memory allocation has to do with different, overloaded 
versions of <tt>operator new</tt>, not with the <tt>new</tt> operator. The same applies to the <tt>delete</tt> operator and <tt>operator delete</tt>.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Placement new is a version of the function <tt>operator new</tt>
 that doesn’t actually allocate any storage; it just returns a pointer 
to some storage that (presumably) is already allocated. Because no 
storage is allocated by a call to placement new, it’s important not to 
delete it.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>				<span class="docEmphMark">delete com1; // oops!                             </span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">However,
 even though we didn’t allocate any storage, we did create an object, 
and that object should be destroyed at the end of its lifetime. We avoid
 the <tt>delete</tt> operator and instead call the object’s destructor directly:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>com1-&gt;~SPort(); // call dtor but not operator delete
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Designs that involve direct 
destructor invocation tend to be prone to error, however, often 
resulting in multiple destruction of the same object or no destruction 
of an object. We would typically prefer to employ such designs only when
 necessary, in well-hidden and well-maintained areas of our code.</p>
		
<p class="docText">We also have a placement array new that can be used to create an array of objects at a given location:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>const int numComs = 4;
//...
SPort *comPorts = new (comAddr) SPort[numComs]; // create array
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Of course, these array elements must eventually be destroyed:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>int i = numComs;
while( i )
    comPorts[--i].~SPort();
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">One potential problem 
with arrays of class objects is that each element must be initialized by
 a call to a default constructor when the array is allocated. Consider a
 simple, fixed-size buffer to which one can append a new value:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>				<span class="docEmphMark">string *sbuf = new string[BUFSIZ]; // BUFSIZ default ctor calls!  </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">int size = 0;                                                     </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">void append( string buf[], int &amp;size, const string &amp;val )         </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">    { buf[size++] = val; } // wipe out default initialization!    </span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">If only a portion of the 
array is used, or if the elements are immediately assigned, this is 
inefficient. Worse, if the element type of the array has no default 
constructor, we’ll get a compile-time error.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Placement new is often used 
to address this buffer problem. With this approach the storage for the 
buffer is allocated in such a way as to avoid initialization by the 
default constructor (if any).</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>const size_t n = sizeof(string) * BUFSIZE;
string *sbuf = static_cast&lt;string *&gt;(::operator new( n ));
int size = 0;
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">We can’t assign to an array element on its first access because it hasn’t been initialized (see <span class="docEmphasis">Assignment and Initialization Are Different</span> [12, 41]). Instead, we use placement new to initialize the element with the copy constructor:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>void append( string buf[], int &amp;size, const string &amp;val )
    { new (&amp;buf[size++]) string( val ); } // placement new
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">As usual, with placement new we are required to do our own cleanup:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>void cleanupBuf( string buf[], int size ) {
    while( size )
        buf[--size].~string(); // destroy initialized elements
    ::operator delete( buf ); // free storage
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">This approach is fast, 
clever, and not intended for viewing by the general public. This basic 
technique is used extensively (in a more sophisticated form) in most 
implementations of the standard library containers.</p>
		


</body>
</html>
