<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 36. Class-Specific Memory Management</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 36. Class-Specific Memory Management</h2>
		
<p class="docText">If you don’t like the way standard <tt>operator new</tt> and <tt>operator delete</tt> are treating one of your class types, you don’t have to stand for it. Instead, your types can have their own <tt>operator new</tt> and <tt>operator delete</tt> customized to their needs.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Note that we can’t do anything with the <tt>new</tt> operator or the <tt>delete</tt> operator, since their behavior is fixed, but we can change which <tt>operator new</tt> and <tt>operator delete</tt> they invoke (see <span class="docEmphasis">Placement New</span> [35, 119]). The best way to do this is to declare member <tt>operator new</tt> and <tt>operator delete</tt> functions:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>class Handle {
  public:
    //...
    void *operator new( size_t );
    void operator delete( void * );
    //...
};
//...
Handle *h = new Handle; // uses Handle::operator new
//...
delete h; // uses Handle::operator delete
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">When we allocate an object of type <tt>Handle</tt> in a new expression, the compiler will first look in the scope of <tt>Handle</tt> for an <tt>operator new</tt>. If it doesn’t find one, then it will use an <tt>operator new</tt> from the global scope. A similar situation holds for <tt>operator delete</tt>, so it generally makes sense to define a member <tt>operator delete</tt> if you define a member <tt>operator new</tt>, and vice versa.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Member <tt>operator new</tt> and <tt>operator delete</tt> are static member functions (see <span class="docEmphasis">Optional Keywords</span> [63, 231]), which makes sense. Recall that static member functions have no <tt>this</tt>
 pointer, and these functions are charged with simply getting and 
releasing the storage for an object, so they have no use for a <tt>this</tt> pointer. Like other static member functions, they are inherited by derived classes:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>class MyHandle : public Handle {
    //...
};
//...
MyHandle *mh = new MyHandle; // uses Handle::operator new
//...
delete mh; // uses Handle::operator delete
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Of course, if <tt>MyHandle</tt> had declared its own <tt>operator new</tt> and <tt>operator delete</tt>,
 those would have been found first by the compiler during lookup, and 
they would have been used instead of the inherited versions from the <tt>Handle</tt> base class.</p>
		
<p class="docText">If you define member <tt>operator new</tt> and <tt>operator delete</tt> in a base class, ensure that the base class destructor is virtual:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>class Handle {
  public:
    //...
    virtual ~Handle();
    void *operator new( size_t );
    void operator delete( void * );
    //...
};
class MyHandle : public Handle {
    //...
    void *operator new( size_t );
    void operator delete( void *, size_t ); // note 2nd arg
    //...
};
//...
Handle *h = new MyHandle; // uses MyHandle::operator new
//...
delete h; // uses MyHandle::operator delete
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Without
 a virtual destructor, the effect of deleting a derived class object 
through a base class pointer is undefined! The implementation may simply
 (and probably incorrectly) invoke <tt>Handle::operator delete</tt> rather than <tt>MyHandle::operator delete</tt>, but anything at all could happen. Notice also that we’ve employed a two-argument version of <tt>operator delete</tt> rather than the usual one-argument version. This two-argument version is another “usual” version of member <tt>operator delete</tt> often employed by base classes that expect derived classes to inherit their <tt>operator delete</tt>
 implementation. The second argument will contain the size of the object
 being deleted—information that is often useful in implementing custom 
memory management.</p>
		
<p class="docText">A common misconception is that use of the <tt>new</tt> and <tt>delete</tt> operators implies use of the heap (or freestore) memory, but this is not the case. The only implication in using the <tt>new</tt> operator is that a function called <tt>operator new</tt> will be called and that function will return a pointer to some memory. The standard, global <tt>operator new</tt> and <tt>operator delete</tt> do indeed allocate memory from the heap, but member <tt>operator new</tt> and <tt>operator delete</tt>
 can do whatever they like. There is no restriction as to where that 
memory comes from; it may come from a special heap, from a statically 
allocated block, from the guts of a standard container, or from a block 
of storage local to a function. The only limit to where the memory comes
 from is your creativity and common sense. For example, <tt>Handle</tt> objects could be allocated from a static block like this:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre class="preFixedHeight">struct rep {
    enum { max = 1000 };
    static rep *free; // head of freelist
    static int num_used; // number of slots used
    union {
        char store[sizeof(Handle)];
        rep *next;
    };
};
static rep mem[ rep::max ]; // block of static storage
void *Handle::operator new( size_t ) {
    if( rep::free ) { // if something on freelist
        rep *tmp = rep::free; // take from freelist
        rep::free = rep::free-&gt;next;
        return tmp;
    }
    else if( rep::num_used &lt; rep::max ) // if slots left
        return &amp;mem[ rep::num_used++ ]; // return unused slot
    else // otherwise, we're...
        throw std::bad_alloc(); // ...out of memory!
}
void Handle::operator delete( void *p ) { // add to freelist
    static_cast&lt;rep *&gt;(p)-&gt;next = rep::free;
    rep::free = static_cast&lt;rep *&gt;(p);
}


					  </pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">A
 production-quality version of this implementation would take care to be
 more robust in out-of-memory conditions, deal with types derived from <tt>Handle</tt> and arrays of <tt>Handle</tt>s, and so on, but this simple code nevertheless shows that <tt>new</tt> and <tt>delete</tt> don’t necessarily have to deal with heap memory.</p>
		


</body>
</html>
