<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 37. Array Allocation</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 37. Array Allocation</h2>
		
<p class="docText">Most C++ programmers know to keep the array and nonarray forms straight when allocating and deallocating memory.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>T *aT = new T; // non-array
T *aryT = new T[12]; // array
delete [] aryT; // array
delete aT; // non-array
aT = new T[1]; // array
<span class="docEmphMark">delete aT; // error! should be array              </span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The reason it’s important to 
keep these functions properly paired is that array allocation and 
deallocation use different functions from nonarray allocation and 
deallocation. A new expression does not use <tt>operator new</tt> to allocate storage for an array. It uses array new. Similarly, a delete expression does not invoke <tt>operator delete</tt>
 to free an array’s storage; it invokes array delete. To be precise, 
when you allocate an array, you’re using a different operator (<tt>new[]</tt>) than you do when you allocate a nonarray (<tt>new</tt>), and likewise for deallocation.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Array new and array delete are array analogs of <tt>operator new</tt> and <tt>operator delete</tt> and are declared similarly:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>void *operator new( size_t ) throw( bad_alloc ); // operator new
void *operator new[]( size_t ) throw( bad_alloc ); // array new
void operator delete( void * ) throw(); // operator delete
void operator delete[]( void * ) throw(); // array delete
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The most common source of 
confusion with the array forms of these functions occurs when a 
particular class or hierarchy defines its own memory management with 
member <tt>operator new</tt> and <tt>operator delete</tt> (see <span class="docEmphasis">Class-Specific Memory Management</span> [36, 123]).</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>class Handle {
  public:
    //...
    void *operator new( size_t );
    void operator delete( void * );
    //...
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The <tt>Handle</tt> class has defined nonarray memory management functions, but these won’t be called for an array of <tt>Handles</tt>; the global array new and array delete will:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>Handle *handleSet = new Handle[MAX]; // calls ::operator new[]
//...
delete [] handleSet; // calls ::operator delete[]
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Logically, it would seem 
to be a good idea always to declare the array forms of these functions 
whenever the nonarray forms exist (though, strangely, it doesn’t appear 
to be a common practice). If the intent is really to invoke the global 
array allocation operations, it’s clearer if the local forms just 
forward the call:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>class Handle {
  public:
    //...
    void *operator new( size_t );
    void operator delete( void * );
    void *operator new[]( size_t n )
        { return ::operator new( n ); }
    void operator delete[]( void *p )
        { ::operator delete( p ); }
    //...
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">If the intent is to discourage the allocation of arrays of <tt>Handle</tt>s, then the array forms can be declared to be private and left undefined (see <span class="docEmphasis">Restricting Heap Allocation</span> [34, 117]).</p>
		
<p class="docText">A second source of 
confusion and error concerns the value of the size argument that is 
passed to array new depending on how the function is called. When <tt>operator new</tt>
 is called (implicitly) in a new expression, the compiler determines how
 much memory is required and passes that amount as the first argument to
 <tt>operator new</tt>. That amount is the size of the object being allocated:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>aT = new T; // calls operator new( sizeof(T) );
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">It’s also possible to call <tt>operator new</tt> directly, in which case we must specify the number of bytes we want to allocate explicitly:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>aT = static_cast&lt;T *&gt;(operator new( sizeof(T) ));
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">We can also call array new directly:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>aryT = static_cast&lt;T *&gt;(operator new[]( 5*sizeof(T) ));
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">However, when we call array new
 implicitly through a new expression, the compiler may, and often does, 
increase the memory request by a small amount.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>aryT = new T[5]; // request 5*sizeof(T) + delta bytes
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The additional space 
is generally used by the runtime memory manager to record information 
about the array that is necessary to later reclaim the memory (the 
number of elements allocated, the size of each element, and so on). To 
further complicate the situation, the compiler may or may not request 
this additional space for every allocation, and the size of the request 
may vary from allocation to allocation.</p>
		
<p class="docText">This difference in the 
amount requested is typically only a concern in very low-level code, 
where storage for arrays is being handled directly. If you’re going to 
be low level, it’s generally simplest to avoid direct calls to array new
 and the associated meddling by the compiler and use plain old <tt>operator new</tt> instead (see <span class="docEmphasis">Placement New</span> [35, 119]).</p>
		


</body>
</html>
