<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 39. Exception Safe Functions</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 39. Exception Safe Functions</h2>
		
<p class="docText">The
 hard part about writing exception safe code isn’t the throwing or 
catching of exceptions; it’s everything in between. As a thrown 
exception wends its way from the throw expression to the catch clause, 
every partially executed function on that path must “clean up” any 
important resources that it controls before its activation record is 
popped off the execution stack. Generally (but not always), all that is 
required to write an exception safe function is a moment’s reflection 
and some common sense.</p>
		
<p class="docText">For example, consider the implementation of <tt>String</tt> assignment from <span class="docEmphasis">Assignment and Initialization Are Different</span> [12, 41]:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>String &amp;String::operator =( const char *str ) {
    if( !str ) str = "";
    char *tmp = strcpy( new char[ strlen(str)+1 ], str );
    delete [] s_;
    s_ = tmp;
    return *this;
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The implementation of this 
function may look superfluously ornate, since we could have coded it 
with fewer lines and no temporary:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>String &amp;String::operator =( const char *str ) {
<span class="docEmphMark">    delete [] s_;                                        </span>
    if( !str ) str = "";
    s_ = strcpy( new char[ strlen(str)+1 ], str );
    return *this;
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">However, while the array delete comes with a social guarantee not to throw an exception (see <span class="docEmphasis">Exception Safety Axioms</span> [38, 131]), the array new a couple of lines later makes no such promise. If we delete the old buffer before we know whether allocation of the new buffer will succeed, we’ll leave the <tt>String</tt> object in a bad state. Herb Sutter summarizes the situation well in his <span class="docEmphasis">Exceptional C++</span>,
 which I’ll paraphrase as this: First do anything that could cause an 
exception “off to the side” without changing important state, and then 
use operations that can’t throw an exception to finish up. That’s what 
we did in the first implementation of <tt>String::operator =</tt> above. Let’s look at another example from <span class="docEmphasis">Commands and Hollywood</span> [19, 67]:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>void Button::setAction( const Action *newAction ) {
    Action *temp = newAction-&gt;clone(); // off to the side...
    delete action_; // then change state!
    action_ = temp;
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Because it’s a virtual function, we really know nothing about the exception-related behavior of the call to <tt>clone</tt>, so we assume the worst. If the <tt>clone</tt> operation succeeds, we continue with an exception safe deletion and pointer assignment. Otherwise, a thrown exception from <tt>clone</tt> will cause premature exit from <tt>Button::setAction</tt>
 with no harm done. Newer C++ programmers have a tendency to “clean up” 
code like this in such a way as to make it exception unsafe:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>				<span class="docEmphMark">void Button::setAction( const Action *newAction ) {              </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">    delete action_; // change state!                             </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">    action_ = newAction-&gt;clone(); // then maybe throw?           </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">}                                                                </span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Performing the deletion (which is assumed to be exception safe) before the clone (which makes no such promise) will leave the <tt>Button</tt> object in an inconsistent state if <tt>clone</tt> throws an exception.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Notice that properly 
written exception safe code employs relatively few try blocks. A novice 
attempt to write exception safe code is often littered with unnecessary 
and often damaging <tt>try</tt>s and <tt>catch</tt>es:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>				<span class="docEmphMark">void Button::setAction( const Action *newAction ) {              </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">    delete action_;                                              </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">    try {                                                        </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">        action_ = newAction-&gt;clone();                            </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">    }                                                            </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">    catch( ... ) {                                               </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">        action_ = 0;                                             </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">        throw;                                                   </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">    }                                                            </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">}                                                                </span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">This version with its fussy try block and catch clause is exception safe in the sense that the <tt>Button</tt> object is left in a consistent (but likely different) state if <tt>clone</tt> throws an exception. However, our previous version was shorter, simpler, and more exception safe because it left the <tt>Button</tt> object not merely consistent but unchanged.</p>
		
<p class="docText">It’s a good idea to minimize 
the use of try blocks, where possible, and employ them primarily in 
locations where you really want to examine the type of a passing 
exception in order to do something with it. In practice, these locations
 are often at module boundaries between your code and third-party 
libraries and between your code and the operating system.</p>
		


</body>
</html>
