<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 40. RAII</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 40. RAII</h2>
		
<p class="docText">The
 C++ community has a long and proud tradition of inscrutable 
abbreviations and odd names for techniques. RAII manages to attain both 
oddness and inscrutability. RAII stands for “resource acquisition is 
initialization.” (No, not “initialization is resource acquisition,” as 
some would have it. If you’re going to be odd, you’ve got to go all the 
way or the whole thing falls flat.)</p>
		
<p class="docText">RAII is a simple 
technique that harnesses C++’s notion of object lifetime to control 
program resources like memory, file handles, network connections, audit 
trails, or whatever. The basic technique is simple. If you want to keep 
track of an important resource, create an object and associate the 
resource’s lifetime with the object’s lifetime. In that way, you can use
 C++’s sophisticated object management facilities to manage resources. 
In its simplest form, we create an object whose constructor seizes a 
resource and whose destructor frees the resource.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>class Resource { ... };
class ResourceHandle {
  public:
    explicit ResourceHandle( Resource *aResource )
        : r_(aResource) {} // seize resource
    ~ResourceHandle()
        { delete r_; } // release resource
    Resource *get()
        { return r_; } // access resource
  private:
    ResourceHandle( const ResourceHandle &amp; );
    ResourceHandle &amp;operator =( const ResourceHandle &amp; );
    Resource *r_;
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The nice thing about a <tt>ResourceHandle</tt>
 object is that, if it is declared as a local member of a function, as a
 function argument, or as a static, we are guaranteed to get a 
destructor call and recover the resource to which it refers.
 This is an important property if we want to keep track of our important
 resources in the face of slapdash maintenance or propagating 
exceptions. Consider some simple code that doesn’t employ RAII:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>				<span class="docEmphMark">void f() {                                        </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">    Resource *rh = new Resource;                  </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">    //...                                         </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">    if( iFeelLikeIt() ) // bad maintenance        </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">        return;                                   </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">    //...                                         </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">    g(); // exception?                            </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">    delete rh; // do we always get here?          </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">}                                                 </span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">It may be that the original version of this function was safe, and the resource to which <tt>rh</tt>
 referred was always recovered. However, over time such code tends to 
break, as less experienced maintainers insert early returns, call 
functions that can throw an exception, or otherwise avoid the resource 
recovery code at the end of the function. Use of RAII results in a 
function that is both simpler and more robust:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>void f() {
    ResourceHandle rh( new Resource );
    //...
    if( iFeelLikeIt() ) // no problem!
        return;
    //...
    g(); // exception? no problem!
    // rh destructor performs deletion!
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The only time you’re 
not guaranteed a destructor call when using RAII is if the resource 
handle is allocated on the heap, since the destructor will be called 
only if the object is deleted explicitly. (In the interests of full 
disclosure, there are also edge cases where <tt>abort</tt> or <tt>exit</tt> is called and an iffy situation that can occur if a thrown exception is never caught.)</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>				<span class="docEmphMark">ResourceHandle *rhp =                                               </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">    new ResourceHandle(new Resource); // bad idea!                  </span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">RAII
 is such a pervasive technique in C++ programming that it’s hard to find
 a library component or significant block of code that does not employ 
it in some fashion. Note that we have a very broad definition of 
“resource” that can be controlled via RAII. In addition to resources 
that are essentially hunks of memory (buffers, strings, container 
implementations, and the like), we can use RAII to control system 
resources like file handles, semaphores, and network connections, as 
well as less glamorous things like login sessions, graphical shapes, or 
zoo animals.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Consider the following class:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>class Trace {
  public:
    Trace( const char *msg ) : msg_(msg)
        { std::cout &lt;&lt; "Entering " &lt;&lt; msg_ &lt;&lt; std::endl; }
    ~Trace()
        { std::cout &lt;&lt; "Leaving " &lt;&lt; msg_ &lt;&lt; std::endl; }
  private:
    std::string msg_;
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">In the case of <tt>Trace</tt>,
 the resource we’re controlling is a message to be printed when a scope 
is exited. It’s instructive to observe the behavior of a variety of <tt>Trace</tt> objects (automatic, static, local, and global) by following their lifetimes under various types of control flow.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>void f() {
    Trace tracer( "f" ); // print "entering" message
    ResourceHandle rh( new Resource ); // seize resource
    //...
    if( iFeelLikeIt() ) // no problem!
        return;
    //...
    g(); // exception? no problem!
    // rh destructor performs deletion!
    // tracer destructor prints exiting message!
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The code above also 
illustrates an important invariant of constructor and destructor 
structure activation: The activations form a stack. That is, we declared
 and initialized <tt>tracer</tt> before <tt>rh</tt>, so we are guaranteed that <tt>rh</tt>will be destroyed before <tt>tracer</tt>
 (last initialized, first destroyed). More generally, whenever we 
declare a sequence of objects, these objects will be initialized at 
runtime in a specific order and eventually destroyed in the inverse 
order. That order of destruction will not vary even in the event of an 
impromptu <tt>return</tt>, a propagating exception, an unusual <tt>switch</tt>, or an evil <tt>goto</tt>. (If you find this to be a dubious claim, I encourage you to play with the <tt>Trace</tt>
 class. Very instructive.) This property is particularly important for 
resource acquisition and release, since it is generally the case that 
resources must be seized in a particular order and released in the 
inverse order. For example, a network connection must be opened before 
an audit message is sent, and a closing audit message must be sent 
before the connection is closed.</p>
		
<p class="docText">This stack-based 
behavior extends even into the initialization and destruction of 
individual objects. An object’s constructor initializes its base class 
subobjects in the order they’re declared, followed by its data members 
in the order that they’re declared. Then (and only then) is the body of 
the constructor executed. Now we know how the object’s destructor will 
behave. Backward. First the destructor body is executed, then the 
object’s data members are destroyed in the inverse order of their 
declaration, and finally the object’s base class subobjects are 
destroyed in the inverse order of their declaration. In case it’s not 
obvious by this point, this stack-like behavior is really handy for 
seizing and releasing an object’s required resources.</p>
		


</body>
</html>
