<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 41. New, Constructors, and Exceptions</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 41. New, Constructors, and Exceptions</h2>
		
<p class="docText">To
 write perfectly exception safe code, it’s necessary to keep track of 
any allocated resources and to be prepared to release them if an 
exception occurs. This is often a straightforward process. We can either
 organize our code in such a way that no resource recovery is necessary 
(see <span class="docEmphasis">Exception Safe Functions</span> [39, 135]) or use resource handles to recover the resources automatically (see <span class="docEmphasis">RAII</span> [40,
 139]). In extreme situations, we can get down and dirty with try blocks
 or even nested try blocks, but this should be an exception, not the 
rule.</p>
		
<p class="docText">We do, however, have an apparent problem with the use of the <tt>new</tt> operator. The <tt>new</tt> operator actually performs two separate operations (see <span class="docEmphasis">Placement New</span> [35, 119]); first it calls a function named <tt>operator new</tt> to allocate some storage, and then it may invoke a constructor to turn that uninitialized storage into an object:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>String *title = new String( "Kicks" );
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The problem is that, if an exception occurs, we can’t tell whether it was thrown by <tt>operator new</tt> or the <tt>String</tt> constructor. This matters, because if <tt>operator new</tt> succeeds and the constructor throws an exception, we should probably call <tt>operator delete</tt> on the allocated (but uninitialized) storage. If <tt>operator new</tt> was the function that threw the exception, no memory was allocated and we should not call <tt>operator delete</tt>.</p>
		
<p class="docText">One horrible approach
 is to handcraft the proper behavior by separating the allocation and 
initialization behavior and tossing in a try block:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre class="preFixedWidth">				<span class="docEmphMark">String *title // allocate raw storage                                   </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">    = static_cast&lt;String *&gt;(::operator new(sizeof(String));             </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">try {                                                                   </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">    new( title ) String( "Kicks" ); // placement new                    </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">}                                                                       </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">catch( ... ) {                                                          </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">    ::operator delete( title ); // clean up if ctor throws              </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">}                                                                       </span>
			

					  </pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Ouch. So many things are
 wrong with this code that the approach is not worth considering. In 
addition to being more trouble for you, the overworked coder, it will 
not behave properly if <tt>String</tt> has a member <tt>operator new</tt> and <tt>operator delete</tt> (see <span class="docEmphasis">Class-Specific Memory Management</span> [36,
 123]). This is a perfect example of too-clever code that works 
initially but fails subtly in the future because of a remote change (for
 example, if someone adds <tt>String</tt>-specific memory management).</p>
		
<p class="docText">Fortunately, the 
compiler handles this situation for us and produces code that performs 
in the same way as in our hand-coded approach above, but with one 
exception. It will invoke the <tt>operator delete</tt> that corresponds to the <tt>operator new</tt> used to perform the allocation.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>String *title = new String( "Kicks" ); // use members if present
String *title = ::new String( "Kicks" ); // use global new/delete
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">In particular, if the allocation uses a member <tt>operator new</tt>, then the corresponding member <tt>operator delete</tt> will be called to reclaim the storage if the <tt>String</tt> constructor throws an exception. This is yet another good reason to declare a member <tt>operator delete</tt> if you declare a member <tt>operator new</tt>.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Essentially the same situation applies to array allocation and allocations that use overloaded versions of <tt>operator new[]</tt>; the compiler will attempt to find and call the appropriate <tt>operator delete[]</tt>.</p>
		


</body>
</html>
