<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 42. Smart Pointers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 42. Smart Pointers</h2>
		
<p class="docText">We
 C++ programmers are a loyal bunch. Whenever we’re faced with a 
situation that requires a feature the language doesn’t support, we don’t
 abandon C++ to flirt with some other language; we just extend C++ to 
support the feature in which we’re interested.</p>
		
<p class="docText">For instance, it’s often 
the case that you’ll need something that behaves like a pointer, but a 
built-in pointer type just doesn’t do the job. In those cases, a C++ 
programmer will use a “smart pointer.” (See also <span class="docEmphasis">Function Objects</span> [18, 63] for similar observations about function pointers.)</p>
		
<p class="docText">A smart pointer is a class
 type that is tricked up to look and act like a pointer but that 
provides additional capability beyond that provided by a built-in 
pointer. Generally, a smart pointer uses the capabilities provided by a 
class’s constructors, destructor, and copy operations to control access 
to or keep track of what it points to in a way that a built-in pointer 
cannot.</p>
		
<p class="docText">All smart pointers overload the <tt>-&gt;</tt> and <tt>*</tt> operators so that they can be used with standard pointer syntax. (Some rare specimens even go so far as to overload the <tt>-&gt;*</tt> operator; see <span class="docEmphasis">Pointers to Class Members Are Not Pointers</span> [15, 53].) Other smart pointers (in particular, smart pointers used as STL iterators) overload other pointer operators, like <tt>++</tt>, <tt>--</tt>, <tt>+</tt>, <tt>-</tt>, <tt>+=</tt>, <tt>-=</tt>, and <tt>[]</tt> (see <span class="docEmphasis">Pointer Arithmetic</span> [44,
 149]). Smart pointers are often implemented as class templates so that 
they may refer to different types of objects. Here’s a very simple smart
 pointer template that performs a check that it’s not null before use:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T&gt;
class CheckedPtr {
  public:
    explicit CheckedPtr( T *p ) : p_( p ) {}
    ~CheckedPtr() { delete p_; }
    T *operator -&gt;() { return get(); }
    T &amp;operator *() { return *get(); }
  private:
    T *p_; // what we're pointing to
    T *get() { // check ptr before returning it
        if( !p_ )
            throw NullCheckedPointer();
        return p_;
    }
    CheckedPtr( const CheckedPtr &amp; );
    CheckedPtr &amp;operator =( const CheckedPtr &amp; );
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Use of a smart pointer should be straightforward, mimicking the use of a built-in pointer:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>CheckedPtr&lt;Shape&gt; s( new Circle );
s-&gt;draw(); // same as (s.operator -&gt;())-&gt;draw()
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The key to this façade is the overloaded <tt>operator -&gt;</tt>;. The <tt>-&gt;</tt>
 operator must be overloaded as a member and has a rather unusual 
property in that it is not “consumed” when it is called. In other words,
 when we write <tt>s-&gt;draw()</tt>, the compiler recognizes that <tt>s</tt> is not a pointer but a class object with an overloaded <tt>operator -&gt;</tt> (that is, that <tt>s</tt> is a smart pointer). This results in a call to the member overloaded operator, which returns (in this case) a <tt>Shape *</tt> built-in pointer. This pointer is then used to call <tt>Shape's draw</tt> function. If you write this out longhand, you’ll get the following challenging expression: <tt>(s.operator -&gt;())-&gt;draw()</tt>, which contains two uses of the <tt>-&gt;</tt> operator, one overloaded, one built in.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Smart pointers also typically overload <tt>operator *</tt> as well as <tt>operator -&gt;</tt> so that they may be used to refer to nonclass types.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>CheckedPtr&lt;int&gt; ip = new int;
*ip = 12; // same as ip.operator *() = 12
(*s).draw(); // use on ptr to class, too
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Smart pointers are used pervasively in C++ programming, from resource handles (see <span class="docEmphasis">RAII</span> [40, 139] and <span class="docEmphasis">auto_ptr Is Unusual</span> [43, 147]) to STL iterators, to reference counting pointers, to wrappers around pointers to member functions, and on and on. <span class="docEmphasis">Semper fidelis</span>.</p>
		


</body>
</html>
