<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 43. auto_ptr Is Unusual</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 43. auto_ptr Is Unusual</h2>
		
<p class="docText">Whenever one discusses RAII, it’s necessary to discuss <tt>auto_ptr</tt>. This is always a task. It’s not that we’re ashamed of <tt>auto_ptr</tt>,
 mind you, but it’s kind of like explaining your brother to strangers; 
he’s a superlative person, but you have to be in the right frame of mind
 to appreciate that. And there’s no denying that both your brother and <tt>auto_ptr</tt> have a different worldview from the typical person or object, respectively.</p>
		
<p class="docText">As we discussed in <span class="docEmphasis">RAII</span> [40,
 139], the use of resource handles is a pervasively employed technique 
in C++ programming, so the standard library supplies a resource handle 
template that serves many resource handle needs: <tt>auto_ptr</tt>. The <tt>auto_ptr</tt> class template is used to generate smart pointers (see <span class="docEmphasis">Smart Pointers</span> [42, 145]) that know how to clean up after themselves.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>using std::auto_ptr; // see <span class="docEmphasis">Namespaces</span> [23, 81]
auto_ptr&lt;Shape&gt; aShape( new Circle );
aShape-&gt;draw(); // draw a circle
(*aShape).draw(); // draw it again
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Like all well-designed smart pointers, <tt>auto_ptr</tt> overloads <tt>operator -&gt;</tt> and <tt>operator *</tt> so that you can usually pretend you’re dealing with a built-in pointer. There are many nice things about <tt>auto_ptr</tt>.
 First, it’s very efficient. You’re not likely to get better performance
 with a hand-coded solution that uses a built-in pointer. Second, when 
an <tt>auto_ptr</tt> goes out of scope, its 
destructor will free whatever it’s pointing to, just as our hand-coded 
resource handle did. In the code fragment above, the <tt>Circle</tt> object to which <tt>aShape</tt> refers will be (effectively) garbage collected.</p>
		
<p class="docText">A third nice thing about <tt>auto_ptr</tt> is that it behaves like a built-in pointer with respect to conversions:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>auto_ptr&lt;Circle&gt; aCircle( new Circle );
aShape = aCircle;
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Through its clever use of template member functions (see <span class="docEmphasis">Member Templates</span> [50, 173]) one <tt>auto_ptr</tt> can be copied to another if the corresponding built-in pointers could. In the code above, an <tt>auto_ptr&lt;Circle&gt;</tt> can be assigned to an <tt>auto_ptr&lt;Shape&gt;</tt> because a <tt>Circle *</tt> can be assigned to a <tt>Shape *</tt> (assuming that <tt>Shape</tt> is a public base class of <tt>Circle</tt>).</p>
		
<p class="docText">Where <tt>auto_ptr</tt> 
differs from the typical smart pointer (or typical object, for that 
matter) is in its copy operations. For a typical class, the copy 
operations (see <span class="docEmphasis">Copy Operations</span> [13, 45]) will not affect the source of the copy. In other words, if <tt>T</tt> is some type</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>T a;
T b( a ); // copy construction of b with a
a = b; // assignment from b to a
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">then when <tt>b</tt> is initialized with <tt>a</tt>, the value of <tt>a</tt> is unaffected, and when <tt>b</tt> is assigned to <tt>a</tt>, the value of <tt>b</tt> is unaffected. Not so with <tt>auto_ptr</tt>! When we assigned <tt>aCircle</tt> to <tt>aShape</tt> above, both source and target of the assignment were affected. If <tt>aShape</tt> was non-null, whatever it referred to was deleted and replaced with what <tt>aCircle</tt> pointed to. In addition, <tt>aCircle</tt> was set to null. Assignment and initialization of <tt>auto_ptr</tt>s are not really copy operations; they are operations that transfer control of the underlying object from one <tt>auto_ptr</tt>
 to another. One can think of the right argument of an assignment or 
initialization as a “source” and the left argument as a “sink.” Control 
of the underlying object is passed from source to sink. This is a good 
property in a resource handle.</p>
		
<p class="docText">However, one should avoid the use of <tt>auto_ptrs</tt>
 in two common situations. First, they should never be used as container
 elements. Container elements are often copied around within a 
container, and the container will assume that its elements obey the 
usual, non-<tt>auto_ptr</tt> copy semantics. Feel free to use a smart pointer as a container element, just as long as it’s not an <tt>auto_ptr</tt>. Second, an <tt>auto_ptr</tt> should refer to a single element, not an array. The reason is that when the object to which the <tt>auto_ptr</tt> refers is deleted, it will be deleted using <tt>operator delete</tt>, not array delete. If the <tt>auto_ptr</tt> refers to an array, the wrong deletion operator will be called (see <span class="docEmphasis">Array Allocation</span> [37, 127]).</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>				<span class="docEmphMark">vector&lt; auto_ptr&lt;Shape&gt; &gt; shapes; // likely error, bad idea   </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">auto_ptr&lt;int&gt; ints( new int[32] ); // bad idea, no error (yet)</span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Generally, a standard <tt>vector</tt> or <tt>string</tt> is a reasonable alternative to an <tt>auto_ptr</tt> to an array.</p>
		


</body>
</html>
