<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 46. Class Template Explicit Specialization</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 46. Class Template Explicit Specialization</h2>
		
<p class="docText">Class
 template explicit specialization is straightforward. First, you need a 
general case to specialize. This general case is called the “primary” 
template.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T&gt; class Heap;
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The primary template has only to be declared to be specialized (as <tt>Heap</tt> is above), but it is usually also defined (as <tt>Heap</tt> is below):</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T&gt;
class Heap {
  public:
    void push( const T &amp;val );
    T pop();
    bool empty() const { return h_.empty(); }
  private:
    std::vector&lt;T&gt; h_;
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Our primary 
template implements a heap data structure by putting an easy-to-use 
interface around the somewhat challenging standard library heap 
algorithms. A heap is a linearized tree structure that is optimized for 
insertion and retrieval. Pushing a value into a heap inserts the value 
into the tree structure, and popping a heap removes and returns the 
largest value in the heap. For example, the <tt>push</tt> and <tt>pop</tt> operations can be implemented using the standard <tt>push_heap</tt> and <tt>pop_heap</tt> algorithms:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T&gt;
void Heap&lt;T&gt;::push( const T &amp;val ) {
    h_.push_back(val);
    std::push_heap( h_.begin(), h_.end() );
}

template &lt;typename T&gt;

T Heap&lt;T&gt;::pop() {
    std::pop_heap( h_.begin(), h_.end() );
    T tmp( h_.back() );
    h_.pop_back();
    return tmp;
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">This
 implementation works well for many types of values but falls down in 
the case of pointers to characters. By default, the standard heap 
algorithms use the <tt>&lt;</tt> operator to 
compare and organize the elements in the heap. In the case of pointers 
to characters, however, this would result in the heap’s being organized 
according to the addresses of the strings to which the character 
pointers refer, not the values of the strings themselves. That is, the 
heap will be organized by the values of the pointers, not the values of 
what they point to.</p>
		
<p class="docText">We can address this particular difficulty with an explicit specialization of the primary <tt>Heap</tt> template for pointers to character:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;&gt;
class Heap&lt;const char *&gt; {
  public:
    void push( const char *pval );
    const char *pop();
    bool empty() const { return h_.empty(); }
  private:
    std::vector&lt;const char *&gt; h_;
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The template-parameter-list
 is empty, but the template argument for which we’re specializing is 
appended to the template-name. Curiously, this class template explicit 
specialization is not a template, because there is no template parameter
 left unspecified. For this reason, a class template explicit 
specialization is commonly called a “complete specialization” to 
distinguish it from a partial specialization, which <span class="docEmphasis">is</span> a template (see <span class="docEmphasis">Template Partial Specialization</span> [47, 161]).</p>
		
<p class="docText">The technical terminology 
in this area is tricky: A template specialization is a template name 
with template arguments supplied (see <span class="docEmphasis">Template Terminology</span> [45, 153]). The syntax <tt>Heap&lt;const char *&gt;</tt> is a template specialization, as is <tt>Heap&lt;int&gt;</tt>. However, the first specialization of <tt>Heap</tt> will not result in an instantiation of the <tt>Heap</tt> template (because the explicit specialization defined for <tt>const char *</tt> will be used), but the second specialization will cause the primary <tt>Heap</tt> template to be instantiated.</p>
		
<p class="docText">The implementation of the specialization can be customized to the needs of the <tt>const char *</tt> element type. For example, the <tt>push</tt>
 operation can insert a new value into the heap based on the value of 
the string to which the pointer refers, rather than the address 
contained in the pointer:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>bool strLess( const char *a, const char *b )
    { return strcmp( a, b ) &lt; 0; }

void Heap&lt;const char *&gt;::push( const char *pval ) {
    h_.push_back(pval);
    std::push_heap( h_.begin(), h_.end(), strLess );
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Note the absence of the <tt>template</tt> keyword and parameter list in the definition of <tt>Heap&lt;const char *&gt;::push;</tt> this is not a function template because, as we noted above, the explicit specialization <tt>Heap&lt;const char *&gt;</tt> is not a template.</p>
		
<p class="docText">With the availability of this complete specialization, we can distinguish between <tt>Heaps</tt> of <tt>const char *s</tt> and other <tt>Heaps</tt>:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>Heap&lt;int&gt; h1; // use primary template
Heap&lt;const char *&gt; h2; // use explicit specialization
<span class="docEmphMark">Heap&lt;char *&gt; h3; // use primary template!              </span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The compiler checks a
 class template specialization against the declaration of the primary 
template. If the template arguments match the primary template (in the 
case of <tt>Heap</tt>, if there is a single 
type name argument) the compiler will look for an explicit 
specialization that matches the template arguments exactly. If we want 
to special case for <tt>Heap</tt>s of <tt>char *</tt> in addition to <tt>Heap</tt>s of <tt>const char *</tt>, we have to provide an additional explicit specialization:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;&gt;
class Heap&lt;char *&gt; {
  public:
    void push( char *pval );

    char *pop();
    size_t size() const;
    void capitalize();
<span class="docEmphMark">    // no empty!                                           </span>
private:
   std::vector&lt;char *&gt; h_;
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Notice
 that there is no requirement that an explicit specialization’s 
interface match that of the primary template. For example, in the case 
of our first explicit specialization of <tt>Heap</tt> for <tt>const char *</tt>, the formal argument type of the <tt>push</tt> function was declared to be <tt>const char *</tt> rather than <tt>const char *&amp;</tt>. This is a reasonable optimization for a pointer argument. In the case of the specialization of <tt>Heap</tt> for <tt>char *</tt>, we’ve gone even further in departing from the interface of the primary template.</p>
		
<p class="docText">We’ve added two new functions (<tt>size</tt> and <tt>capitalize</tt>), which is both legal and sometimes useful, and not provided another (<tt>empty</tt>),
 which is legal but generally inadvisable. When considering the 
interfaces of class template explicit specializations, it’s helpful to 
make an analogy to the relationship between base and derived classes 
(though class template explicit specialization has absolutely no 
technical connection to class derivation). Users of a class hierarchy 
often write polymorphic code to the base class interface with the 
expectation that the derived class will implement that interface (see <span class="docEmphasis">Polymorphism</span> [2,
 3]). Similarly, users will often write generic code to the interface 
provided in the primary template (if the primary is defined as well as 
declared) and will expect that any specialization will have at least 
those capabilities (though, as with a derived class, it may have 
additional capabilities). Consider a simple function template:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T, typename Out&gt;
void extractHeap( Heap&lt;T&gt; &amp;h, Out dest ) {
    while( !h.empty() )
        *dest++ = h.pop();
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The author of this function template will have unkind thoughts about the author of the <tt>char *</tt> explicit specialization of <tt>Heap</tt> if this code works:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>Heap&lt;const char *&gt; heap1;
//...
vector&lt;const char *&gt; vec1;
extractHeap( heap1, back_inserter(vec1) ); // fine...
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">and this code fails to compile:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>Heap&lt;char *&gt; heap2;
//...
vector&lt;char *&gt; vec2;
<span class="docEmphMark">extractHeap( heap2, back_inserter(vec2) ); // error! no empty</span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		


</body>
</html>
