<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 47. Template Partial Specialization</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 47. Template Partial Specialization</h2>
		
<p class="docText">Let’s
 get it straight: you can’t partially specialize function templates. 
It’s just not a part of the C++ language (although it may be some day). 
What you probably want to do is overload them (see <span class="docEmphasis">Overloading Function Templates</span> [58, 213]). Accordingly, we are considering only class templates in this item.</p>
		
<p class="docText">The way class template
 partial specialization works is straightforward. As with complete 
specialization, you first need a general case—or primary template—to 
specialize. Let’s use our <tt>Heap</tt> template from <span class="docEmphasis">Class Template Explicit Specialization</span> [46, 155]:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T&gt; class Heap;
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Explicit 
specialization (also known colloquially as “complete” specialization) is
 used to customize a class template for a precise set of arguments. In <span class="docEmphasis">Class Template Explicit Specialization</span> [46, 155], we used it to provide customized implementations of <tt>Heap</tt> for <tt>const char *</tt> and <tt>char *</tt>. However, we still have a problem with <tt>Heap</tt>s of other pointer types, in that we’d like to order the <tt>Heap</tt> according to the values to which the pointer elements refer, rather than the value of the pointers themselves.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>Heap&lt;double *&gt; readings; // primary template, T is double *
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Because the type (<tt>double *</tt>
 ) does not match either of our character pointer complete 
specializations, the compiler will instantiate the primary template. We 
could provide complete specializations for <tt>double *</tt>
 and every other pointer type of interest, but this is onerous and 
ultimately unmaintainable. This is a job for partial specialization:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T&gt;
class Heap&lt;T *&gt; {
  public:
    void push( const T *val );
    T *pop();

    bool empty() const { return h_.empty(); }
  private:
    std::vector&lt;T *&gt; h_;
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The
 syntax of a partial specialization is similar to that of a complete 
specialization, but the template parameter list is not empty. Like a 
complete specialization, the class template name is a template-id and 
not a simple template name (see <span class="docEmphasis">Template Terminology</span> [45, 153]).</p>
		
<p class="docText">This partial 
specialization for pointers allows us to modify the implementation 
appropriately. For example, insertions can be made based on the value of
 the object pointed to, rather than the value of the pointer. First, 
let’s whip up a comparator that compares two pointers by the values of 
what they point to (see <span class="docEmphasis">STL Function Objects</span> [20, 71]):</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T&gt;
struct PtrCmp : public std::binary_function&lt;T *, T *, bool&gt; {
    bool operator ()( const T *a, const T *b ) const
        { return *a &lt; *b; }
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Now let’s use our comparator to implement a <tt>push</tt> operation with the correct behavior:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T&gt;
void Heap&lt;T *&gt;::push( T *pval ) {
    if( pval ) {
        h_.push_back(pval);
        std::push_heap( h_.begin(), h_.end(), PtrCmp&lt;T&gt;() );
    }
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Note that, unlike a complete specialization of a class template, a partial specialization is a template, and the <tt>template</tt> keyword and parameter list are required in definitions of its members.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Unlike our complete specializations, the parameter type of this version of <tt>Heap</tt> is not completely determined; it’s only partially determined to be <tt>T *</tt>, where <tt>T</tt>
 is an unspecified type. That’s what makes it a partial specialization. 
This partial specialization will be preferred to the primary template 
when instantiating a <tt>Heap</tt> with any (unqualified) pointer type. Further, the complete specializations of <tt>Heap</tt> for <tt>const char *</tt> and <tt>char *</tt> will be preferred to this partial specialization if the template argument type is <tt>const char *</tt> or <tt>char *</tt>.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>Heap&lt;std::string&gt; h1; // primary, T is std::string
Heap&lt;std::string *&gt; h2; // partial spec, T is std::string
Heap&lt;int **&gt; h3; // partial spec, T is int *
Heap&lt;char *&gt; h4; // complete spec for char *
Heap&lt;char **&gt; h5; // partial spec, T is char *
Heap&lt;const int *&gt; h6; // partial spec, T is const int
Heap&lt;int (*)()&gt; h7; // partial spec, T is int ()
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The complete set of
 rules for choosing among the various available partial specializations 
is rather involved, but most cases are straightforward. Generally, the 
most specific, most restricted candidate is chosen. The partial 
specialization mechanism is precise and allows us to select among 
candidates with high precision. For example, we could augment our set of
 partial specializations with one for pointers to const:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T&gt;
class Heap&lt;const T *&gt; {
    //...
};
//...
Heap&lt;const int *&gt; h6; // different partial spec, now T is int
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Note that, as we discussed in <span class="docEmphasis">Class Template Explicit Specialization</span> [46,
 155], the compiler checks a class template specialization against the 
declaration of the primary template. If the template arguments match the
 primary template (in the case of <tt>Heap</tt>, if 
there is a single type name argument) the compiler will look for the 
complete or partial specialization that best matches the template 
arguments.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Here’s a subtle and useful
 point: A complete or partial specialization of a primary template must 
be instantiated with the same number and kind of arguments as the 
primary, but its template parameter list does not have to have the same 
form as that of the primary. In the case of <tt>Heap</tt>, the primary takes a single type name parameter, so any complete or partial specialization of <tt>Heap</tt> must be instantiated with a single type name argument:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T&gt; class Heap;
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Therefore, a complete specialization of <tt>Heap</tt>
 still takes a single type name template argument, but the template 
parameter list differs from that of the primary because it is empty:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;&gt; class Heap&lt;char *&gt;;
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">A partial specialization of <tt>Heap</tt>
 must also take a single type name template argument, and its template 
parameter list may have a single type name parameter in its template 
header</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T&gt; class Heap&lt;T *&gt;;
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">but it doesn’t have to.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T, int n&gt; class Heap&lt;T [n]&gt;;
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">This partial specialization will be selected for a specialization of <tt>Heap</tt> with an array type. For example:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>Heap&lt;float *[6]&gt; h8; // partial spec, T is float * and n is 6
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Essentially, this 
partial specialization says, “This partial specialization takes a single
 type parameter like the primary template, but that parameter must have 
the form ’array of <tt>T</tt> of size <tt>n</tt>.’” Consider some more involved examples:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename R, typename A1, typename A2&gt;
class Heap&lt;R (*)(A1,A2)&gt;;


template &lt;class C, typename T&gt;
class Heap&lt;T C::*&gt;;
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">With the addition of these partial specializations, we can special case for <tt>Heap</tt>s of pointers to non-member functions that take two arguments and <tt>Heap</tt>s of pointers to data members (though why you’d want heaps of these things is anybody’s guess):</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>Heap&lt;char *(*)(int,int)&gt; h9; // partial spec
                             // R is char *, A1 and A2 are int
Heap&lt;std::string Name::*&gt; h10; // partial spec
                               // T is string, C is Name
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		


</body>
</html>
