<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 48. Class Template Member Specialization</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 48. Class Template Member Specialization</h2>
		
<p class="docText">A
 common misconception about class template explicit specialization and 
partial specialization is that a specialization somehow “inherits” 
something from the primary template. This is not the case. A complete or
 partial specialization of a class template is a totally separate entity
 from the primary template and does not “inherit” either interface or 
implementation from the primary template. However, in a nontechnical 
sense, specializations do inherit a set of expectations about their 
interfaces and behaviors, in that users who write generic code to the 
interface of a primary template generally expect that code to work with 
specializations as well.</p>
		
<p class="docText">This implies that a 
complete or partial specialization must generally reimplement all the 
capabilities of the primary template, even if only a portion of the 
implementation requires customization. An alternative is often to 
specialize only a subset of the primary template’s member functions. For
 example, consider the primary <tt>Heap</tt> template (see <span class="docEmphasis">Class Template Explicit Specialization</span> [46, 155]):</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T&gt;
class Heap {
  public:
    void push( const T &amp;val );
    T pop();
    bool empty() const { return h_.empty(); }
  private:
    std::vector&lt;T&gt; h_;
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Our complete specialization of <tt>Heap</tt> for <tt>const char *</tt> replaced the entire implementation of the primary, even though its private implementation and <tt>empty</tt> member function were perfectly adequate for a heap of character pointers. All we really had to do was specialize the <tt>push</tt> and <tt>pop</tt> member functions:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;&gt;
void Heap&lt;const char *&gt;::push( const char *const &amp;pval ) {
    h_.push_back(pval);
    std::push_heap( h_.begin(), h_.end(), strLess );
}

template&lt;&gt;
const char *Heap&lt;const char *&gt;::pop() {
    std::pop_heap( h_.begin(), h_.end(), strLess );
    const char *tmp = h_.back(); h_.pop_back();
    return tmp;
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">These functions are explicit specializations of the corresponding members of the primary <tt>Heap</tt> template and will be used in place of the implicitly instantiated versions for <tt>Heap&lt;const char *&gt;</tt>.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Note that the interface of 
each of these functions must match exactly the corresponding interface 
in the template whose members they’re specializing. For example, the 
primary template declared <tt>push</tt> to take an argument of type <tt>const T &amp;</tt>, so the explicit specialization of <tt>push</tt> for <tt>const char *</tt> must have an argument type of <tt>const char * const &amp;</tt>.
 (That’s a reference to a const pointer to a const char.) Note that we 
didn’t have this restriction when providing a complete specialization of
 the <tt>Heap</tt> template as a whole, where the argument to <tt>push</tt> was declared to be simply <tt>const char *</tt>.</p>
		
<p class="docText">To increase the 
level of complexity (a common occurrence when programming with 
templates), let’s consider what would happen if we had available our 
partial specialization of <tt>Heap</tt> for pointers in general (see <span class="docEmphasis">Template Partial Specialization</span> [47, 161]):</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T&gt;
class Heap&lt;T *&gt; {
    //...
    void push( T *pval );
    //...
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">If this partial specialization of <tt>Heap</tt> is present, our explicit specialization of <tt>push</tt> now must conform to the interface of the <tt>push</tt> member of the partial specialization, since that’s the function that would otherwise be instantiated for <tt>Heap&lt;const char *&gt;</tt>. The explicit specialization must now be declared as follows:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;&gt;
void Heap&lt;const char *&gt;::push( const char *pval ) {
    h_.push_back(pval);
    std::push_heap( h_.begin(), h_.end(), strLess );
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Two final notes: First,
 other members of class templates may be explicitly specialized in 
addition to member functions, including static members and member 
templates.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Second, there is 
often confusion about the difference between explicit specialization and
 explicit instantiation. As we’ve seen in this item, explicit 
specialization is a means of providing a custom version of a template or
 template member that differs from what one would have gotten from an 
implicit instantiation. Explicit instantiation simply tells the 
compiler, explicitly, to instantiate a member that is identical to what 
one would have gotten with an implicit instantiation.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template void Heap&lt;double&gt;::push( const double &amp; );
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">See also <span class="docEmphasis">You Instantiate What You Use</span> [61, 225].</p>
		


</body>
</html>
