<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 49. Disambiguating with Typename</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 49. Disambiguating with Typename</h2>
		
<p class="docText">Even
 experienced C++ programmers are often put off by the rather complex 
syntax required to program with templates. Of all the syntactic 
gyrations one has to undertake, none is more initially confusing than 
the occasional need to help the compiler disambiguate a parse.</p>
		
<p class="docText">As an example, let’s look at a portion of an implementation of a simple, nonstandard container template.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T&gt;
class PtrList {
  public:
    //...
    typedef T *ElemT;
    void insert( ElemT );
    //...
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">It’s common practice for 
class templates to embed information about themselves as nested type 
names. This allows us to access information about the instantiated 
template through the appropriate nested name (see <span class="docEmphasis">Embedded Type Information</span> [53, 189] and <span class="docEmphasis">Traits</span> [54, 193]).</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>typedef PtrList&lt;State&gt; StateList;
//...
StateList::ElemT currentState = 0;
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The nested name <tt>ElemT</tt> allows us easy access to what the <tt>PtrList</tt> template considers to be its element type. Even though we instantiated <tt>PtrList</tt> with the type name <tt>State</tt>, the element type is <tt>State *</tt>. In other circumstances, <tt>PtrList</tt> could be implemented with a smart pointer element type, or a very sophisticated implementation of <tt>PtrList</tt> might vary its implementation based on the properties of the type used to instantiate it (see <span class="docEmphasis">Specializing for Type Information</span> [52, 183]). Use of the nested type name helps to insulate users of <tt>PtrList</tt> from these internal implementation decisions.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Here’s another nonstandard container:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename Etype&gt;
class SCollection {
  public:
    //...
    typedef Etype ElemT;
    void insert( const Etype &amp; );
    //...
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">It appears that <tt>SCollection</tt> is designed according to the same set of naming standards as <tt>PtrList</tt>, in that it also defines a nested <tt>ElemT</tt>
 type name. Adherence to an established convention is useful, because 
(among other advantages) it allows us to write generic algorithms that 
work with a range of different container types. For example, we could 
write a simple utility algorithm that fills a conforming container with 
the content of an array of the appropriate element type:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;class Cont&gt;
<span class="docEmphMark">void fill( Cont &amp;c, Cont::ElemT a[], int len ) { // error!   </span>
    for( int i = 0; i &lt; len; ++i )
        c.insert( a[i] );
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Unfortunately, we have a syntax error. The nested name <tt>Cont::ElemT</tt> is not recognized as a type name! The trouble is that, in the context of the <tt>fill</tt> template, the compiler does not have enough information to determine whether the nested name <tt>ElemT</tt> is a type name or a nontype name. The standard says that in such situations, the nested name is assumed to be a nontype name.</p>
		
<p class="docText">If at first this makes no 
sense to you, you’re not alone. However, let’s see what information is 
available to the compiler in different contexts. First, let’s consider 
the situation in which we have a nontemplate class:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>class MyContainer {
  public:
    typedef State ElemT;
    //...
};
//...
MyContainer::ElemT *anElemPtr = 0;
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">There’s clearly no problem here, since the compiler can examine the content of the <tt>MyContainer</tt> class, verify that it has a member named <tt>ElemT</tt>, and note that <tt>MyContainer::ElemT</tt> is indeed a type name. Things are just as simple for a class that is generated from a class template.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>typedef PtrList&lt;State&gt; StateList;
//...
StateList::ElemT aState = 0;
PtrList&lt;State&gt;::ElemT anotherState = 0;
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">To the compiler, an 
instantiated class template is just a class, and there is no difference 
in the access of a nested name from the class type <tt>PtrList&lt;State&gt;</tt> than there is from <tt>MyContainer</tt>. In either case, the compiler just examines the content of the class to determine whether <tt>ElemT</tt> is a type name.</p>
		
<p class="docText">However, once we 
enter the context of a template, things are different because there is 
less precise information available. Consider the following fragment:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T&gt;
void aFuncTemplate( T &amp;arg ) {
    ...T::ElemT...
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">When the compiler encounters the qualified name <tt>T::ElemT</tt>, what does it know? From the template parameter list it knows that <tt>T</tt> is a type name of some sort. It can also determine that <tt>T</tt> is a class name because we’ve employed the scope operator (<tt>::</tt>) to access a nested name of <tt>T</tt>. But that’s all the compiler knows, because there is no information available about the content of <tt>T</tt>. For instance, we could call <tt>aFuncTemplate</tt> with a <tt>PtrList</tt>, in which case <tt>T::ElemT</tt> would be a type name.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>PtrList&lt;State&gt; states;
//...
aFuncTemplate( states ); // T::ElemT is PtrList&lt;State&gt;::ElemT
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">But what if we were to instantiate <tt>aFuncTemplate</tt> with a different type?</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>struct X {
    enum Types { typeA, typeB, typeC } ElemT;
    //...
};
X anX;
//...

aFuncTemplate( anX ); // T::ElemT is X::ElemT
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">In this case, <tt>T::ElemT</tt>
 is the name of a data member—a nontype name. What’s a compiler to do? 
The standard tossed a coin, and in cases where it can’t determine the 
type of a nested name, the compiler will assume the nested name is a 
nontype name. That is the cause of the syntax error in the <tt>fill</tt> function template above.</p>
		
<p class="docText">To deal with this situation, we must sometimes explicitly inform the compiler when a nested name is a type name.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T&gt;
void aFuncTemplate( T &amp;arg ) {
    ...typename T::ElemT...
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Here we’ve used the <tt>typename</tt>
 keyword to tell the compiler explicitly that the following qualified 
name is a type name. This allows the compiler to parse the template 
correctly. Note that we are telling the compiler that <tt>ElemT</tt> is a type name, not <tt>T</tt>. The compiler can already determine that <tt>T</tt> is a type name. Similarly, if we were to write</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>typename A::B::C::D::E
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">we’d be telling the compiler that the (very) nested name <tt>E</tt> is a type name.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Of course, if <tt>aFuncTemplate</tt>
 is instantiated with a type that does not satisfy the requirements of 
the parsed template, it will result in a compile-time error.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>struct Z {
    // no member named ElemT...
};
Z aZ;
//...
<span class="docEmphMark">aFuncTemplate( aZ ); // error! no member Z::ElemT            </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">aFuncTemplate( anX ); // error! X::ElemT is not a type name  </span>
aFuncTemplate( states ); // OK. nested ElemT is a type
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Now we can rewrite the <tt>fill</tt> function template to parse correctly:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;class Cont&gt;
void fill( Cont &amp;c, typename Cont::ElemT a[], int len ) { // OK
    for( int i = 0; i &lt; len; ++i )
        c.insert( a[i] );
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		


</body>
</html>
