<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 51. Disambiguating with Template</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 51. Disambiguating with Template</h2>
		
<p class="docText">In <span class="docEmphasis">Disambiguating with Typename</span> [49,
 169], we saw how it is sometimes necessary to tell the compiler 
explicitly that a nested name is a type name so that the compiler can 
perform a correct parse. The same situation arises with nested template 
names.</p>
		
<p class="docText">The canonical example is 
in the implementation of an STL allocator. If you’re not familiar with 
STL allocators, don’t worry, be happy. Previous familiarity with them is
 not necessary for following this discussion, though a good deal of 
patience might be.</p>
		
<p class="docText">An allocator is a class type 
that is used to customize memory management operations for STL 
containers. Allocators are typically implemented as class templates:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;class T&gt;
class AnAlloc {
  public:
    //...
    template &lt;class Other&gt;
    class rebind {
      public:
        typedef AnAlloc&lt;Other&gt; other;
    };

    //...
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The class template <tt>AnAlloc</tt> contains the nested name <tt>rebind</tt>,
 which is itself a class template. It is used within the STL framework 
to create allocators “just like” the allocator that was used to 
instantiate a container but for a different element type. For example:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>typedef AnAlloc&lt;int&gt; AI; // original allocator allocates ints
typedef AI::rebind&lt;double&gt;::other AD; // allocates doubles
typedef AnAlloc&lt;double&gt; AD; // legal! this is the same type
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">It may look a little odd, but using the <tt>rebind</tt>
 mechanism allows one to create a version of an existing allocator for a
 different element type without knowing the type of the allocator or the
 type of the element.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>typedef SomeAlloc::rebind&lt;Node&gt;::other NodeAlloc;
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">If the type name <tt>SomeAlloc</tt> follows the STL convention for allocators, then it will have a nested <tt>rebind</tt>
 class template. Essentially, we’ve said, “I don’t know what kind of 
allocator this type is, and I don’t know what it allocates, but I want 
an allocator just like it that allocates <tt>Node</tt>s!”</p>
		
<p class="docText">This level of ignorance
 can occur only within a template, where precise types and values are 
not known until much later, when the template is instantiated. Consider 
an augmentation of our <tt>SList</tt> container of <span class="docEmphasis">Member Templates</span> [50, 173] to include an allocator type (<tt>A</tt>) that can allocate elements (of type <tt>T</tt>). Like the standard containers, <tt>SList</tt> will provide a default allocator argument:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt; typename T, class A = std::allocator&lt;T&gt; &gt;
class SList {
    //...
    struct Node {
        //...
    };
<span class="docEmphMark">    typedef A::rebind&lt;Node&gt;::other NodeAlloc; // syntax error!</span>
    //...
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">As is typical for lists and other node-based containers, our list-of-<tt>T</tt> does not actually allocate and manipulate <tt>T</tt>s. Rather, it allocates and manipulates nodes that contain a member of type <tt>T</tt>. This is the situation we described above. We have some sort of allocator that knows how to allocate objects of type <tt>T</tt>, but we want to allocate objects of type <tt>Node</tt>. However, when we attempt to <tt>rebind</tt>, we get a syntax error.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Once again, the problem is that the compiler has no information about the type name <tt>A</tt> at this point other than that it is a type name. The compiler has to make the assumption that the nested name <tt>rebind</tt>
 is a nontemplate name, and the angle bracket that follows is parsed as a
 less-than. But our troubles are just beginning. Even if the compiler 
were somehow able to determine that <tt>rebind</tt> is a template name, when it reached the (doubly) nested name <tt>other</tt>, it would have to assume that it’s a nontype name! Time for some clarification. The typedef must be written as follows:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>typedef typename A::template rebind&lt;Node&gt;::other NodeAlloc;
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The use of <tt>template</tt> tells the compiler that <tt>rebind</tt> is a template name, and the use of <tt>typename</tt> tells the compiler that the whole mess refers to a type name. Simple, right?</p>
		


</body>
</html>
