<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 52. Specializing for Type Information</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 52. Specializing for Type Information</h2>
		
<p class="docText">Class
 template explicit specialization and partial specialization are 
commonly used to produce versions of a primary class template that are 
customized to specific template arguments or classes of template 
arguments (see <span class="docEmphasis">Class Template Explicit Specialization</span> [46, 155] and <span class="docEmphasis">Template Partial Specialization</span> [47, 161]).</p>
		
<p class="docText">However, these language 
features are also commonly used in an inverse fashion: Rather than 
produce a specialization based on the properties of a type, the 
properties of a type are deduced from a specialization. Let’s look at a 
simple example:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T&gt;
struct IsInt // T is not an int...
    { enum { result = false }; };
template &lt;&gt;
struct IsInt&lt;int&gt; // unless it's an int!
    { enum { result = true }; };
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Before we go on, I’d like to 
point out how simple the above code is, once you get past its convoluted
 syntax. This is a simple example of what’s known as template 
metaprogramming, that is, performing some portion of a computation at 
compile time rather than runtime through the use of template 
instantiation. It sounds high falutin’, but it still boils down to an 
observation that might have come from one of my plainspoken, 
cranberry-farming neighbors: “It’s an <tt>int</tt> if it’s an <tt>int</tt>.” Most advanced C++ template programming is no more difficult than this, just more involved.</p>
		
<p class="docText">With the primary template and
 complete specialization above, we can ask (at compile time) whether an 
unknown type is actually an <tt>int</tt>:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename X&gt;
void aFunc( X &amp;arg ) {
    //...

    ...IsInt&lt;X&gt;::result...
    //...
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The
 ability to ask such questions about types at compile time is the basis 
of a number of important optimization and error-checking techniques. Of 
course, knowing whether a particular type is precisely an <tt>int</tt>
 is of limited utility. Knowing whether a type is a pointer is probably 
more generally useful, since implementations often take different forms 
depending on whether they are dealing with pointers to objects or with 
objects directly:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>struct Yes {}; // a type analog to true
struct No {}; // a type analog to false


template &lt;typename T&gt;
struct IsPtr // T is not a ptr...
    { enum { result = false }; typedef No Result; };
template &lt;typename T&gt;
struct IsPtr&lt;T *&gt; // unless it's an unqualified ptr,
    { enum { result = true }; typedef Yes Result; };
template &lt;typename T&gt;
struct IsPtr&lt;T *const&gt; // or a const ptr,
    { enum { result = true }; typedef Yes Result; };
template &lt;typename T&gt;
struct IsPtr&lt;T *volatile&gt; // or a volatile ptr,
    { enum { result = true }; typedef Yes Result; };
template &lt;typename T&gt;
struct IsPtr&lt;T *const volatile&gt; // or a const volatile ptr.
    { enum { result = true }; typedef Yes Result; };
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">We’re asking a more general question with <tt>IsPtr</tt> than we did with <tt>IsInt</tt>,
 so we’re employing partial specialization to “capture” the variously 
qualified versions of the pointer modifier. As advertised above, this <tt>IsPtr</tt> facility is really no more difficult to understand than the <tt>IsInt</tt> facility; it’s just more syntactically challenging. (See also <span class="docEmphasis">SFINAE</span> [59, 217] for a similar metaprogramming technique.)</p>
		
<p class="docText">To
 see the utility of the ability to ask questions about a type at compile
 time, consider this implementation of a simple stack template:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T&gt;
class Stack {
  public:
    ~Stack();
    void push( const T &amp;val );
    T &amp;top();
    void pop();
    bool empty() const;
  private:
    //...
    typedef std::deque&lt;T&gt; C;
    typedef typename C::iterator I;
    C s_;
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Our stack is simply a pleasant interface wrapped around a standard <tt>deque</tt>, similar to what we could have achieved with a standard <tt>stack</tt> container adapter. Most of the operations are straightforward and can be implemented directly with the <tt>deque</tt>.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T&gt;
void Stack&lt;T&gt;::push( const T &amp;val )
    { s_.push_back( val ); }
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">However, we may have a problem with the <tt>Stack</tt>’s destructor. When the <tt>Stack</tt> is destroyed, its <tt>deque</tt> data member will be destroyed as well, which in turn will destroy any elements left in the <tt>deque</tt>.
 If these elements are pointers, however, the objects to which they 
point will not be deleted; that’s just the way the standard <tt>deque</tt> container behaves. Therefore, we have to decide on a pointer element deletion policy for our <tt>Stack</tt>, which I will imperiously declare is to delete! (But see <span class="docEmphasis">Policies</span> [56, 205] for a more flexible approach.) We can’t simply have the destructor delete the <tt>deque</tt> elements, however, because that would cause an error in those cases where the elements are not pointers.</p>
		
<p class="docText">One solution would be to use partial specialization of the <tt>Stack</tt> (primary) template to handle stacks of pointers (see <span class="docEmphasis">Template Partial Specialization</span>[47, 161]). However, that seems like an overreaction when only a small portion of the <tt>Stack</tt>’s
 behavior must change. A different approach simply asks the obvious 
question (at compile time) and acts accordingly: “If the element type of
 the <tt>Stack</tt> is a pointer, then delete any remaining elements. Otherwise don’t delete.”</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T&gt;
class Stack {
  public:
    ~Stack()
        { cleanup( typename IsPtr&lt;T&gt;::Result() ); }
    //...
  private:
    void cleanup( Yes ) {
        for( I i( s_.begin() ); i != s_.end(); ++i )
            delete *i;
    }
    void cleanup( No )
        {}
    typedef std::deque&lt;T&gt; C;
    typedef typename C::iterator I;
    C s_;
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Here we have two different <tt>cleanup</tt> member functions, one of which takes an argument of type <tt>Yes</tt>, while the other takes an argument of type <tt>No</tt>. The <tt>Yes</tt> version deletes; the <tt>No</tt> version does not. The destructor asks the question “Is <tt>T</tt> a pointer type?” by instantiating <tt>IsPtr</tt> with <tt>T</tt> and accessing the nested type name <tt>Result</tt> (see <span class="docEmphasis">Disambiguating with Typename</span> [49, 169]), which will be either <tt>Yes</tt> or <tt>No</tt>, and passing an object of that type to <tt>cleanup</tt>. Only one of the two versions of <tt>cleanup</tt> will be instantiated and called, and the other will not (see <span class="docEmphasis">You Instantiate What You Use</span> [61, 225]).</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>Stack&lt;Shape *&gt; shapes; // will delete
Stack&lt;std::string&gt; names; // won't delete
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Class
 template specializations can be used to extract arbitrarily complex 
information from types. For instance, we may want to know not only 
whether a particular type is an array but, if it is an array, what it’s 
an array of and what its bound is:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T&gt;
struct IsArray { // T is not an array...
    enum { result = false };
    typedef No Result;
};
template &lt;typename E, int b&gt;
struct IsArray&lt;E [b]&gt; { // ...unless it's an array!
    enum { result = true };
    typedef Yes Result;
    enum { bound = b }; // array bound
    typedef E Etype; // array element type
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">We may want to know not 
only whether a particular type is a pointer to data member, but, if it 
is, what its class and member types are:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T&gt;
struct IsPCM { // T is not a pointer to data member
    enum { result = false };
    typedef No Result;
};
template &lt;class C, typename T&gt;
struct IsPCM&lt;T C::*&gt; { // ...unless it is!
    enum { result = true };
    typedef Yes Result;
    typedef C ClassType; // the class type
    typedef T MemberType; // the type of class member
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">These techniques are employed in a number of popular toolkits that provide the ability to access type traits (see <span class="docEmphasis">Traits</span> [54, 193]) for compile-time code customization.</p>
		


</body>
</html>
