<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 53. Embedded Type Information</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 53. Embedded Type Information</h2>
		
<p class="docText">How do we know the type of a container’s elements?</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T&gt;
class Seq {
    //...
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">At first, this may not seem to be a problem. The element type of <tt>Seq&lt;std::string&gt;</tt> is <tt>std::string</tt>,
 right? Not necessarily. There’s nothing to prevent the implementation 
of our (nonstandard) sequence container from making the element type <tt>const T, T *</tt>, or a “smart pointer” to a <tt>T</tt>. (A particularly weird container could simply ignore the template parameter and always set the element type to <tt>void *!</tt>)
 But vagary of implementation is not the only reason we may not be able 
to determine the element type of our container. We often write generic 
code in which that information is simply not available.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;class Container&gt;
<span class="docEmphMark">Elem process( Container &amp;c, int size ) {                       </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">    Temp temp = Elem();                                        </span>
    for( int i = 0; i &lt; size; ++i )
        temp += c[i];
    return temp;
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">In the <tt>process</tt> generic algorithm above, we need to know the element type (<tt>Elem</tt>) of <tt>Container</tt>, as well as a type that could serve to declare a temporary for holding objects of the element type (<tt>Temp</tt>), but that information is not available until the <tt>process</tt> function template is instantiated with a specific container.</p>
		
<p class="docText">A common way to handle this 
situation is to have a type provide “personal” information about itself.
 This information is often embedded in the type itself, rather like 
embedding a microchip in a person that can be queried for the person’s 
name, identifying number, blood type, and so on. (This
 is an analogy, not an indication of approval for employment of such a 
procedure.) We are not interested in our sequence container’s blood 
type, but we do want to know the type of its elements.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;class T&gt;
class Seq {
  public:
    typedef T Elem; // element type
    typedef T Temp; // temporary type
    size_t size() const;
    //...
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">This embedded information can be queried at compile time:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>typedef Seq&lt;std::string&gt; Strings;
//...
Strings::Elem aString;
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">This approach is familiar
 to any user of the standard library containers. For instance, to 
declare an iterator into a standard container, it’s advisable to ask the
 container itself what its iterator type is:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>vector&lt;int&gt; aVec;
//...
for( vector&lt;int&gt;::iterator i( aVec.begin() );
    i != aVec.end(); ++i )
    //...
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Here we’ve asked the <tt>vector&lt;int&gt;</tt> to tell us what its iterator type is, rather than make the assumption that it is <tt>int *</tt> (as it often is for many implementations). The iterator type for <tt>vector&lt;int&gt;</tt>
 could just as well be some other type (like a user-defined safe pointer
 type), so the only portable way to write the loop above is to get the 
type of the iterator from the <tt>vector&lt;int&gt;</tt> itself.</p>
		
<p class="docText">A more important observation is that this approach allows us to write generic code that makes the <span class="docEmphasis">assumption</span> that the required information is present.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;class Container&gt;
typename Container::Elem process( Container &amp;c, int size ) {
   typename Container::Temp temp
       = typename Container::Elem();
   for( int i = 0; i &lt; size; ++i )
       temp += c[i];
   return temp;
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">This version of the <tt>process</tt> algorithm queries the <tt>Container</tt> type for its personal information, and makes the assumption that <tt>Container</tt> defines the nested type names <tt>Elem</tt> and <tt>Temp</tt>. (Note that we had to use the <tt>typename</tt>
 keyword in three places to tell the compiler explicitly that the nested
 names were type names and not some other kind of nested name. See <span class="docEmphasis">Disambiguating with Typename</span> [49, 169].)</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>Strings strings;
aString = process( strings, strings.size() ); // OK
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The <tt>process</tt> algorithm works well with our <tt>Seq</tt> container and will also work with any other container that follows our convention.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T&gt;
class ReadonlySeq {
  public:
    typedef const T Elem;
    typedef T Temp;
    //...
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">We can <tt>process</tt> a <tt>ReadonlySeq</tt> container because it validates our assumptions.</p>
		


</body>
</html>
