<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 54. Traits</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 54. Traits</h2>
		
<p class="docText">Sometimes
 it’s not enough to know just an object’s type. Often, there is 
information related to the object’s type that is essential to working 
with the object. In <span class="docEmphasis">Embedded Type Information</span> [53, 189], we saw how complex types like the standard containers often embed information about themselves within themselves:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>Strings strings;
aString = process( strings, strings.size() ); // OK
std::vector&lt;std::string&gt; strings2;
<span class="docEmphMark">aString = process( strings2, strings2.size() ); // error!     </span>
extern double readings[RSIZ];
<span class="docEmphMark">double r = process( readings, RSIZ ); // error!               </span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The <tt>process</tt> algorithm works well with our <tt>Seq</tt> container but fails with a standard <tt>vector</tt> container, because <tt>vector</tt> does not define the nested type names that <tt>process</tt> assumes are present.</p>
		
<p class="docText">We can <tt>process</tt> a <tt>ReadonlySeq</tt> container because it validates our assumptions, but we may also want to <tt>process</tt> containers that do not follow our rather parochial convention, and we may want to <tt>process</tt> container-like things that are not even classes. Traits classes are often used to solve these problems.</p>
		
<p class="docText">A traits class is a 
collection of information about a type. Unlike our nested container 
information, however, the traits class is independent of the type it 
describes.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename Cont&gt;
struct ContainerTraits;
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">One common use of a traits 
class is to put a conventional layer between our generic algorithms and 
types that don’t follow the algorithms’ expected convention. We write 
the algorithm in terms of the type’s traits. The general case will often
 assume some sort of convention. In this case, our <tt>ContainerTraits</tt> will assume the convention used by our <tt>Seq</tt> and <tt>ReadonlySeq</tt> containers.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename Cont&gt;
struct ContainerTraits {
    typedef typename Cont::Elem Elem;
    typedef typename Cont::Temp Temp;
    typedef typename Cont::Ptr Ptr;
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">With the addition of this traits class template, we have the choice of referring to the nested <tt>Elem</tt>
 type of one of our container types either through the container type or
 through the traits type instantiated with the container type.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>typedef Seq&lt;int&gt; Cont;
Cont::Elem e1;
ContainerTraits&lt;Cont&gt;::Elem e2; // same type as e1
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">We can rewrite our generic algorithm to employ traits in place of direct access to the container’s nested type names:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename Container&gt;
typename ContainerTraits&lt;Container&gt;::Elem
process( Container &amp;c, int size ) {
    typename ContainerTraits&lt;Container&gt;::Temp temp
        = typename ContainerTraits&lt;Container&gt;::Elem();
    for( int i = 0; i &lt; size; ++i )
        temp += c[i];
    return temp;
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">It may seem that all we’ve managed to do is to make the syntax of the generic <tt>process</tt> algorithm even more impenetrable! Previously, to get the type of the container’s element, we wrote <tt>typename Container::Elem</tt>. Put in plain language, we said, “Get <tt>Container</tt>’s nested name <tt>Elem</tt>. By the way, it’s a type name.” With traits, we have to write <tt>typename ContainerTraits&lt;Container&gt;::Elem</tt>. Essentially, we say, “Instantiate the <tt>ContainerTraits</tt> class that corresponds to this container, and get its nested name <tt>Elem</tt>.
 By the way, it’s a type name.” We’ve taken a step back from getting the
 information directly from the container type itself and are going 
through the intermediary of the traits class. If accessing nested type 
information is like reading information about a person from an embedded 
microchip, using a traits class is like looking up someone’s information
 in a database, using the person’s name as a key. You’ll get the same information, but the database lookup approach is certainly less invasive and more flexible.</p>
		
<p class="docText">For example, you can’t get 
information from someone’s microchip if he doesn’t have one. (Perhaps 
the person comes from a region where embedded microchips are not <span class="docEmphasis">de rigeur</span>.)
 However, you can always create a new entry in a database for such a 
person without the necessity of even informing the individual concerned.
 Similarly, we can specialize the traits template to provide information
 about a particular nonconforming container without affecting the 
container itself:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>class ForeignContainer {
    // no nested type information...
};
//...
template &lt;&gt;
struct ContainerTraits&lt;ForeignContainer&gt; {
    typedef int Elem;
    typedef Elem Temp;
    typedef Elem *Ptr;
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">With this specialization of <tt>ContainerTraits</tt> available, we can <tt>process</tt> a <tt>ForeignContainer</tt> as effectively as one that is written to our convention. The original implementation of <tt>process</tt> would have failed on a <tt>ForeignContainer</tt> because it would have attempted to access nested information that did not exist:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>				<span class="docEmphMark">ForeignContainer::Elem x; // error, no such nested name!     </span>
ContainerTraits&lt;ForeignContainer&gt;::Elem y; // OK, using traits
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">It’s helpful to think of
 a traits template as a collection of information that is indexed by a 
type, much as an associative container is indexed by a key. But the 
“indexing” of traits happens at compile time, through template 
specialization.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Another advantage of 
accessing information about a type through a traits class is that the 
technique can be used to provide information about types that are not 
classes and therefore can have no nested information. Even though traits
 classes are classes, the types whose traits they encapsulate don’t have
 to be. For example, an array is a kind of (mathematically and morally) 
degenerate container that we might like to manipulate as a first class 
container.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;&gt;
struct ContainerTraits&lt;const char *&gt; {
    typedef const char Elem;
    typedef char Temp;
    typedef const char *Ptr;
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">With this specialization in place for the “container” type <tt>const char *</tt>, we can <tt>process</tt> an array of characters.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>const char *name = "Arsene Lupin";
const char *r = process( name, strlen(name) );
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">We can continue in this fashion for other types of arrays, producing specializations for <tt>int *, const double *</tt>,
 and so on. However, it would be more convenient to specify a single 
case for any type of pointer, since they all will have similar 
properties. For this purpose, we employ partial specialization of the 
traits template for pointers:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T&gt;
struct ContainerTraits&lt;T *&gt; {
    typedef T Elem;
    typedef T Temp;
    typedef T *Ptr;
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Specializing <tt>ContainerTraits</tt> with any pointer type, whether it be <tt>int *</tt> or <tt>const float *(*const*)(int)</tt>, will result in instantiation of this partial specialization, unless there is an even more specialized version of <tt>ContainerTraits</tt> available.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>extern double readings[RSIZ];
double r = process( readings, RSIZ ); // works!
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">We’re not quite there yet, 
however. Notice that using the partial specialization for a pointer to 
constant will not result in the correct type for use as a “temporary.” 
That is, constant temporary values are not of much use because we can’t 
assign to them. What we’d like is to have the non-constant analog of the
 element type as our temporary type. In the case of <tt>const char *</tt>, for instance, <tt>ContainerTraits&lt;const char *&gt;::Temp</tt> should be <tt>char</tt>, not <tt>const char</tt>. We can handle this case with an additional partial specialization:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T&gt;
struct ContainerTraits&lt;const T *&gt; {
    typedef const T Elem;
    typedef T Temp; // note: non-const analog of Elem
    typedef const T *Ptr;
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">This more specific 
partial specialization will be selected in preference to the previous 
one in those cases where the template argument is a pointer to constant,
 rather than a pointer to non-constant.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Partial specialization can 
also help us to extend our traits mechanism to convert a “foreign” 
convention to be in line with a local convention. For example, the STL 
is very heavy on convention (see <span class="docEmphasis">The Standard Template Library</span> [4, 11]), and the standard containers have concepts similar to those encapsulated in our <tt>ContainerTraits</tt> but are expressed differently. For example, we earlier attempted to instantiate the <tt>process</tt> algorithm with a standard <tt>vector</tt> but failed. Let’s fix that.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;class T&gt;
struct ContainerTraits&lt; std::vector&lt;T&gt; &gt; {
    typedef typename std::vector&lt;T&gt;::value_type Elem;
    typedef typename
        std::iterator_traits&lt;typename
        std::vector&lt;T&gt;::iterator&gt;
        ::value_type Temp;
    typedef typename
        std::iterator_traits&lt;typename
        std::vector&lt;T&gt;::iterator&gt;
        ::pointer Ptr;
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">It’s not the most readable 
implementation one can imagine, but it’s hidden, and our users can now 
invoke our generic algorithm with a container generated from a standard <tt>vector</tt>.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>std::vector&lt;std::string&gt; strings2;
aString = process( strings2, strings2.size() ); // works!
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		


</body>
</html>
