<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 55. Template Template Parameters</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 55. Template Template Parameters</h2>
		
<p class="docText">Let’s pick up the <tt>Stack</tt> template we considered in <span class="docEmphasis">Specializing for Type Information</span> [52, 183]. We decided to implement it with a standard <tt>deque</tt>,
 which is a pretty good compromise choice of implementation, though in 
many circumstances a different container would be more efficient or 
appropriate. We can address this problem by adding an additional 
template parameter to <tt>Stack</tt> for the container type used in its implementation.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T, class Cont&gt;
class Stack;
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">For simplicity, let’s abandon 
the standard library (not usually a good idea, by the way) and assume we
 have available a set of nonstandard container templates: <tt>List, Vector, Deque</tt>,
 and perhaps others. Let’s also assume these containers are similar to 
the standard containers but have only a single template parameter for 
the element type of the container.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Recall that the standard 
containers actually have at least two parameters: the element type and 
an allocator type. Containers use allocators to allocate and free their 
working memory so that this behavior may be customized. In effect, the 
allocator specifies a memory management policy for the container (see <span class="docEmphasis">Policies</span> [56, 205]). The allocator has a default so it’s easy to forget it’s there. However, when you instantiate a standard container like <tt>vector&lt;int&gt;</tt>, you’re actually getting <tt>vector&lt; int, std::allocator&lt;int&gt; &gt;</tt>.</p>
		
<p class="docText">For example, the declaration of our nonstandard <tt>List</tt> would be</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename&gt; class List;
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Notice that we’ve left out the name of template parameter in the declaration of <tt>List</tt>,
 above. Just as with a formal argument name in a function declaration, 
giving a name to a template parameter in a template declaration is 
optional. As with a function definition, the name of a template 
parameter is required only in a template definition and only if the 
parameter name is used
 in the template. However, as with formal arguments in function 
declarations, it’s common to give names to template parameters in 
template declarations to help document the template.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T, class Cont&gt;
class Stack {
  public:
    ~Stack();
    void push( const T &amp; );
    //...
  private:
    Cont s_;
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">A user of <tt>Stack</tt> 
now has to provide two template arguments, an element type and a 
container type, and the container has to be able to hold objects of the 
element type.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>Stack&lt;int, List&lt;int&gt; &gt; aStack1; // OK
<span class="docEmphMark">Stack&lt;double, List&lt;int&gt; &gt; aStack2; // legal, not OK           </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">Stack&lt;std::string, Deque&lt;char *&gt; &gt; aStack3; // error!         </span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The declarations of <tt>aStack2</tt> and <tt>aStack3</tt>
 show we have a potential problem in coordination. If the user selects 
the incorrect type of container for the element type, we’ll get a 
compile-time error (in the case of <tt>aStack3</tt>, because of the inability to copy a <tt>string</tt> to a <tt>char *</tt>) or a subtle bug (in the case of <tt>aStack2</tt>, because of loss of precision in copying a <tt>double</tt> to an <tt>int</tt>). Additionally, most users of <tt>Stack</tt>
 don’t want to be bothered with selection of its underlying 
implementation and will be satisfied with a reasonable default. We can 
improve the situation by providing a default for the second template 
parameter.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T, class Cont = Deque&lt;T&gt; &gt;
class Stack {
    //...
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">This helps in cases where the user of a <tt>Stack</tt> is willing to accept a <tt>Deque</tt> implementation or doesn’t particularly care about the implementation.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>Stack&lt;int&gt; aStack1; // container is Deque&lt;int&gt;
Stack&lt;double&gt; aStack2; // container is Deque&lt;double&gt;
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">This is more or less the approach employed by the standard container adapters <tt>stack</tt>, <tt>queue</tt>, and <tt>priority_queue</tt>.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>std::stack&lt;int&gt; stds; // container is
                      // deque&lt; int, allocator&lt;int&gt; &gt;
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">This approach is a good compromise of convenience for the casual user of the <tt>Stack</tt> facility and of flexibility for the experienced user to employ any (legal and effective) kind of container to hold the <tt>Stack</tt>’s elements.</p>
		
<p class="docText">However, this 
flexibility comes at a cost in safety. It’s still necessary to 
coordinate the types of element and container in other specializations, 
and this requirement of coordination opens up the possibility of 
miscoordination.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>Stack&lt;int, List&lt;int&gt; &gt; aStack3;
<span class="docEmphMark">Stack&lt;int, List&lt;unsigned&gt; &gt; aStack4; // oops!                  </span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Let’s see if we can improve 
safety and still have reasonable flexibility. A template can take a 
parameter that is itself the name of a template. These parameters have 
the pleasingly repetitious name of template template parameters.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T, template &lt;typename&gt; class Cont&gt;
class Stack;
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">This new template parameter list for <tt>Stack</tt> looks unnerving, but it’s not as bad as it appears. The first parameter, <tt>T</tt>, is old hat. It’s just the name of a type. The second parameter, <tt>Cont</tt>,
 is a template template parameter. It’s the name of a class template 
that has a single type name parameter. Note that we didn’t give a name 
to the type name parameter of <tt>Cont</tt>, although we could have:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T, template &lt;typename ElementType&gt; class Cont&gt;
class Stack;
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">However, such a name (<tt>ElementType</tt>,
 above) can serve only as documentation, similar to a formal argument 
name in a function declaration. These names are commonly omitted, but 
you should feel free to use them where you think they improve 
readability. Conversely, we could take the opportunity to reduce 
readability to a minimum by eliminating all technically unnecessary 
names in the declaration of <tt>Stack</tt>:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename, template &lt;typename&gt; class&gt;
class Stack;
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">But compassion for the readers of our code does impose constraints on such practices, even if the C++ language does not.</p>
		
<p class="docText">The <tt>Stack</tt> 
template uses its type name parameter to instantiate its template 
template parameter. The resulting container type is used to implement 
the <tt>Stack</tt>:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T, template &lt;typename&gt; class Cont&gt;
class Stack {
    //...
  private:
    Cont&lt;T&gt; s_;
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">This approach allows coordination between element and container to be handled by the implementation of the <tt>Stack</tt> itself, rather than in all the various code that specializes <tt>Stack</tt>.
 This single point of specialization reduces the possibility of 
miscoordination between the element type and the container used to hold 
the elements.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>Stack&lt;int,List&gt; aStack1;
Stack&lt;std::string,Deque&gt; aStack2;
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">For additional convenience, we can employ a default for the template template argument:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T, template &lt;typename&gt; class Cont = Deque&gt;
class Stack {
    //...
};
//...
Stack&lt;int&gt; aStack1; // use default: Cont is Deque
Stack&lt;std::string,List&gt; aStack2; // Cont is List
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">This is often a good approach 
for dealing with coordination of a set of arguments to a template and a 
template that is to be instantiated with the arguments.</p>
		
<p class="docText">It’s common to 
confuse template template parameters with type name parameters that just
 happen to be generated from templates. For example, consider the 
following class template declaration:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;class Cont&gt; class Wrapper1;
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The <tt>Wrapper1</tt> template needs a type name for its template argument. (We used the keyword <tt>class</tt> instead of <tt>typename</tt> in the declaration of the <tt>Cont</tt> parameter of <tt>Wrapper1</tt> to tell the readers of our code that we’re expecting a <tt>class</tt> or <tt>struct</tt> rather than an arbitrary type, but it’s all the same to the compiler. In this context <tt>typename</tt> and <tt>class</tt> mean exactly the same thing technically. See <span class="docEmphasis">Optional Keywords</span> [63, 231].) That type name could be generated from a template, as in <tt>Wrapper1&lt; List&lt;int&gt; &gt;</tt>, but <tt>List&lt;int&gt;</tt> is still just a class name, even though it was generated from a template.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>Wrapper1&lt; List&lt;int&gt; &gt; w1; // fine, List&lt;int&gt; is a type name
Wrapper1&lt; std::list&lt;int&gt; &gt; w2; // fine, list&lt;int&gt; is a type
<span class="docEmphMark">Wrapper1&lt;List&gt; w3; // error! List is a template name         </span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Alternatively, consider the following class template declaration:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;template &lt;typename&gt; class Cont&gt; class Wrapper2;
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The <tt>Wrapper2</tt>
 template needs a template name for its template argument, and not just 
any template name. The declaration says that the template must take a 
single type argument.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>Wrapper2&lt;List&gt; w4; // fine, List is a template one type
<span class="docEmphMark">Wrapper2&lt; List&lt;int&gt; &gt; w5; // error! List&lt;int&gt; isn't a template </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">Wrapper2&lt;std::list&gt; w6; // error! std::list takes 2+ arguments </span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">If we want to have a chance at being able to specialize with a standard container, we have to do the following:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;template &lt;typename Element,
    class Allocator&gt; class Cont&gt;
class Wrapper3;
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">or equivalently:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;template &lt;typename,typename&gt; class Cont&gt;
class Wrapper3;
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">This declaration says that the template must take two type name arguments:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>Wrapper3&lt;std::list&gt; w7; // might work...
<span class="docEmphMark">Wrapper3&lt; std::list&lt;int&gt; &gt; w8; // error! list&lt;int&gt; is a class </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">Wrapper3&lt;List&gt; w9; // error! List takes one type argument     </span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">However, the standard container templates (like <tt>list</tt>) may legally be declared to take more than two parameters, so the declaration of <tt>w7</tt> above may not work on all platforms. Well, we all love and respect the STL, but we never claimed it was perfect.</p>
		


</body>
</html>
