<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 56. Policies</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 56. Policies</h2>
		
<p class="docText">In <span class="docEmphasis">Specializing for Type Information</span> [52,
 183], we designed a stack template that deleted any remaining elements 
left in the stack at the end of the stack’s lifetime if the stack’s 
element type was a pointer.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T&gt; class Stack;
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">This is not an unreasonable 
policy, but it is inflexible. There may be cases where the user of our 
stack does not want to delete what the stack’s pointers refer to. For 
instance, the pointers may refer to objects that are not on the heap or 
that are shared with other containers. Additionally, it’s possible that a
 pointer refers to an array of objects, rather than a single object. If 
we have a stack of character pointers, this is almost certainly the 
case, since character pointers usually refer to an NTCTS (standardese 
for a null terminated array of characters):</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>				<span class="docEmphMark">Stack&lt;const char *&gt; names; // oops! undefined behavior        </span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Our deletion policy assumes that a <tt>Stack</tt>’s pointers refer to a single object, and therefore employs the nonarray form of <tt>delete</tt>, whereas for an array we must use array delete (see <span class="docEmphasis">Array Allocation</span> [37, 127]).</p>
		
<p class="docText">Our goal is to be able to write the <tt>Stack</tt> template’s destructor in something like the following way:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T&gt;
class Stack {
  public:
    ~Stack() {
        for( I i( s_.begin() ); i != s_.end(); ++i )
            <span class="docEmphasis">doDeletionPolicy</span>( *i );
    }
    //...
  private:
    typedef std::deque&lt;T&gt; C;
    typedef typename C::iterator I;
    C s_;
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The destructor iterates over any remaining elements and executes the appropriate deletion policy on each element. The <tt>doDeletionPolicy</tt> could be implemented in a variety of ways. Typically, a policy is made explicit when the <tt>Stack</tt> template is instantiated and is implemented with a template template parameter (see <span class="docEmphasis">Template Template Parameters</span> [55, 199]).</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T, template &lt;typename&gt; class DeletionPolicy&gt;
class Stack {
  public:
    ~Stack() {
        for( I i( s_.begin() ); i != s_.end(); ++i )
            DeletionPolicy&lt;T&gt;::doDelete( *i ); // exec policy
    }
    //...
  private:
    typedef std::deque&lt;T&gt; C;
    typedef typename C::iterator I;
    C s_;
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">By examining how the deletion policy is used in the <tt>Stack</tt> destructor, we can determine that a <tt>Stack's</tt> deletion policy is a class template that is instantiated with the element type of the <tt>Stack</tt>. It has a static member function called <tt>doDelete</tt> that performs the appropriate deletion action on the <tt>Stack</tt> element. Now we can go about defining some appropriate policies. One policy is to delete:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T&gt;
struct PtrDeletePolicy {
    static void doDelete( T ptr )
        { delete ptr; }
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Of course, we 
could have designed a policy implementation with a different interface. 
For example, rather than use a static member function, we could have 
overloaded the function call operator</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T&gt;
struct PtrDeletePolicy {

    void operator ()( T ptr )
        { delete ptr; }
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">and modified the deletion operation in Stack’s destructor to read</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>DeletionPolicy&lt;T&gt;()(*i);
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The important 
thing is to establish a convention, because every implementation of a 
particular policy will be accessed with the same syntax.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Other useful policies perform an array deletion or do nothing at all:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T&gt;
struct ArrayDeletePolicy {
    static void doDelete( T ptr )
        { delete [] ptr; }
};
template &lt;typename T&gt;
struct NoDeletePolicy {
    static void doDelete( const T &amp; )
        {}
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Now we can specify the appropriate deletion policy when we instantiate <tt>Stack</tt>:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>Stack&lt;int, NoDeletePolicy&gt; s1; // don't delete ints
Stack&lt;std::string *, PtrDeletePolicy&gt; s2; // delete string *'s
Stack&lt;const char *, ArrayDeletePolicy&gt; s3; // delete [] these
Stack&lt;const char *, NoDeletePolicy&gt; s4; // don't delete!
<span class="docEmphMark">Stack&lt;int, PtrDeletePolicy&gt; s5; // error! can't delete int!  </span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">If one policy is more commonly used than others, it’s often a good idea to make it the default:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T,
    template &lt;typename&gt; class DeletionPolicy = NoDeletePolicy&gt;
class Stack;
//...
Stack&lt;int&gt; s6; // don't delete
Stack&lt;const char *&gt; s7; // don't delete
Stack&lt;const char *, ArrayDeletePolicy&gt; s8; // delete []
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">A template design often offers several opportunities for parameterization by policies. For example, in <span class="docEmphasis">Template Template Parameters</span> [55, 199] we gave the user the ability to specify how a <tt>Stack</tt> was implemented. That’s an implementation policy:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T,
    template &lt;typename&gt; class DeletionPolicy = NoDeletePolicy
    template &lt;typename&gt; class Cont = Deque&gt;
class Stack;
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">This gives the user of <tt>Stack</tt> additional flexibility:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>Stack&lt;double *, ArrayDeletePolicy, Vector&gt; dailyReadings;
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">while allowing good general behavior in the default case.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>Stack&lt;double&gt; moreReadings; // no deletion, use a Deque
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">In generic design,
 we frequently make policy decisions about implementation and behavior. 
Often, those decisions can be abstracted and represented as policies.</p>
		


</body>
</html>
