<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 57. Template Argument Deduction</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 57. Template Argument Deduction</h2>
		
<p class="docText">Class templates must be specialized explicitly. For example, if we want to specialize the <tt>Heap</tt> container discussed in <span class="docEmphasis">Class Template Explicit Specialization</span> [46, 155], we have to provide a type name argument to the template:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>Heap&lt;int&gt; aHeap;
Heap&lt;const char *&gt; anotherHeap;
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Function templates may also 
be specialized explicitly. Suppose we have a function template that 
performs a restricted old-style cast:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename R, typename E&gt;
R cast( const E &amp;expr ) {
    // ...do some clever checking...
    return R( expr ); // ...and cast.
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">We may specialize the template explicitly when we call it, just as we must specialize a class template:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>int a = cast&lt;int,double&gt;(12.3);
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">However, it’s typical and 
more convenient to let the compiler deduce the template arguments from 
the types of the actual arguments to the function call. Not 
surprisingly, this process is called “template argument deduction.” 
Careful! In the description below, pay attention to the difference 
between the terms “template argument” and “function argument” (see <span class="docEmphasis">Template Terminology</span> [45, 153]). Consider a template with a single template argument that finds the lesser of two function arguments.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T&gt;
T min( const T &amp;a, const T &amp;b )
    { return a &lt; b ? a : b; }
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">When we use <tt>min</tt> 
without supplying the template arguments explicitly, the compiler 
examines the types of the function call arguments in order to deduce the
 template argument:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>int a = min( 12, 13 ); // T is int
double d = min( '\b', '\a' ); // T is char
<span class="docEmphMark">char c = min( 12.3, 4 ); // error! T can't be both double and int</span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The erroneous line above is
 the result of the compiler’s not being able to deduce a template 
argument in an ambiguous situation. In such cases, we can always tell 
the compiler what a template argument is by being explicit:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>d = min&lt;double&gt;( 12.3, 4 ); // OK, T is double
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">A similar situation occurs with our <tt>cast</tt> template if we try to use template argument deduction:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>				<span class="docEmphMark">int a = cast( 12.3 ); // error! E is double, but what's R?   </span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">As with overload 
resolution, the compiler examines the types of only function arguments 
during template argument deduction, not potential return types. The only
 way the compiler’s going to know the return type is if we tell it:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>int a = cast&lt;int&gt;( 12.3 ); // E is double and
                           // R is (explicitly) int
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Notice that any trailing 
template arguments may be left off the template argument list if the 
compiler can deduce them on its own. In this case we had only to supply 
the compiler with the return type and let it figure out the expression 
type on its own. The order of the template parameters is important for 
the template’s usability, since if the expression type had preceded the 
return type, we would have had to specify both explicitly.</p>
		
<p class="docText">At this point, many people will notice the syntax of the call to <tt>cast</tt> above and ask, “Are you implying that <tt>static_cast</tt>, <tt>dynamic_cast</tt>, <tt>const_cast</tt>, and <tt>reinterpret_cast</tt>
 are function templates?” No, we’re not implying that because these four
 cast operators are not templates, they’re built-in operators (like the <tt>new</tt> operator or the <tt>+</tt> operator on integers); but it sure looks like their syntax was inspired by something similar to our <tt>cast</tt> function template. (See <span class="docEmphasis">New Cast Operators</span> [9, 29].)</p>
		
<p class="docText">Note
 that template argument deduction works by examining the types of the 
actual arguments to a call. This implies that any template argument of a
 function template that cannot be deduced from the argument types has to
 be supplied explicitly. For example, here’s an annoyingly repetitious 
function template:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;int n, typename T&gt;
void repeat( const T &amp;msg ) {
    for( int i = 0; i &lt; n; ++i )
        std::cout &lt;&lt; msg &lt;&lt; std::flush;
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">We were careful to 
put the integer template argument before the type argument, so we could 
get by with specifying only the number of repetitions of the message, 
and let template argument deduction determine the type of the message:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>repeat&lt;12&gt;( 42 ); // n is 12, T is int
repeat&lt;MAXINT&gt;( '\a' ); // n is big, T is char
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">In the <tt>cast</tt>, <tt>min</tt>, and <tt>repeat</tt>
 templates, the compiler deduced a single template argument from a 
single function argument. However, the deduction mechanism is capable of
 deducing multiple template arguments from the type of a single function
 argument:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;int bound, typename T&gt;
void zeroOut( T (&amp;ary)[bound] ) {
    for( int i = 0; i &lt; bound; ++i )
        ary[i] = T();
}
//...
const int hrsinweek = 7*24;
float readings[hrsinweek];
zeroOut( readings ); // bound == 168, T is float
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">In this case, <tt>zeroOut</tt>
 expects an array argument, and argument deduction is capable of 
dissecting the argument type to determine its bound and element type.</p>
		
<p class="docText">We noted at the start of this
 item that a class template must be specialized explicitly. However, 
function template argument deduction can be used to specialize a class 
template indirectly. Consider a class template that can be used to generate a function object from a function pointer (see <span class="docEmphasis">STL Function Objects</span> [20, 71]):</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename A1, typename A2, typename R&gt;
class PFun2 : public std::binary_function&lt;A1,A2,R&gt; {
  public:
    explicit PFun2( R (*fp)(A1,A2) ) : fp_( fp ) {}
    R operator()( A1 a1, A2 a2 ) const
        { return fp_( a1, a2 ); }
  private:
    R (*fp_)(A1,A2);
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">(This is a simplified version of the standard <tt>pointer_to_binary_function</tt>
 template and has been chosen specifically for the convoluted syntax 
required to specialize it. It doesn’t get much worse than this.) 
Instantiating the template directly is somewhat onerous:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>bool isGreater( int, int );
<span class="docEmphMark">std::sort(b, e, PFun2&lt;int,int,bool&gt;(isGreater)); // painful   </span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">It’s common in cases like 
this to provide a “helper function” whose only purpose is to deduce the 
template arguments in order to specialize, automagically, a class 
template:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename R, typename A1, typename A2&gt;
inline PFun2&lt;A1,A2,R&gt; makePFun( R (*pf)(A1,A2) )
    { return PFun2&lt;A1,A2,R&gt;(pf); }
//...
std::sort(b, e, makePFun(isGreater)); // much better...
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">In this deduction tour de 
force, the compiler is able to deduce both argument types and the return
 type from the type of a single function argument. This technique is 
commonly used in the standard library for utilities like <tt>ptr_fun</tt>, <tt>make_pair</tt>, <tt>mem_fun</tt>, <tt>back_inserter</tt>, and many others that are simply helper functions that ease the task of complex and error-prone class template specialization.</p>
		


</body>
</html>
