<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 58. Overloading Function Templates</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 58. Overloading Function Templates</h2>
		
<p class="docText">Function
 templates can be overloaded with other function templates and with 
nontemplate functions. This capability is useful but easy to abuse.</p>
		
<p class="docText">One of the major 
differences between function templates and nontemplate functions is the 
availability of implicit conversions of actual arguments. Nontemplate 
functions allow a wide range of implicit conversions on their arguments,
 from built-in conversions (like integral promotions) to user-defined 
conversions (nonexplicit single argument constructors and conversion 
operators). In the case of function templates, because the compiler must
 perform argument deduction based on the types of the arguments, only 
trivial implicit conversions will be performed, including outer-level 
qualification (for example, <tt>T</tt> to <tt>const T</tt> or <tt>const T</tt> to <tt>T</tt>), reference (for example, <tt>T</tt> to <tt>T &amp;</tt>), and array and function decay to a pointer (for example, <tt>T[42]</tt> to <tt>T *</tt>).</p>
		
<p class="docText">The practical effect of 
this difference is that function templates require much more exact 
matching than nontemplate functions do. This can be good, bad, or merely
 surprising. For example, consider the following:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T&gt;
void g( T a, T b ) { ... } // this g is a template
void g( char a, char b ) { ... } // this g is not
//...
g( 12.3, 45.6 ); // template g
g( 12.3, 45 ); // non-template g!
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The first call with two <tt>double</tt> arguments could be made to match the nontemplate <tt>g</tt> by converting the <tt>double</tt>s to <tt>char</tt> implicitly (legal but inadvisable), but an exact match is available by instantiating the template <tt>g</tt> with <tt>T</tt> as <tt>double</tt>, so the template is chosen. The second call with <tt>double</tt> and <tt>int</tt> arguments will not match the template <tt>g</tt>, because the compiler will not attempt the predefined conversion from <tt>int</tt> to <tt>double</tt> on the second argument (or from <tt>double</tt> to <tt>int</tt> on the first) so as to deduce <tt>T</tt> to be <tt>double</tt> (or <tt>int</tt>). Therefore the non-member <tt>g</tt> is called, using the unfortunate predefined conversions of <tt>double</tt> and <tt>int</tt> to <tt>char</tt>.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Selecting the right 
version of a function when faced with a variety of template and 
nontemplate candidates is a complex process, and many otherwise reliable
 C++ compilers will select the incorrect function or issue an 
inappropriate error. This is also an indication that the maintainers of 
our code may have similar difficulties in understanding what version of 
an overloaded template we intended to call. For everybody’s sake, when 
using function template overloading, keep things as simple as possible.</p>
		
<p class="docText">“Simple” doesn’t imply unsophisticated. In <span class="docEmphasis">Template Argument Deduction</span> [57,
 209], we considered a “helper” function that was used to circumvent an 
onerous and error-prone specialization of a complex class template:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename A1, typename A2, typename R&gt;
class PFun2 : public std::binary_function&lt;A1,A2,R&gt; {
    // see implementation in <span class="docEmphasis">Template Argument</span>
    // <span class="docEmphasis">Deduction</span> [57, 209] ...
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Rather than force users 
to specialize this monster directly, we provided a helper function that 
performed template argument deduction and specialization:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename R, typename A1, typename A2&gt;
inline PFun2&lt;A1,A2,R&gt; makePFun( R (*pf)(A1,A2) )
    { return PFun2&lt;A1,A2,R&gt;(pf); }
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Syntactically, this is a fairly complex piece of code, but it simplifies things for our users, allowing them to write <tt>makePFun(isGreater)</tt> rather than <tt>PFun2&lt;int,int,bool&gt;(isGreater)</tt> for a function declared <tt>bool isGreater(int,int)</tt>.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Of course, we’ll want to provide facilities for unary functions as well:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename A, typename R&gt;
class PFun1 : public std::unary_function&lt;A,R&gt; {
  public:
    explicit PFun1( R (*fp)(A) ) : fp_( fp ) {}
    R operator()( A a ) const
        { return fp_( a ); }
  private:
    R (*fp_)(A);
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">And a helper function:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename R, typename A&gt;
inline PFun1&lt;A,R&gt; makePFun( R (*pf)(A) )
    { return PFun1&lt;A,R&gt;(pf); }
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Here is a perfect application 
of function template overloading. It’s simple, in the sense that there 
is no possible confusion about which version of <tt>makePFun</tt>
 will be called (one is for binary functions, one for unary functions), 
but use of the same name for both functions makes the facility easy to 
learn and use.</p>
		


</body>
</html>
