<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 59. SFINAE</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 59. SFINAE</h2>
		
<p class="docText">In
 attempting to use function template argument deduction to select among a
 number of overloaded function templates and nontemplate functions, the 
compiler may attempt a specialization that fails on one or more of them.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T&gt; void f( T );
template &lt;typename T&gt; void f( T * );
//...
f( 1024 ); // instantiates first f
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Even though substitution of the nonzero integer for <tt>T *</tt> in the second <tt>f</tt>
 function template would have been incorrect, the attempted substitution
 does not give rise to an error provided that a correct substitution is 
found. In this case, the first <tt>f</tt> is 
instantiated, and there is no error. Thus, we have the “substitution 
failure is not an error” concept, dubbed SFINAE by Vandevoorde and 
Josuttis.</p>
		
<p class="docText">SFINAE is an important 
property in that, without it, it would be difficult to overload function
 templates; the combination of argument deduction and overloading would 
otherwise render many uses of a set of overloaded function templates 
illegal. But SFINAE is also valuable as a metaprogramming technique.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Recall the <tt>IsPtr</tt> facility we developed in <span class="docEmphasis">Specializing for Type Information</span> [52,
 183]. There we used template partial specialization in order to 
determine whether an unknown type was a pointer of some kind. We can use
 SFINAE to achieve a similar result.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>typedef True char; // sizeof(True) == 1
typedef struct { char a[2]; } False; // sizeof(False) &gt; 1
//...
template &lt;typename T&gt; True isPtr( T * );
False isPtr( ... );

#define is_ptr( e ) (sizeof(isPtr(e))==sizeof(True))
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Here, we can use <tt>is_ptr</tt>
 to determine whether the type of an expression is a pointer through a 
combination of function template argument deduction and SFINAE. If the 
expression <tt>e</tt> has pointer type, the compiler will match the template function <tt>isPtr</tt>; otherwise it will match the nontemplate <tt>isPtr</tt> function with the ellipsis formal argument. SFINAE assures us that the attempt to match the template <tt>isPtr</tt> with a non-pointer will not result in a compile-time error.</p>
		
<p class="docText">The second bit of magic is the use of <tt>sizeof</tt> in the <tt>is_ptr</tt> macro. Notice that neither <tt>isPtr</tt> function is defined. This is correct, because they are never actually called. The appearance of a function call in a <tt>sizeof</tt>
 expression causes the compiler to perform argument deduction and 
function matching, but it doesn’t actually call the function. The <tt>sizeof</tt>
 operator is interested only in the size of the return type of the 
function that would have been called. We can then check the size of the 
function’s return type to determine which function was matched. If the 
compiler selected the function template, then the expression <tt>e</tt> had pointer type.</p>
		
<p class="docText">We did not have to special case for const pointers, volatile pointers, and const volatile pointers as we did for the <tt>IsPtr</tt>
 facility that we implemented with class template partial 
specialization. As part of function template argument deduction, the 
compiler will ignore “first level” cv-qualifiers (<tt>const</tt> and <tt>volatile</tt>) as well as reference modifiers (see <span class="docEmphasis">Overloading Function Templates</span> [58,
 213]). Similarly, we do not have to be concerned about incorrectly 
identifying as a pointer type a user-defined type that has a conversion 
operator to a pointer type. The compiler employs a very restricted list 
of conversions on the actual arguments during function template argument
 deduction, and user-defined conversions are not on the list.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Notice the similarity of this technique with our use of template partial specialization to uncover type information in <span class="docEmphasis">Specializing for Type Information</span> [52,
 183]. There we used the primary template as a “catchall” and used 
complete or partial specialization to detect the cases of interest. 
Here, we’re using a function with an ellipsis formal argument as the 
catchall and capturing cases of interest with more precisely overloaded 
versions of the catchall. In fact, class template partial specialization
 and function template overloading are very closely related technically;
 the standard actually defines the selection algorithm for one in terms 
of the other.</p>
		
<p class="docText">After one gets used to the <tt>is_ptr</tt>
 example above, there really is nothing more to the SFINAE technique 
from a technical perspective. However, this simple technique can be 
employed in rather surprising ways to uncover information about types 
and expressions at compile time. Let’s look at some (not at all simple) 
examples.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Consider the problem of determining whether an unknown type is a class:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T&gt;
struct IsClass {
    template &lt;class C&gt; static True isClass( int C::* );
    template &lt;typename C&gt; static False isClass( ... );
    enum { r = sizeof(IsClass&lt;T&gt;::isClass&lt;T&gt;(0))
        == sizeof(True) };
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Neatness counts, so this time we’ve encapsulated the SFINAE mechanism inside a class template, <tt>IsClass</tt>, and overloaded two function templates as static members of <tt>IsClass</tt>. One of the functions takes a pointer to member argument (see <span class="docEmphasis">Pointers to Class Members Are Not Pointers</span> [15, 53]). A literal zero can be converted to a pointer to class member (even for a function template), so if <tt>T</tt> is a class type, the first <tt>isClass</tt> will be matched. If <tt>T</tt> is not a class, SFINAE will ignore the erroneous first matching attempt and choose the version of <tt>isClass</tt> with the ellipsis argument list. As with <tt>is_ptr</tt>, we can check the size of the function’s return type to see which function was matched and, thereby, determine whether <tt>T</tt> is a class.</p>
		
<p class="docText">This next example is 
abstracted from Vandevoorde and Josuttis: Suppose you’d like to know 
whether a particular class type has a nested type name spelled 
“iterator.” (Of course, this can be implemented to ask the question of 
any nested type name, not just <tt>iterator</tt>.)</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;class C&gt;
True hasIterator( typename C::iterator const * );
template &lt;typename T&gt;
False hasIterator( ... );
#define has_iterator( C )\
    (sizeof(hasIterator&lt;C&gt;(0))==sizeof(True))
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">This <tt>has_iterator</tt> facility is mechanically identical to <tt>IsClass</tt>, but this time we’re accessing a nested type name of an unknown type (see <span class="docEmphasis">Disambiguating with Typename</span> [49, 169]). If <tt>C</tt>
 has such a nested type, we’ll be able to convert the literal zero to a 
pointer to such a type; otherwise we’ll match the catchall.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Finally, let’s look at some trickery from Andrei Alexandrescu: Given two unknown types <tt>T1</tt> and <tt>T2</tt>, can we convert <tt>T1</tt> to <tt>T2</tt>? Note that this mechanism will detect both predefined and user-defined conversions:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T1, typename T2&gt;
struct CanConvert {
    static True canConvert( T2 );
    static False canConvert( ... );
    static T1 makeT1();
    enum { r = sizeof(canConvert( makeT1() )) == sizeof(True) };
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">As we saw in our <tt>Heap</tt> implementation in <span class="docEmphasis">Specializing for Type Information</span> [52,
 183], there is often a great advantage in flexibility or efficiency in 
being able to provide special-purpose implementations based on 
information that can be statically determined at compile time. Through 
the use of SFINAE and other metaprogramming techniques, we’re able to 
ask questions like, “Is this unknown type a pointer to a class type that
 has a nested <tt>iterator</tt> typename that can be converted to <tt>std::string?</tt>”</p>
		


</body>
</html>
