<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 60. Generic Algorithms</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 60. Generic Algorithms</h2>
		
<p class="docText">A
 generic algorithm is a function template that is designed in such a way
 that it can be easily and effectively customized at compile time 
according to the context of its use. Let’s look at a function template 
that doesn’t meet these exacting standards and is therefore not a proper
 generic algorithm:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>				<span class="docEmphMark">template &lt;typename T&gt;                                            </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">void slowSort( T a[], int len ) {                                </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">    for( int i = 0; i &lt; len; ++i ) // For each pair              </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">        for( int j = i; j &lt; len; ++j )                           </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">            if( a[j] &lt; a[i] ) { // ...if out of order...         </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">                T tmp( a[j] ); // ...swap them.                  </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">                a[j] = a[i];                                     </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">                a[i] = tmp;                                      </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">            }                                                    </span>
				<span class="docEmphMark">}                                                                </span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">This template can be used to sort an array of objects, provided that the objects can be compared with a <tt>&lt;</tt> operator and copied. For example, we can sort an array of our <tt>String</tt> objects from <span class="docEmphasis">Assignment and Initialization Are Different</span> [12, 41]:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>String names[] = { "my", "dog", "has", "fleece" };
const int namesLen = sizeof(names)/sizeof(names[0]);
slowSort( names, namesLen ); // sorts...eventually!
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The first complaint one might make concerning <tt>slowSort</tt> is that it can be slow. That observation is correct, but let’s forgive <tt>slowSort</tt> its O(n<sup>2</sup>) runtime and concentrate instead on aspects of its generic design.</p>
		
<p class="docText">The first observation we can make is that our implementation of swap in <tt>slowSort</tt> is not ideal for the <tt>String</tt> type (or many other types, for that matter). The <tt>String</tt> class has its own member <tt>swap</tt> that is both faster and more exception safe than a swap that is accomplished by copying through a temporary <tt>String</tt>. A better implementation approach is simply to say what we mean:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T&gt;
void slowSort( T a[], int len ) {
    for( int i = 0; i &lt; len; ++i ) // For each pair
        for( int j = i; j &lt; len; ++j )
            if( a[j] &lt; a[i] ) // ...if out of order...
                swap( a[j], a[i] ); // ...swap them.
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">We’re still not calling <tt>String</tt>’s <tt>swap</tt> member function, but if the author of the <tt>String</tt> class has it together, there will be a nonmember <tt>swap</tt> available that will:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>inline void swap( String &amp;a, String &amp;b )
    { a.swap( b ); }
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Suppose there is no such nonmember <tt>swap</tt> available? In that case, we’ll be no worse off because one way or another we’ll end up calling the standard library <tt>swap</tt>, which does precisely the same thing we hand-coded in the original version of <tt>slowSort</tt>. Actually, we’re still much better off than we were originally, because the new implementation of <tt>slowSort</tt> is shorter, simpler, and easier to understand. More important, if someone should eventually implement an efficient nonmember <tt>swap</tt> for <tt>String</tt>, we’ll pick up the improvement automatically. That’s the kind of code maintenance we can live with.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Now consider the use of <tt>&lt;</tt>
 for comparing elements of the array. This is probably the most common 
way one would like to sort an array (from smallest to largest), but we 
may also want to sort in descending order or in some idiosyncratic 
order. Further, there may be arrays of objects we’d like to sort that 
either don’t support a <tt>&lt;</tt> operator or have several distinct candidates for a less-than-like operator. We’ve already seen such a type in <span class="docEmphasis">STL Function Objects</span> [20, 71]: the <tt>State</tt> class:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>class State {
  public:
   //...
   int population() const;
   float aveTempF() const;
   //...
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Our approach in <span class="docEmphasis">STL Function Objects</span> [20, 71] was to implement functions and function objects that could be used in place of a <tt>&lt;</tt> operator, but this approach will work only if the generic algorithm has been designed to accept such an argument:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T, typename Comp&gt;
void slowSort( T a[], int len, Comp less ) {
    for( int i = 0; i &lt; len; ++i ) // For each pair
        for( int j = i; j &lt; len; ++j )
           if( less( a[j], a[i] ) ) // ...if out of order...
                swap( a[j], a[i] ); // ...swap them.
}
//...
State states[50];
//...
slowSort( states, 50, PopComp() );
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">If <tt>slowSort</tt>ing with <tt>&lt;</tt> is a very common operation, it might be a good idea to overload <tt>slowSort</tt> so that it can be called either with or without a special purpose comparison operation.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Finally, it’s always a good 
idea to follow convention, and it’s a particularly good idea in the case
 of generic algorithms. We can also justifiably criticize <tt>slowSort</tt>
 for restricting the argument it sorts to be an array, since there are 
many other kinds of containers or data structures that we might like to 
sort. When in doubt, copy the standard:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename For, typename Comp&gt;
void slowSort( For b, For e, Comp less ) {
    for( For i( b ); i != e; ++i ) // For each pair
        for( For j( i ); j != e; ++j )
            if( less( a[j], a[i] ) ) // ...if out of order...
               swap( a[j], a[i] ); // ...swap them.
}
template &lt;typename For&gt;
void slowSort( For b, For e ) {
    for( For i( b ); i != e; ++i ) // For each pair
        for( For j( i ); j != e; ++j )
            if( a[j] &lt; a[i] ) // ...if out of order...
                swap( a[j], a[i] ); // ...swap them.
}
//...
std::list&lt;State&gt; states;
//...
slowSort( states.begin(), states.end(), PopComp() );
slowSort( names, names+namesLen );
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Here
 we’ve replaced our clunky array interface with a more standard and more
 flexible STL compliant iterator interface. Now we can feel comfortable 
calling <tt>slowSort</tt> a generic algorithm, rather than simply a function template.</p>
		
<p class="docText">One important lesson
 of this example is that complex software design is nearly always a 
group effort. As such, your code should be designed in such a way as to 
leverage the expertise of your colleagues while remaining as immune as 
possible to maintenance they perform on code that is not in your 
control. Our improved <tt>slowSort</tt> 
algorithm is a good example of such proper design. It performs a single,
 well-understood operation at as high a conceptual level as possible. To
 be precise, <tt>slowSort</tt> handles the 
sorting algorithm and subcontracts swapping and comparison to others who
 will do a better job. This approach allows you, the (supposed) sorting 
expert, to augment your sorting expertise with the swapping expertise of
 whoever designed the element type that is being sorted. The two of you 
may never meet, but through proper design you can work together as 
closely as if you shared the same workstation. Moreover, if improved 
swap functionality should appear in the future, <tt>slowSort</tt>
 will pick up the improvement automatically and probably without your 
knowledge. As ever, ignorance is strength. (This is similar in flavor to
 proper polymorphic design; see <span class="docEmphasis">Commands and Hollywood</span> [19, 67].)</p>
		


</body>
</html>
