<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 61. You Instantiate What You Use</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 61. You Instantiate What You Use</h2>
		
<p class="docText">In
 both C and C++, if you don’t call a declared function (or take its 
address), you don’t have to define it. An analogous situation occurs 
with member functions of class templates; if you don’t actually call a 
template’s member function, it’s not instantiated.</p>
		
<p class="docText">This is clearly a handy 
property for the purpose of reducing code size. If a class template 
defines a large number of member functions, but you use only two or 
three of them, you don’t pay the code space penalty for all those unused
 functions.</p>
		
<p class="docText">An even more important
 result of this rule is that you can specialize class templates with 
arguments that would be illegal if all the member functions were 
instantiated. With this rule in place, it’s possible to write flexible 
class templates that can work with a wide variety of arguments, even if 
some arguments would result in erroneous instantiations of some member 
functions; if you don’t actually call those erroneous functions, they’re
 not instantiated, and you don’t get an error. This is consistent with 
many areas of the C++ language, where potential problems are not flagged
 as errors until they become actual problems. In C++, it’s OK to think 
illegal thoughts as long as you don’t act on them!</p>
		
<p class="docText">Consider a simple, fixed-size array template:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T, int n&gt;
class Array {
  public:
    Array() : a_( new T[n] ) {}
    ~Array() { delete [] a_; }
    Array( const Array &amp; );
    Array &amp;operator =( const Array &amp; );
    void swap( Array &amp;that ) { std::swap( a_, that.a_ ); }
    T &amp;operator []( int i ) { return a_[i]; }
    const T &amp;operator []( int i ) const { return a_[i]; }
    bool operator ==( const Array &amp;rhs ) const;
    bool operator !=( const Array &amp;rhs ) const
        { return !(*this==rhs); }
  private:
    T *a_;
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">This
 container behaves pretty much like a predefined array, with the usual 
operations for indexing, but it also provides some higher-level 
operations that are not available on predefined arrays, like swapping 
and comparison for equality (we’ve left out the relational operators for
 reasons of space). Let’s look at an implementation of <tt>operator ==:</tt></p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename T, int n&gt;
bool Array&lt;T,n&gt;::operator ==( const Array &amp;that ) const {
    for( int i = 0; i &lt; n; ++i )
        if( !(a_[i] == that.a_[i]) )
            return false;
    return true;
}
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">We know that both arrays 
being compared have the same number of elements, since they’re both the 
same type and the array size is one of the template parameters, so we 
just have to perform a pairwise comparison of each element. If any pair 
of elements differs, the <tt>Array</tt> objects are not equal.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>Array&lt;int,12&gt; a, b;
//...
if( a == b ) // calls a.operator ==(b)
    //...
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">When we use the <tt>==</tt> operation on our <tt>Array&lt;int,12&gt;</tt> objects, the compiler instantiates <tt>Array&lt;int,12&gt;::operator ==</tt>, which compiles correctly. If we hadn’t used <tt>==</tt> (or <tt>!=</tt>, which calls <tt>operator ==</tt>) on objects of type <tt>Array&lt;int,12&gt;</tt>, then we would not have instantiated that member function.</p>
		
<p class="docText">The interesting situation occurs when we instantiate <tt>Array</tt> with a type that does not have an <tt>==</tt> operation defined. For instance, let’s assume that our <tt>Circle</tt> type does not define or inherit an <tt>operator ==:</tt></p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>Array&lt;Circle,6&gt; c, d; // no problem!
//...
c[3].draw(); // OK
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">So far, so good. We have not directly or indirectly used an <tt>==</tt> operation on an <tt>Array&lt;Circle,6&gt;</tt> object, so the <tt>operator ==</tt> function is not instantiated, and there is no error.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>				<span class="docEmphMark">if( c == d ) // error!                        </span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Now we have a problem. The compiler will attempt to instantiate <tt>Array&lt;Circle,6&gt;::operator ==</tt>, but the function implementation will attempt to compare two <tt>Circle</tt> objects with a nonexistent <tt>==</tt> operator. Compile-time error.</p>
		
<p class="docText">This technique is commonly used in the design of class templates that are as flexible as possible but no more so.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Note that this idyllic situation does not occur in the case of an explicit instantiation of a class template:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>				<span class="docEmphMark">template Array&lt;Circle,7&gt;; // error!                        </span>
			</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">This explicit instantiation directive tells the compiler to instantiate <tt>Array</tt> and all its members with the arguments <tt>Circle</tt> and <tt>7</tt>, resulting in a compile-time error in the instantiation of <tt>Array&lt;Circle,7&gt;::operator ==</tt>. Well, you asked for it....</p>
		


</body>
</html>
