<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 62. Include Guards</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 62. Include Guards</h2>
		
<p class="docText">Production
 C++ applications tend to use a lot of header files, and many header 
files include other header files. Under these circumstances, it’s common
 for the same header file to be indirectly included more than once in a 
compilation, and it’s not uncommon in large, complex applications for 
the same header file to occur hundreds of times in the same compilation.
 Consider the simple case of a header file <tt>hdr2.h</tt> that includes another header file, <tt>hdr1.h</tt>, and a header file <tt>hdr3.h</tt> that also includes <tt>hdr1.h</tt>. If both <tt>hdr2.h</tt> and <tt>hdr3.h</tt> are included in the same source file, <tt>hdr1.h</tt> will be included twice. Typically, such multiple inclusions are undesirable and cause multiple definition errors.</p>
		
<p class="docText">For this reason, C++ 
header files almost universally employ a preprocessor coding technique 
to prevent the content of the header from appearing more than once in a 
compilation no matter how many times the header file is actually <tt>#include</tt>d. Consider the content of header file <tt>hdr1.h</tt>:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>#ifndef HDR1_H
#define HDR1_H
// actual content of the header file...
#endif
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The first time the header file <tt>hdr1.h</tt> is <tt>#include</tt>d in a compilation, the preprocessor symbol <tt>HDR1_H</tt> is undefined, so the <tt>#ifndef</tt> (“if not defined”) preprocessor conditional allows preprocessing of the <tt>#define</tt> directive and the rest of the header file’s content. The next time <tt>hdr1.h</tt> appears in the same compilation, the symbol <tt>HDR1_H</tt> is defined, and the <tt>#ifndef</tt> prevents repeated inclusion of the header file’s content.</p>
		
<p class="docText">This technique will work only if the preprocessor symbol for a header file (in this case, <tt>HDR1_H</tt>) is associated with exactly one header file (in this case, <tt>hdr1.h</tt>).
 It’s therefore important to establish a standard, simple naming 
convention that allows the construction of the name of the preprocessor 
symbol used in the include guard from the name of the header file being 
guarded.</p>
		
<p class="docText">In addition to preventing
 error, include file guards also help to speed up compilation by 
allowing the compiler to skip over the content of any header files that 
have already been translated. Unfortunately, the very process of opening
 a header file, evaluating the <tt>#ifndef</tt>, and scanning to the terminating <tt>#endif</tt>
 can be time-consuming in complex situations where many header files 
appear many times in a given compilation. In some cases, redundant 
include guards can speed things up considerably:</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>#ifndef HDR1_H
#include "hdr1.h"
#endif
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Rather than simply <tt>#include</tt>
 a header file, we guard the inclusion with a test on the same guard 
symbol that is set within the header file. This is redundant, because 
the first time a header file is included, the same condition (in this 
case, <tt>#ifndef HDR1_H</tt>) will be tested twice, both before the <tt>#include</tt> and within the header file itself. However, on subsequent inclusions, the redundant guard will prevent the <tt>#include</tt>
 directive from being executed, preventing the header file from being 
needlessly opened and scanned. Use of redundant include guards is not as
 common as that of simple include guards, but in some cases their use 
can improve compilation times of large applications considerably.</p>
		


</body>
</html>
