<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Item 63. Optional Keywords</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 
		<h2>Item 63. Optional Keywords</h2>
		
<p class="docText">Some
 keyword usage is strictly optional from the perspective of the C++ 
language, though other considerations may argue for their presence or 
absence.</p>
		
<p class="docText">The most common source of confusion is the optional use of <tt>virtual</tt> in a derived class member function that overrides a base class virtual member function.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>class Shape {
  public:
    virtual void draw() const = 0;
    virtual void rotate( double degrees ) = 0;
    virtual void invert() = 0;
    //...
};
class Blob : public Shape {
  public:
    virtual void draw() const;
    void rotate( double );
    void invert() = 0;
    //...
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">The member function <tt>Blob::draw</tt> overrides the base class <tt>draw</tt>
 function and so is virtual; the use of the keyword is completely 
optional and has no effect on the meaning of the program. A common 
misassumption is that omitting the <tt>virtual</tt> keyword will prevent further overriding in more derived classes. This is not the case.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>class SharpBlob : public Blob {
  public:
    void rotate( double ); // overrides Blob::rotate
    //...
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Note that the appearance of the <tt>virtual</tt> keyword is also optional on an overriding pure virtual function, as in <tt>Blob::invert</tt>. The presence or absence of the <tt>virtual</tt> keyword in an overriding derived class function is completely optional and has no effect on the meaning of the program. None.</p>
		
<p class="docText">Opinion is divided as to whether it is a good practice to omit the <tt>virtual</tt> keyword in an overriding derived class function. Some authorities claim that use of the nonessential <tt>virtual</tt>
 helps to document the nature of the derived class function for the 
human reader. Others claim it’s a waste of effort and may cause a 
nonoverriding derived class function to become “accidentally” virtual. 
No matter which opinion you hold, it is best to be consistent; either 
use the <tt>virtual</tt> keyword on every overriding derived class function or omit its use entirely.</p>
		
<p class="docText">The <tt>static</tt> keyword is optional when declaring member <tt>operator new, operator delete</tt>, array new, and array delete (see <span class="docEmphasis">Class-Specific Memory Management</span> [36, 123]), because these functions are implicitly static.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>class Handle {
  public:
    void *operator new( size_t ); // implicitly static
    static void operator delete( void * );
    static void *operator new[]( size_t );
    void operator delete[]( void * ); // implicitly static
};
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">Some authorities claim 
that it’s best to be specific and always declare these functions to be 
explicitly static. Others think that if a user or maintainer of a piece 
of C++ does not know these functions are implicitly static, they should 
not be using or maintaining the code. The use of <tt>static</tt> here is a waste of effort; a program is no place to put crib notes on language semantics. As with the optional use of <tt>virtual</tt>, whatever your position on optional <tt>static</tt>,
 it’s important to be consistent. Either all four of these functions 
should be declared explicitly static or none of them should.</p>
		
<p class="docText">In a template header, the keywords <tt>typename</tt> and <tt>class</tt>
 may be used interchangeably to indicate that a template parameter is a 
type name; there is no difference in meaning whatsoever. However, many 
expert C++ programmers use <tt>typename</tt> to indicate to the human reader that the template argument may be of any type and <tt>class</tt> to indicate that the type argument must be a class type.</p>
		
<div class="docText">
  <pre>template &lt;typename In, typename Out&gt;
Out copy( In begin, In end, Out result );

template &lt;class Container&gt;
void resize( Container &amp;container, int newSize );
</pre>
</div>
<br/>
		
<p class="docText">In ancient times, the <tt>register</tt>
 keyword was used to “suggest” to the compiler that a variable was (in 
the opinion of the programmer) going to be heavily used and should be 
therefore be put in a register. It was also illegal to take the address 
of a variable declared with the <tt>register</tt>
 storage class. Early on, however, compiler writers learned that their 
programming colleagues were absolutely clueless about what variables 
should be stored in registers, and now compilers uniformly ignore 
programmers’ suggestions in that regard. In C++, use of <tt>register</tt> has no effect whatsoever on the meaning of the program and typically has no effect on the efficiency of the program.</p>
		
<p class="docText">The <tt>auto</tt> 
keyword can be used to indicate that an automatic variable (a function 
argument or a local variable) is automatic. Don’t bother with it.</p>
		
<p class="docText">To be perfectly honest, both <tt>register</tt> and <tt>auto</tt>
 can be used in obscure circumstances to disambiguate the syntax of 
particularly poorly written code. The proper approach in these cases is 
to write better code and avoid use of these keywords.</p>
		


</body>
</html>
