<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Installing Maven on Linux</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div id="page" class="sbo-epubcss">
  <div class="epub__section" title="Installing Maven on Linux">
    <div class="epub__titlepage">
      <div>
        <div>
          <h1><a id="ch01lvl1sec12"/>Installing Maven on Linux</h1>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    <p>Let us look at the<a id="id32"/> steps to install Maven on Linux.</p>
    <p>While there are many<a id="id33"/> flavors of Linux (Ubuntu, Fedora, RHEL, SUSE, CentOS, and so on), the steps to set up Maven are similar.</p>
    <div class="epub__section" title="Getting ready">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch01lvl2sec24"/>Getting ready</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>Maven needs Java, specifically the Java Development Kit (JDK). Using the following steps, let us check if it is installed in your Linux system, which is a bit tricky:</p>
      <div class="epub__orderedlist">
        <ol class="epub__orderedlist epub__arabic">
          <li class="epub__listitem">Open a terminal and run the following command:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>java -version</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">See if you get an output similar to the following:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting">java version "1.7.0_65"
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>OpenJDK Runtime Environment (rhel-2.5.1.2.el6_5-x86_64 u65-b17)</strong></span>
</pre></div><p>The preceding output will still not tell you where your Java is installed, which is required to set <code class="epub__literal">JAVA_HOME</code>. You can get this information by performing the next set of steps.</p></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Check if <code class="epub__literal">javac</code> <a id="id34"/>works; it does only if JDK is installed, not <a id="id35"/>JRE:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>$ javac -version</strong></span>
</pre></div><p>The output for the preceding command is shown as:</p><div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>javac 1.7.0_65</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Find the location of the <code class="epub__literal">javac</code> command:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>$ which javac</strong></span>
</pre></div><p>The output for the preceding command is shown as:</p><div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>/usr/bin/javac</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">In the preceding output, <code class="epub__literal">javac</code> is a symbolic link to the actual location of the file. Try to determine this location in the following way:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>$ readlink /usr/bin/javac</strong></span>
</pre></div><p>The output for the preceding command is shown as:</p><div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>/etc/alternatives/javac</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">By executing the preceding command, we again got the symbolic link. To get the path to the location of <code class="epub__literal">javac</code>, we execute the following command again:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>$ readlink /etc/alternatives/javac</strong></span>
</pre></div><p>The output for the preceding command is shown as:</p><div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>/usr/lib/jvm/java-1.7.0-openjdk.x86_64/bin/javac</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">We have now located the folder where JDK is installed:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>/usr/lib/jvm/java-1.7.0-openjdk.x86_64/</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Set <code class="epub__literal">JAVA_HOME</code> to the preceding folder. This can be done in two ways, depending on what you desire:<p>If it is for the duration of the session, run the following command:</p><div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>export JAVA_HOME=/usr/lib/jvm/java-1.7.0-openjdk.x86_64/</strong></span>
</pre></div><p>If this is permanent, add the preceding line in <code class="epub__literal">.bash_profile</code> in your <code class="epub__literal">HOME</code> folder.</p></li>
        </ol>
      </div>
      <p>If Java is not present, download and install Java from the Oracle Java download page<a id="id36"/> at http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/downloads/index.html.</p>
      <p>If you have an rpm-based Linux distribution, you can download and install <code class="epub__literal">rpm</code>. Otherwise, you can download the <code class="epub__literal">.tar.gz</code> format of the distribution and extract it to a folder of your choice.</p>
      <p>In the earlier case, you know exactly where Java is installed and can set <code class="epub__literal">JAVA_HOME</code> correspondingly. Once installed, verify the Java installation by following the preceding steps.</p>
      <p>Now, let us set up Maven on Linux.</p>
    </div>
    <div class="epub__section" title="How to do it...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch01lvl2sec25"/>How to do it...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>To set up Maven on<a id="id37"/> Linux, perform <a id="id38"/>the following steps:</p>
      <div class="epub__orderedlist">
        <ol class="epub__orderedlist epub__arabic">
          <li class="epub__listitem">Go<a id="id39"/> to http://maven.apache.org/ and click on the <span class="epub__strong"><strong>Download</strong></span> link. The links to latest stable versions of Maven will be displayed.</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">The binaries are available in both <code class="epub__literal">.zip</code> and <code class="epub__literal">.tar.gz</code> formats. For Mac OS X and Linux, the preferred download format is <code class="epub__literal">.tar.gz</code>.</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Extract the downloaded binary to a folder you want Maven to reside in. The typical location in Linux is the <code class="epub__literal">/usr/local</code> folder.<div class="epub__note" title="Note" style=""><div class="epub__inner"><h3><a id="tip05"/>Tip</h3><p>You will need a super user (su) or administrator access to place contents in the <code class="epub__literal">/usr/local</code> folder. If you do not have access, you can place this in a subfolder of your <code class="epub__literal">HOME</code> folder.</p></div></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Execute the following command, and ensure the contents of the <code class="epub__literal">apache-maven-3.2.5</code> folder are similar to the following output:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>/usr/local/apache-maven-3.2.5$ ls -l</strong></span>
</pre></div><p>The output for the preceding command is shown as:</p><div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting">total 27
-rw-r--r--    1 root    root    17464 Aug 12 02:29 LICENSE
-rw-r--r--    1 root    root      182 Aug 12 02:29 NOTICE
-rw-r--r--    1 root    root     2508 Aug 12 02:26 README.txt
drwxr-xr-x    8 root    root     4096 Aug 19 13:41 bin
drwxr-xr-x    3 root    root        0 Aug 19 13:41 boot
drwxr-xr-x    4 root    root        0 Oct 14 17:39 conf
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>drwxr-xr-x   67 root    root    28672 Aug 19 13:41 lib</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Set the <code class="epub__literal">M2_HOME</code> variable as follows:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>export M2_HOME=/usr/local/apache-maven-3.2.5</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Update <code class="epub__literal">PATH</code> to include Maven's <code class="epub__literal">bin</code> folder:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>export PATH=$PATH:$M2_HOME/bin</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
        </ol>
      </div>
      <p>Like <code class="epub__literal">JAVA_HOME</code>, the preceding settings can be persisted by updating <code class="epub__literal">.bash_profile</code>.</p>
    </div>
    <div class="epub__section" title="How it works...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch01lvl2sec26"/>How it works...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>The Maven <a id="id40"/>installation is essentially a set of JAR files, configuration<a id="id41"/> files, and a Linux shell script, namely <code class="epub__literal">mvn</code>.</p>
      <p>The <code class="epub__literal">mvn</code> command essentially runs this script. It first checks for <code class="epub__literal">JAVA_HOME</code>. This file is present in the <code class="epub__literal">bin</code> folder of the Maven installation and hence needs to be in <code class="epub__literal">PATH</code>.</p>
      <p>If the shell script does not find <code class="epub__literal">JAVA_HOME</code>, it looks for <code class="epub__literal">java</code> in its <code class="epub__literal">PATH</code>. This can lead to unexpected results, as typically, the <code class="epub__literal">Java</code> in <code class="epub__literal">PATH</code> is usually JRE and not JDK.</p>
      <p>The shell script then looks for <code class="epub__literal">M2_HOME</code>, which is the location of the Maven installation. It does this so that it can load the libraries that are present.</p>
      <p>Additionally, it also reads values specified in <code class="epub__literal">MAVEN_OPTS</code>. This variable allows you to run Maven with an additional heap size and other Java parameters.</p>
      <p>Using the values for <code class="epub__literal">JAVA_HOME</code>, <code class="epub__literal">M2_HOME</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">MAVEN_OPTS</code>, the shell script runs its <code class="epub__literal">org.codehaus.plexus.classworlds.launcher.Launcher</code> main class.</p>
    </div>
    <div class="epub__section" title="There's more...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch01lvl2sec27"/>There's more...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>Using the following steps, let's confirm that Maven has been set up correctly, by running a Maven command:</p>
      <div class="epub__orderedlist">
        <ol class="epub__orderedlist epub__arabic">
          <li class="epub__listitem">Open a command prompt and run the following command:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>mvn –version</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">The following output should be displayed:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting">Apache Maven 3.2.5 (12a6b3acb947671f09b81f49094c53f426d8cea1; 2014-12-14T22:59:23+05:30)
Maven home: /usr/local/maven
Java version: 1.7.0_65, vendor: Oracle Corporation
Java home: /usr/lib/jvm/java-1.7.0-openjdk-1.7.0.65.x86_64/jre
Default locale: en_US, platform encoding: ANSI_X3.4-1968
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>OS name: "linux", version: "2.6.32-279.22.1.el6.x86_64", arch: "amd64", family: "unix"</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
        </ol>
      </div>
      <p>If you get an error, recheck <a id="id42"/>the <a id="id43"/>installation steps and repeat them.</p>
    </div>
    <div class="epub__section" title="See also">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch01lvl2sec28"/>See also</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <div class="epub__itemizedlist">
        <ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc">The <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Creating a simple project with Maven</em></span> recipe in this chapter</li>
        </ul>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>


</body>
</html>
