<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Changing the JDK used by Maven</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div id="page" class="sbo-epubcss">
  <div class="epub__section" title="Changing the JDK used by Maven">
    <div class="epub__titlepage">
      <div>
        <div>
          <h1><a id="ch01lvl1sec13"/>Changing the JDK used by Maven</h1>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    <p>It is possible to have more <a id="id44"/>than one version of JDK installed on your system. By following some simple steps, you can specify and/or change the JDK to be used by Maven.</p>
    <div class="epub__section" title="How to do it...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch01lvl2sec29"/>How to do it...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>You will recall that, in the earlier section, we used Java SE 7. Let us now change to Java SE 8. To change the JDK version to Java SE 8 on Microsoft Windows, perform the following steps:</p>
      <div class="epub__orderedlist">
        <ol class="epub__orderedlist epub__arabic">
          <li class="epub__listitem">From the command prompt, run the following command:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>set JAVA_HOME=C:\Program Files\Java\jdk1.8.0_20</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">For Linux or Mac, the command will be:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>export JAVA_HOME=&lt;java-8-home-folder&gt;</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Now, run the following command to check the version of Maven installed:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>mvn –version</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">To check the version of Maven installed on Microsoft Windows, run the following command from the command prompt. You should get the following output. The output will be similar for Linux and Mac:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>C:\projects\apache-maven-cookbook&gt;mvn -version</strong></span>
</pre></div><p>The output for the preceding command is shown as:</p><div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting">Apache Maven 3.2.5 (12a6b3acb947671f09b81f49094c53f426d8cea1; 2014-12-14T22:59:23+05:30)
Maven home: C:\software\apache-maven-3.2.5
Java version: 1.8.0_20, vendor: Oracle Corporation
Java home: C:\Program Files\Java\jdk1.8.0_20\jre
Default locale: en_IN, platform encoding: Cp1252
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>OS name: "windows 8.1", version: "6.3", arch: "amd64", family: "windows"</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
        </ol>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="epub__section" title="How it works...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch01lvl2sec30"/>How it works...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>Maven always uses the <a id="id45"/>JDK specified by <code class="epub__literal">JAVA_HOME</code>, no matter how many JDK installations are available on the system. This allows the user the flexibility to change JDKs as required or based on the project.</p>
      <p>Hence, it is important to ensure <code class="epub__literal">JAVA_HOME</code> is defined. In the absence of this variable, Maven attempts to detect the presence of Java from <code class="epub__literal">PATH</code>. This is typically JRE and not JDK.</p>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>


</body>
</html>
