<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Building a simple project with Maven</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div id="page" class="sbo-epubcss">
  <div class="epub__section" title="Building a simple project with Maven">
    <div class="epub__titlepage">
      <div>
        <div>
          <h1><a id="ch01lvl1sec15"/>Building a simple project with Maven</h1>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    <p>Let us now build the <a id="id53"/>project that was created in the preceding <a id="id54"/>section.</p>
    <div class="epub__section" title="How to do it...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch01lvl2sec34"/>How to do it...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>To build the previously created simple project with Maven, perform the following steps:</p>
      <div class="epub__orderedlist">
        <ol class="epub__orderedlist epub__arabic">
          <li class="epub__listitem">Open the command prompt and run the following command, changing the directory to the folder the project was created:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>mvn package</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Observe the following things in the output:<p>Notice the following warning (we will see how to resolve this later in this book):</p><div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting">[INFO] --- maven-resources-plugin:2.6:resources (default-resources) @ simple-project ---
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[WARNING] Using platform encoding (Cp1252 actually) to copy filtered resources,</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>i.e. build is platform dependent!</strong></span>
</pre></div><p>Check if the sources are compiled:</p><div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] --- maven-compiler-plugin:3.1:compile (default-compile) @ simple-project</strong></span>
</pre></div><p>Check if the tests are run:</p><div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting">[INFO] --- maven-surefire-plugin:2.12.4:test (default-test) @ simple-project ---
[INFO] Surefire report directory: C:\projects\apache-maven-cookbook\simple-project\target\surefire-reports
-------------------------------------------------------
 T E S T S
-------------------------------------------------------
Running com.packt.cookbook.AppTest
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>Tests run: 1, Failures: 0, Errors: 0, Skipped: 0, Time elapsed: 0.005 sec</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">A JAR file is now created.</li>
        </ol>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="epub__section" title="How it works...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch01lvl2sec35"/>How it works...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>In the <code class="epub__literal">mvn package</code> command, the <code class="epub__literal">package</code> parameter is a phase in the build lifecycle. Maven has a default <a id="id55"/>build lifecycle that has a number of phases. Each<a id="id56"/> phase will execute every phase prior to it in order along with the specified phase. In this case, the <code class="epub__literal">package</code> phase executes in the following order:</p>
      <div class="epub__itemizedlist">
        <ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc">Validate</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc">Compile</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc">Test</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc">Package</li>
        </ul>
      </div>
      <p>The <code class="epub__literal">validate</code> phase <a id="id57"/>makes sure that the project (specifically the <code class="epub__literal">pom.xml</code> file that describes the project) is in order and all the necessary information to run the project is available.</p>
      <p>The <code class="epub__literal">compile</code> phase<a id="id58"/> compiles the sources.</p>
      <p>The <code class="epub__literal">test</code> phase<a id="id59"/> compiles the <a id="id60"/>test sources and then runs the test using a <a id="id61"/>suitable test framework. In the earlier example, the <span class="epub__strong"><strong>JUnit</strong></span><a id="id62"/> framework is used to run the tests.</p>
      <p>The <code class="epub__literal">package</code> phase packages <a id="id63"/>the artifacts to the format specified in the <code class="epub__literal">pom.xml</code> file.</p>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>


</body>
</html>
