<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Changing the location of the Maven repository</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div id="page" class="sbo-epubcss">
  <div class="epub__section" title="Changing the location of the Maven repository">
    <div class="epub__titlepage">
      <div>
        <div>
          <h1><a id="ch01lvl1sec16"/>Changing the location of the Maven repository</h1>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    <p>There are three types of Maven repositories:</p>
    <div class="epub__itemizedlist">
      <ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
        <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Local</strong></span>: This is the<a id="id64"/> repository in your computer filesystem</li>
        <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Remote</strong></span>: This is the<a id="id65"/> repository from where the required Maven files get downloaded</li>
        <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Mirrors</strong></span>: These are <a id="id66"/>repository managers, such as <span class="epub__strong"><strong>Nexus</strong></span><a id="id67"/> and <a id="id68"/><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Artifactory</strong></span>, that mirror various repositories</li>
      </ul>
    </div>
    <p>You will have seen <a id="id69"/>Maven downloading a number of <a id="id70"/>files (called poms and jars). Let us see where they are located in your computer:</p>
    <div class="epub__itemizedlist">
      <ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
        <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc">Go to your <code class="epub__literal">HOME</code> folder (<code class="epub__literal">C:\Users\username</code>) in the case of Microsoft Windows, <code class="epub__literal">/Users/username</code> for Mac, and, <code class="epub__literal">/home/username</code> (or a similar location) for Linux</li>
        <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc">You will notice the <code class="epub__literal">.m2</code> folder and within that, a subfolder called <code class="epub__literal">repository</code><div class="epub__note" title="Note" style=""><div class="epub__inner"><h3><a id="tip07"/>Tip</h3><p>Any folder that starts with a dot (<code class="epub__literal">.</code>) is typically hidden from view. You will need to change your folder viewer settings to see it.</p></div></div></li>
        <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc">You will see a number of folders and files that are used by Maven</li>
      </ul>
    </div>
    <p>You may want to change this location for the following reasons:</p>
    <div class="epub__itemizedlist">
      <ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
        <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc">You may want to conserve space in the <code class="epub__literal">C</code> drive and store these folders and files in the <code class="epub__literal">D</code> drive on Microsoft Windows.</li>
        <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc">You may want to take a back up of the contents. Backup software usually backs up contents in specific folders of the filesystem.</li>
        <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc">Your organization may have a policy for all users to store a local repository in the same folder.</li>
      </ul>
    </div>
    <div class="epub__section" title="How to do it...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch01lvl2sec36"/>How to do it...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>To change the location of the Maven repository, perform the following steps:</p>
      <div class="epub__orderedlist">
        <ol class="epub__orderedlist epub__arabic">
          <li class="epub__listitem">Create a file called <code class="epub__literal">settings.xml</code> in the <code class="epub__literal">.m2</code> folder.</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Add the following contents to the settings.xml file that you just created:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting">&lt;settings xmlns="http://maven.apache.org/SETTINGS/1.0.0"
  xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
 xsi:schemaLocation="http://maven.apache.org/SETTINGS/1.0.0
                      http://maven.apache.org/xsd/settings-1.0.0.xsd"&gt;
    <span class="epub__strong"><strong>&lt;localRepository&gt;C:/software/maven&lt;/localRepository&gt;</strong></span>
&lt;/settings&gt;</pre></div><p>Notice the highlighted part of the preceding code. We have changed the location of the repository contents to C:\software\maven. You can change it to any valid folder name.</p></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Delete the <code class="epub__literal">repository</code> subfolder and run the <code class="epub__literal">mvn package</code> command again.<p>You will now notice that the <code class="epub__literal">repository</code> folder is not created in the <code class="epub__literal">.m2</code> folder. Instead, it is created in <code class="epub__literal">C:\software\maven</code>.</p></li>
        </ol>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="epub__section" title="How it works...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch01lvl2sec37"/>How it works...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>Maven determines<a id="id71"/> the location of the local repository in the following <a id="id72"/>way:</p>
      <div class="epub__itemizedlist">
        <ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc">If <code class="epub__literal">settings.xml</code> exists in the user's <code class="epub__literal">.m2</code> folder, which contains the <code class="epub__literal">&lt;localRepository&gt;</code> tag, then Maven uses its contents to determine the location</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc">If not, Maven will check if <code class="epub__literal">localRepository</code> is explicitly defined in the default <code class="epub__literal">settings.xml</code>, present in the <code class="epub__literal">conf</code> folder of the Maven installation</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc">If it is not present there, Maven will use the default value for the local repository, which is the user's <code class="epub__literal">.m2</code> folder</li>
        </ul>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>


</body>
</html>
