<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Running Maven behind an HTTP proxy server</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div id="page" class="sbo-epubcss">
  <div class="epub__section" title="Running Maven behind an HTTP proxy server">
    <div class="epub__titlepage">
      <div>
        <div>
          <h1><a id="ch01lvl1sec17"/>Running Maven behind an HTTP proxy server</h1>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    <p>Most organizations do not<a id="id73"/> allow devices in their network to<a id="id74"/> access the Internet directly for security and other reasons. In such cases, typically, a proxy server comes into picture. The proxy server details are specified in the browser or any other location where access to the Internet is required.</p>
    <div class="epub__section" title="How to do it...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch01lvl2sec38"/>How to do it...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>Let's start running Maven behind an HTTP proxy server, by performing the following steps:</p>
      <div class="epub__orderedlist">
        <ol class="epub__orderedlist epub__arabic">
          <li class="epub__listitem">Create a <code class="epub__literal">settings.xml</code> file in the <code class="epub__literal">.m2</code> folder in your <code class="epub__literal">HOME</code> directory, if it does not exist already.</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Add the following code within the <code class="epub__literal">settings</code> tag:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting">  &lt;proxies&gt;
    &lt;proxy&gt;
      &lt;id&gt;myproxy&lt;/id&gt;
      &lt;active&gt;true&lt;/active&gt;
      &lt;protocol&gt;http&lt;/protocol&gt;
      &lt;host&gt;proxy.myorg.com&lt;/host&gt;
      &lt;port&gt;8080&lt;/port&gt;
      &lt;username&gt;proxyuser&lt;/username&gt;
      &lt;password&gt;somepassword&lt;/password&gt;
      &lt;nonProxyHosts&gt;*.myorg.com &lt;/nonProxyHosts&gt;
    &lt;/proxy&gt;
  &lt;/proxies&gt;</pre></div></li>
        </ol>
      </div>
      <p>If the proxy server does not need authentication, the <code class="epub__literal">username</code> and <code class="epub__literal">password</code> tags can be omitted.</p>
      <p>The <code class="epub__literal">nonProxyHosts</code> tag allows you to specify locations that can be accessed directly (for instance, your intranet). This can be skipped if not relevant.</p>
    </div>
    <div class="epub__section" title="How it works...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch01lvl2sec39"/>How it works...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>Maven needs Internet access to download plugins and dependencies. When Maven runs, it reads the user's <code class="epub__literal">settings.xml</code> file, if it exists. It checks for any active proxy settings and applies the same.</p>
      <p>Maven uses the values in the proxy settings to download any artifacts from the repository. If there are no artifacts to be downloaded, then these values are not used.</p>
      <div class="epub__note" title="Note" style="">
        <div class="epub__inner">
          <h3><a id="note03"/>Note</h3>
          <p>The<a id="id75"/> HTTP proxy server may work <a id="id76"/>only in your organization's network. If you are running Maven from a different network, you may want to turn off the HTTP proxy server. This can be done by setting the <code class="epub__literal">active</code> tag to <code class="epub__literal">false</code> in the preceding code.</p>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>


</body>
</html>
