<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Understanding the pom file</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div id="page" class="sbo-epubcss">
  <div class="epub__section" title="Understanding the pom file">
    <div class="epub__titlepage">
      <div>
        <div>
          <h1><a id="ch03lvl1sec28"/>Understanding the pom file</h1>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    <p>Every Maven project has a pom file that defines what the project is all about and how it should be built. Pom is an acronym for <span class="epub__strong"><strong>project object model</strong></span>. Let us take a peek at this file.</p>
    <div class="epub__section" title="How to do it...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch03lvl2sec64"/>How to do it...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>Let's understand the <a id="id165"/>pom file, by performing the following steps:</p>
      <div class="epub__orderedlist">
        <ol class="epub__orderedlist epub__arabic">
          <li class="epub__listitem">Go to a Maven project that we created in previous chapters.</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Open the file named <code class="epub__literal">pom.xml</code>.</li>
        </ol>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="epub__section" title="How it works...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch03lvl2sec65"/>How it works...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>A pom file is an XML file that is based on a specific schema, as specified at the top of the file:</p>
      <div class="epub__informalexample">
        <pre class="epub__programlisting">&lt;project xmlns="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0"
  xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
  xsi:schemaLocation="http://maven.apache.org/POM/4.0.0
                      http://maven.apache.org/xsd/maven-4.0.0.xsd"&gt;</pre>
      </div>
      <p>There is also a <code class="epub__literal">modelVersion</code> element that defines the version of this schema:</p>
      <div class="epub__informalexample">
        <pre class="epub__programlisting">&lt;modelVersion&gt;4.0.0&lt;/modelVersion&gt;</pre>
      </div>
      <p>These are the basic elements of a pom file.</p>
      <p>The <code class="epub__literal">groupId</code> element is a unique identifier of the organization to which the project belongs. For our sample project, it is <code class="epub__literal">org.packt.cookbook</code>. It is a good practice to follow the reverse domain name notation to specify this:</p>
      <div class="epub__informalexample">
        <pre class="epub__programlisting">&lt;groupId&gt;...&lt;/groupId&gt;</pre>
      </div>
      <p>The <code class="epub__literal">artifactId</code> element is the name of the project. For our sample project, it is <code class="epub__literal">simple-project</code>:</p>
      <div class="epub__informalexample">
        <pre class="epub__programlisting">&lt;artifactId&gt;...&lt;/artifactId&gt;</pre>
      </div>
      <p>The <code class="epub__literal">version</code> element is the specific instance of the project, corresponding to the source code at a particular instance of time. In our case, it is <code class="epub__literal">1.0-SNAPSHOT</code>, which is a default version during development:</p>
      <div class="epub__informalexample">
        <pre class="epub__programlisting">&lt;version&gt;...&lt;/version&gt;</pre>
      </div>
      <p>We will explore the difference <a id="id166"/>between the <span class="epub__strong"><strong>SNAPSHOT</strong></span><a id="id167"/> and concrete versions later in the book.</p>
      <p>The combination of <code class="epub__literal">groupId</code>, <code class="epub__literal">artifactId</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">version</code> uniquely identifies the project. In this sense, they are the coordinates of the project.</p>
      <p>The <code class="epub__literal">packaging</code> element indicates the artifact type of the project. This is typically a <code class="epub__literal">jar</code>, <code class="epub__literal">war</code>, <code class="epub__literal">zip</code>, or in some cases, a <code class="epub__literal">pom</code>:</p>
      <div class="epub__informalexample">
        <pre class="epub__programlisting">  &lt;packaging&gt;...&lt;/packaging&gt;</pre>
      </div>
      <p>The <code class="epub__literal">dependencies</code> element section of the pom file defines all the dependent projects of this project. This would typically be third-party libraries required to build, test, and run the project:</p>
      <div class="epub__informalexample">
        <pre class="epub__programlisting">  &lt;dependencies&gt;...&lt;/dependencies&gt;</pre>
      </div>
      <p>The <code class="epub__literal">parent</code> section is used to indicate a relationship, specifically a parent-child relationship. If the project is part of a multi-module project or inherits project information from another project, then the details are specified in this section:</p>
      <div class="epub__informalexample">
        <pre class="epub__programlisting">  &lt;parent&gt;...&lt;/parent&gt;</pre>
      </div>
      <p>Maven properties are <a id="id168"/>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>placeholders</strong></span>. Their values are accessible anywhere in the pom file by using <code class="epub__literal">${key}</code>, where <code class="epub__literal">key</code> is the property name:</p>
      <div class="epub__informalexample">
        <pre class="epub__programlisting">  &lt;properties&gt;...&lt;/properties&gt;</pre>
      </div>
      <p>A project with modules is known as a multi-module or <a id="id169"/>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>aggregator project</strong></span>. Modules are projects that this pom file lists and are executed as a group:</p>
      <div class="epub__informalexample">
        <pre class="epub__programlisting">  &lt;modules&gt;...&lt;/modules&gt;</pre>
      </div>
      <p>For more information on multi-module projects refer to Chapter 9, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Multi-module Projects</em></span>.</p>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>


</body>
</html>
