<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Using properties in Maven</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div id="page" class="sbo-epubcss">
  <div class="epub__section" title="Using properties in Maven">
    <div class="epub__titlepage">
      <div>
        <div>
          <h1><a id="ch03lvl1sec34"/>Using properties in Maven</h1>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    <p>Maven allows us to<a id="id204"/> define as well as use properties. Properties allow us to <a id="id205"/>avoid hardcoding values in multiple places such as versions of dependencies. They also provide flexibility to the build tool by allowing values to be passed at runtime.</p>
    <div class="epub__section" title="How to do it...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch03lvl2sec79"/>How to do it...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>Let's define and use Maven properties by performing the following steps:</p>
      <div class="epub__orderedlist">
        <ol class="epub__orderedlist epub__arabic">
          <li class="epub__listitem">Open the pom file of a project that we created earlier.</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Define a property:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting">&lt;properties&gt;
    &lt;junit.version&gt;3.8.1&lt;/junit.version&gt;
&lt;/properties&gt;</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Use the property:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting">&lt;dependency&gt;
      &lt;groupId&gt;junit&lt;/groupId&gt;
      &lt;artifactId&gt;junit&lt;/artifactId&gt;
      &lt;version&gt;${junit.version}&lt;/version&gt;
      &lt;scope&gt;test&lt;/scope&gt;
    &lt;/dependency&gt;</pre></div></li>
        </ol>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="epub__section" title="How it works...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch03lvl2sec80"/>How it works...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>There are different types of properties. They are as follows:</p>
      <div class="epub__itemizedlist">
        <ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc">Environment variables: Prefixing a variable with <code class="epub__literal">env.</code> will return the value of the shell's environment variable. For example, <code class="epub__literal">${env.PATH}</code> will return the value of the <code class="epub__literal">PATH</code> variable.</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc">pom variables: Prefixing a variable with <code class="epub__literal">project.</code> will return the value of that element in the pom file. For example, <code class="epub__literal">${project.version}</code> will return the value in the <code class="epub__literal">&lt;version&gt;</code> tag of the pom file.</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc">The <code class="epub__literal">settings</code> variable: Prefixing a variable with <code class="epub__literal">settings.</code> will return the value of that element in the settings file. For example, <code class="epub__literal">${settings.offline}</code> will return the value <code class="epub__literal">&lt;offline&gt;</code> in the settings file.</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc">Java properties: Any property available through the <code class="epub__literal">System.getProperties()</code> method in Java is available. For example, <code class="epub__literal">${java.home}</code>.</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc">Normal properties: Values that are specified in the <code class="epub__literal">&lt;properties&gt;</code> tag, which is shown in the following example:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting">&lt;properties&gt;
  &lt;java.version&gt;1.7&lt;/java.version&gt;
&lt;/properties&gt;</pre></div><p>Here, the <code class="epub__literal">${java.version}</code> command will return <code class="epub__literal">1.7</code>
</p></li>
        </ul>
      </div>
      <p>Do remember <a id="id206"/>that properties and profiles can break the portability of the<a id="id207"/> project. Two specific practices for looking up in problem areas are as follows:</p>
      <div class="epub__itemizedlist">
        <ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc">External properties: These are properties defined outside the pom file (in a settings file) but used as part of a plugin configuration. The absence of this property definition will break the build.</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc">Incomplete specification: This is where properties are defined for different build environments. A missing definition for one will break the build.</li>
        </ul>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="epub__section" title="See also">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch03lvl2sec81"/>See also</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <div class="epub__itemizedlist">
        <ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc">The <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Specifying source encoding for platform-independent builds</em></span> recipe in this chapter.</li>
        </ul>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>


</body>
</html>
