<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Specifying source encoding for platform-independent builds</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div id="page" class="sbo-epubcss">
  <div class="epub__section" title="Specifying source encoding for platform-independent builds">
    <div class="epub__titlepage">
      <div>
        <div>
          <h1><a id="ch03lvl1sec35"/>Specifying source encoding for platform-independent builds</h1>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    <p>Let us put our learning of <a id="id208"/>properties to <a id="id209"/>practical use. You will have observed the following warning while building the simple project that we created in the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Building a simple project with Maven</em></span> recipe in Chapter 1, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Getting Started</em></span>.</p>
    <div class="epub__informalexample">
      <pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>[WARNING] Using platform encoding (Cp1252 actually) to copy filtered resources,</strong></span>
i.e. build is platform dependent!
</pre>
    </div>
    <p>Let us remove this warning if we really do not want the build to be platform dependent.</p>
    <div class="epub__section" title="How to do it...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch03lvl2sec82"/>How to do it...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>Let's specify the source encoding for platform-independent builds in our Maven project, by performing the following steps:</p>
      <div class="epub__orderedlist">
        <ol class="epub__orderedlist epub__arabic">
          <li class="epub__listitem">Open the pom file we created previously.</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Add the following code:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting">&lt;properties&gt;
      &lt;project.build.sourceEncoding&gt;UTF-8 &lt;/project.build.sourceEncoding&gt;
  &lt;/properties&gt;</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Run the following command:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>mvn package</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Observe that the warning is no longer present.</li>
        </ol>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="epub__section" title="How it works...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch03lvl2sec83"/>How it works...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>The <code class="epub__literal">project.build.sourceEncoding</code> property <a id="id210"/>explicitly specifies<a id="id211"/> the encoding of the source files. Maven plugins get information about the encoding from the value of this property and use it.</p>
      <p>This value will be the same on any platform that the project is built on and, thus, the build becomes independent of the platform.</p>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>


</body>
</html>
