<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Changing the compiler used by the Maven Compiler plugin</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div id="page" class="sbo-epubcss">
  <div class="epub__section" title="Changing the compiler used by the Maven Compiler plugin">
    <div class="epub__titlepage">
      <div>
        <div>
          <h1><a id="ch04lvl1sec39"/>Changing the compiler used by the Maven Compiler plugin</h1>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    <p>Let us say we are running <a id="id224"/>Maven using JDK 7 but our project requires the sources to be compiled using JDK 8. Essentially, we want to use a JDK for compilation that is different from the JDK running Maven.</p>
    <p>In this case, we can specify the compiler we want to use to Maven.</p>
    <div class="epub__section" title="How to do it...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch04lvl2sec91"/>How to do it...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>Use the following steps to change the compiler used by the Maven Compiler plugin:</p>
      <div class="epub__orderedlist">
        <ol class="epub__orderedlist epub__arabic">
          <li class="epub__listitem">Open the command prompt.</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Define a Maven property to store the location details for Java 8:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting">&lt;properties&gt;
    &lt;JAVA8.HOME&gt;C:/Program Files/Java/jdk1.8.0_20&lt;/JAVA8.HOME&gt;
&lt;/properties&gt;</pre></div><div class="epub__note" title="Note" style=""><div class="epub__inner"><h3><a id="note04"/>Note</h3><p>The portable way to do this would be to define this property in a <code class="epub__literal">profile</code> in the user's <code class="epub__literal">settings.xml</code> file. This is because the location of <code class="epub__literal">JAVA_HOME</code> may be different for different users based on their operating system or preferred installation location.</p></div></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Add the following plugin configuration to the Maven project:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting">    &lt;plugins&gt;
      &lt;plugin&gt;
        &lt;groupId&gt;org.apache.maven.plugins&lt;/groupId&gt;
        &lt;artifactId&gt;maven-compiler-plugin&lt;/artifactId&gt;
        &lt;version&gt;3.2&lt;/version&gt;
        &lt;configuration&gt;
          &lt;verbose&gt;true&lt;/verbose&gt;
          &lt;fork&gt;true&lt;/fork&gt;
          &lt;executable&gt;${JAVA8.HOME}/bin/javac&lt;/executable&gt;
          &lt;compilerVersion&gt;1.8&lt;/compilerVersion&gt;
        &lt;/configuration&gt;
      &lt;/plugin&gt;
    &lt;/plugins&gt;</pre></div><div class="epub__note" title="Note" style=""><div class="epub__inner"><h3><a id="note05"/>Note</h3><p>The <code class="epub__literal">fork</code> element needs to be set to <code class="epub__literal">true</code> for the preceding code to work. Maven will invoke the different java compiler in a separate thread and hence the need to fork. This is so that Maven can load a different JVM corresponding to a different JDK.</p></div></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Run the following command on a command prompt:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>mvn compile</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
        </ol>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="epub__section" title="How it works...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch04lvl2sec92"/>How it works...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>There would no visible<a id="id225"/> difference in the way the compilation happens, except that now, the compiler specified in the <code class="epub__literal">executable</code> element will get invoked.</p>
    </div>
    <div class="epub__section" title="See also">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch04lvl2sec93"/>See also</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <div class="epub__itemizedlist">
        <ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc">The <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Specifying the Java version for the Compiler plugin</em></span> recipe in this chapter</li>
        </ul>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>


</body>
</html>
