<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Using the Maven Resources plugin</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div id="page" class="sbo-epubcss">
  <div class="epub__section" title="Using the Maven Resources plugin">
    <div class="epub__titlepage">
      <div>
        <div>
          <h1><a id="ch04lvl1sec43"/>Using the Maven Resources plugin</h1>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    <p>The Resources <a id="id248"/>plugin comes into picture to copy project resources to the output directory. The resources can be for the project to run or for the purpose of testing.</p>
    <div class="epub__section" title="How to do it...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch04lvl2sec102"/>How to do it...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>Let's start using the Maven <a id="id249"/>Resources plugin by performing the following steps:</p>
      <div class="epub__orderedlist">
        <ol class="epub__orderedlist epub__arabic">
          <li class="epub__listitem">Open the command prompt.</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Run the following command on the simple project that we created earlier:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>mvn process-resources</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Observe what happens:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] --- maven-resources-plugin:2.5:resources (default-resources) @ simple-project ---</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] skip non existing resourceDirectory C:\projects\apache-maven-cookbook\simple-project\src\main\resources</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
        </ol>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="epub__section" title="How it works...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch04lvl2sec103"/>How it works...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>When we specify the <code class="epub__literal">process-resources</code> phase, Maven executes the <code class="epub__literal">resources</code> goal of <code class="epub__literal">maven-resources-plugin</code>, which is bound to the <code class="epub__literal">process-resources</code> lifecycle phase.</p>
      <p>In the earlier project, there are no resources and hence, resources are not copied.</p>
      <p>If you add a file in <code class="epub__literal">src\main\resources</code> (as in the case of the <code class="epub__literal">project-with-resources</code> project), you will see the following output:</p>
      <div class="epub__informalexample">
        <pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] --- maven-resources-plugin:2.5:resources (default-resources) @ project-with-properties ---</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] Copying 1 resource</strong></span>
</pre>
      </div>
      <p>You could also explicitly invoke the plugin's goal as follows:</p>
      <div class="epub__informalexample">
        <pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>mvn resources:resources</strong></span>
</pre>
      </div>
      <p>You could also invoke any phase following the <code class="epub__literal">process-resources</code> phase, which will trigger resource processing as well:</p>
      <div class="epub__informalexample">
        <pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>mvn compile</strong></span>
</pre>
      </div>
      <p>There is a separate goal to copy test resources to provide separation of the main and test resources. Like project resources, the test resource processing can be invoked in three ways, which are as follows:</p>
      <div class="epub__itemizedlist">
        <ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc">By specifying a<a id="id250"/> phase that will automatically invoke phases before it:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>mvn process-test-resources</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc">By explicitly stating the plugin's goal:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>mvn resources:testResources</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc">By a phase following <code class="epub__literal">process-test-resources</code>:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>mvn test</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
        </ul>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="epub__section" title="There's more...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch04lvl2sec104"/>There's more...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>What if we had resources in additional folders? The Maven Resources plugin allows us to configure these additional folders.</p>
      <p>Let's say we have an additional resources folder, namely <code class="epub__literal">src/main/additional</code>. We can configure the <code class="epub__literal">pom.xml</code> file as follows:</p>
      <div class="epub__informalexample">
        <pre class="epub__programlisting">&lt;build&gt;
   &lt;resources&gt;
     &lt;resource&gt;
         &lt;directory&gt;src/main/resources&lt;/directory&gt;
     &lt;/resource&gt;
     &lt;resource&gt;
         &lt;directory&gt;src/main/additional&lt;/directory&gt;
     &lt;/resource&gt;
   &lt;/resources&gt;
   &lt;/build&gt;</pre>
      </div>
      <p>Now, run the following command:</p>
      <div class="epub__informalexample">
        <pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>mvn process-resources</strong></span>
</pre>
      </div>
      <p>Observe the output:</p>
      <div class="epub__informalexample">
        <pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] --- maven-resources-plugin:2.5:resources (default-resources) @ project-with-additional-resources ---</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] Copying 1 resource</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] Copying 1 resource</strong></span>
</pre>
      </div>
      <p>The line <code class="epub__literal">Copying 1 resource</code> repeats twice, indicating the copying happening from two folders.</p>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>


</body>
</html>
