<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Choosing the scope of dependency</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div id="page" class="sbo-epubcss">
  <div class="epub__section" title="Choosing the scope of dependency">
    <div class="epub__titlepage">
      <div>
        <div>
          <h1><a id="ch05lvl1sec49"/>Choosing the scope of dependency</h1>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    <p>We may use a dependency <a id="id269"/>for many reasons. Some of them may be required to compile and run the projects. There might be others only to run tests (for instance, <code class="epub__literal">junit</code>). Then there may be dependencies that are required at runtime, say <code class="epub__literal">logback</code>.</p>
    <div class="epub__section" title="How to do it...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch05lvl2sec114"/>How to do it...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>Use the following steps to choose the scope of the dependency:</p>
      <div class="epub__orderedlist">
        <ol class="epub__orderedlist epub__arabic">
          <li class="epub__listitem">Open the Maven project we had created earlier.</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Observe the following section:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting">&lt;dependencies&gt;
    &lt;dependency&gt;
      &lt;groupId&gt;junit&lt;/groupId&gt;
      &lt;artifactId&gt;junit&lt;/artifactId&gt;
      &lt;version&gt;3.8.1&lt;/version&gt;
      &lt;scope&gt;test&lt;/scope&gt;
    &lt;/dependency&gt;</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Remove the preceding lines of code and run the following command:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>mvn compile</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Observe that it runs without any issues.</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Now, run the following command:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>mvn test</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Note the following error:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] Compiling 1 source file to C:\projects\apache-maven-cookbook\project-with</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>-dependencies\target\test-classes</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] -------------------------------------------------------------</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[ERROR] COMPILATION ERROR:</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] -------------------------------------------------------------</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[ERROR] /C:/projects/apache-maven-cookbook/project-with-dependencies/src/test/java/com/packt/cookbook/AppTest.java:[3,23] package junit.framework does not exist</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
        </ol>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="epub__section" title="How it works...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch05lvl2sec115"/>How it works...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>The Java source code <code class="epub__literal">App.java</code> did not have any dependency. Only the source classes were compiled by <code class="epub__literal">mvn</code> and thus, the command ran without any error.</p>
      <p>The test <a id="id270"/>code <code class="epub__literal">AppTest.java</code> required the <code class="epub__literal">junit</code> library to build. This is declared in the import statement in the code. The <code class="epub__literal">mvn</code> test tried to compile the test classes, and as it did not find the dependency, it failed.</p>
      <p>The following information needs to be specified to declare a dependency:</p>
      <div class="epub__informalexample">
        <pre class="epub__programlisting">      &lt;groupId&gt;junit&lt;/groupId&gt;
      &lt;artifactId&gt;junit&lt;/artifactId&gt;
      &lt;version&gt;3.8.1&lt;/version&gt;</pre>
      </div>
      <p>The preceding three elements uniquely identify the dependency.</p>
      <p>The fourth piece of information is as follows:</p>
      <div class="epub__informalexample">
        <pre class="epub__programlisting">&lt;scope&gt;test&lt;/scope&gt;</pre>
      </div>
      <p>By default, the <code class="epub__literal">scope</code> is <code class="epub__literal">compile</code>.</p>
      <p>There are six different dependency scopes available:</p>
      <div class="epub__itemizedlist">
        <ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc"><code class="epub__literal">compile</code>: This <a id="id271"/>dependency is required for compilation. This automatically means it is required for testing as well as runtime (when the project is run).</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc"><code class="epub__literal">test</code>: This <a id="id272"/>dependency is only required for tests. This means the dependency is typically in the test code. As the test code is not used to run the project, these dependencies are not required for runtime.</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc"><code class="epub__literal">runtime</code>: These<a id="id273"/> dependencies are not required during compilation, but only required to run the project. One example would be the <code class="epub__literal">logback</code> dependency if you are using <span class="epub__strong"><strong>Simple Logging Facade for Java</strong></span> (<span class="epub__strong"><strong>slf4j</strong></span>) <a id="id274"/>to log and want to use <code class="epub__literal">logback</code> binding.</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc"><code class="epub__literal">provided</code>: This <a id="id275"/>tells Maven that dependency is required for compilation and runtime, but this dependency need not be packaged with the package for distribution. The dependency will be provided by the user. An example of this dependency is <code class="epub__literal">servlet-api</code>. Typically, application servers have these libraries.</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc"><code class="epub__literal">system</code>: This is <a id="id276"/>similar to the provided scope. Here, we need to explicitly provide the location of the JAR file. It is not looked up from the repository. This may be useful to specify a dependency that is not present in the repository:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting">  &lt;dependency&gt;
      &lt;groupId&gt;com.myorg&lt;/groupId&gt;
      &lt;artifactId&gt;some-jar&lt;/artifactId&gt;
      &lt;version&gt;2.0&lt;/version&gt;
      &lt;scope&gt;system&lt;/scope&gt;
      &lt;systemPath&gt;${basedir}/lib/some.jar&lt;/systemPath&gt;
    &lt;/dependency&gt;</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc"><code class="epub__literal">import</code>: This is<a id="id277"/> only used on a dependency of the <code class="epub__literal">pom</code> type in the <code class="epub__literal">dependencyManagement</code> section. It indicates that <a id="id278"/>the specified pom should be replaced with the dependencies in that pom's <code class="epub__literal">dependencyManagement</code> section. This is intended to centralize dependencies of large multi-module projects.</li>
        </ul>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="epub__section" title="See also">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch05lvl2sec116"/>See also</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <div class="epub__itemizedlist">
        <ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc">The <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Manually installing dependencies that are not available in a repository</em></span> recipe in this chapter</li>
        </ul>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>


</body>
</html>
