<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Understanding SNAPSHOT dependencies</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div id="page" class="sbo-epubcss">
  <div class="epub__section" title="Understanding SNAPSHOT dependencies">
    <div class="epub__titlepage">
      <div>
        <div>
          <h1><a id="ch05lvl1sec53"/>Understanding SNAPSHOT dependencies</h1>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    <p>In Maven, a <code class="epub__literal">SNAPSHOT</code> version<a id="id292"/> is a version of the project/dependency that has not been released. This is indicated by suffixing <code class="epub__literal">SNAPSHOT</code> to the version number. Here's an example:</p>
    <div class="epub__informalexample">
      <pre class="epub__programlisting">&lt;version&gt;1.0-SNAPSHOT&lt;/version&gt;</pre>
    </div>
    <p>You will notice that the project we created using the Maven archetype quickstart had a <code class="epub__literal">SNAPSHOT</code> version.</p>
    <p>The version number specified before <code class="epub__literal">-SNAPSHOT</code> is the version that the released project/dependency is expected to have. So, <code class="epub__literal">1.0-SNAPSHOT</code> indicates <code class="epub__literal">1.0</code> is not released yet.</p>
    <p>As the <code class="epub__literal">SNAPSHOT</code> version indicates software under development, Maven deals with these dependencies differently.</p>
    <div class="epub__section" title="How to do it...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch05lvl2sec128"/>How to do it...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>One would rarely use the<a id="id293"/> <code class="epub__literal">SNAPSHOT</code> version of an external dependency. If you are developing a multi-module project in your organization, chances are you will use <code class="epub__literal">SNAPSHOT</code> versions of other modules required in your project.</p>
      <p>Let us try the following contrived example:</p>
      <div class="epub__orderedlist">
        <ol class="epub__orderedlist epub__arabic">
          <li class="epub__listitem">Open one of the projects that we have created.</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Add the following dependency:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting">&lt;dependency&gt;
    &lt;groupId&gt;org.springframework&lt;/groupId&gt;
    &lt;artifactId&gt;spring-context&lt;/artifactId&gt;
    &lt;version&gt;4.1.0.BUILD-SNAPSHOT&lt;/version&gt;
&lt;/dependency&gt;</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Add the following code to specify the repository where the dependency is available:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting">&lt;repositories&gt;
    &lt;repository&gt;
        &lt;id&gt;repository.spring.snapshot&lt;/id&gt;
        &lt;name&gt;Spring Snapshot Repository&lt;/name&gt;
        &lt;url&gt;http://repo.spring.io/snapshot&lt;/url&gt;
    &lt;/repository&gt;
&lt;/repositories&gt;</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Run the following command:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\projects\apache-maven-cookbook\project-with-snapshot-dependencies&gt;mvn verify</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Observe the following results:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] Scanning for projects...</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO]</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] ------------------------------------------------------------------------</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] Building Project with SNAPSHOT dependencies 1.0-SNAPSHOT</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] ------------------------------------------------------------------------</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>Downloading:http://repo.spring.io/snapshot/org/springframework/spring-context/4.1.2.BUILD-SNAPSHOT/maven-metadata.xml</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>Downloaded:http://repo.spring.io/snapshot/org/springframework/spring-context/4.1.2.BUILD-SNAPSHOT/maven-metadata.xml (3 KB at 1.7 KB/sec)</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>Downloading:http://repo.spring.io/snapshot/org/springframework/spring-context/4.1.2.BUILD-SNAPSHOT/spring-context-4.1.2.BUILD-20141107.161556-92.pom</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>Downloaded:http://repo.spring.io/snapshot/org/springframework/spring-context/4.1.2.BUILD-SNAPSHOT/spring-context-4.1.2.BUILD-20141107.161556-92.pom (5 KB at 6.8 KB/sec)</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
        </ol>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="epub__section" title="How it works...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch05lvl2sec129"/>How it works...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>The first thing you <a id="id294"/>would have seen is the need to define a specific repository to download the dependencies. These dependencies are not available in the usual repositories. They reside separately in repositories called<a id="id295"/> <span class="epub__strong"><strong>snapshot repositories</strong></span>. In the preceding example, we specified the snapshot repository where the desired dependencies were available.</p>
      <p>The second thing you would notice are the filenames. Each artifact that is being downloaded is appended with <code class="epub__literal">20141107.161556-92</code>. This is a unique identifier for each <code class="epub__literal">SNAPSHOT</code> version in the repository. This value changes each time a new <code class="epub__literal">SNAPSHOT</code> version is available in the repository.</p>
      <p>Maven treats <code class="epub__literal">SNAPSHOT</code> versions differently from release versions.</p>
      <p>For a release version, Maven checks if the artifact is available in the local repository that is already downloaded. If so, it does not attempt to fetch the same from the remote repositories.</p>
      <p>For <code class="epub__literal">SNAPSHOT</code> versions, even if the artifact is available locally, it checks the <code class="epub__literal">SNAPSHOT</code> version for updates in the remote repository based on the update policy that can be configured.</p>
      <p>By default, the update interval is once a day. This means, if Maven downloads a <code class="epub__literal">SNAPSHOT</code> dependency at noon today, it will check for an update to it at noon tomorrow and not before that, irrespective of how many times you build the project.</p>
      <p>The update interval can be specified in the repository section of the pom or settings file as follows:</p>
      <div class="epub__informalexample">
        <pre class="epub__programlisting">&lt;updatePolicy&gt;always&lt;updatePolicy&gt;</pre>
      </div>
      <p>The choices<a id="id296"/> are <code class="epub__literal">always</code>, <code class="epub__literal">daily</code> (default), <code class="epub__literal">interval:X</code> (where <code class="epub__literal">X</code> is an integer in minutes), or <code class="epub__literal">never</code>. Let's discuss in brief about these choices:</p>
      <div class="epub__itemizedlist">
        <ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc"><code class="epub__literal">always</code>: This checks for updates for every Maven run.</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc"><code class="epub__literal">daily</code>: This checks for updates once a day. This does not necessarily mean exactly 24 hours from the last check; just once a day at the start of the day.</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc"><code class="epub__literal">interval:X</code>: This checks for updates after a specified time.<div class="epub__note" title="Note" style=""><div class="epub__inner"><h3><a id="tip09"/>Tip</h3><p>In a multi-module project, it is good to set the <code class="epub__literal">updatePolicy</code> element value to <code class="epub__literal">always</code> for intermodule dependencies.</p></div></div></li>
        </ul>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="epub__section" title="There's more...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch05lvl2sec130"/>There's more...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>As mentioned earlier, there are separate repositories<a id="id297"/> for release and <a id="id298"/>snapshot versions. By default, snapshots are disabled for a release repository and vice versa. The <code class="epub__literal">repository</code> element has separate <code class="epub__literal">releases</code> and <code class="epub__literal">snapshots</code> sub-elements where this can be specified:</p>
      <div class="epub__informalexample">
        <pre class="epub__programlisting">       &lt;repository&gt;
          &lt;id&gt;my-repo&lt;/id&gt;
          &lt;name&gt;My Release Repo&lt;/name&gt;
          &lt;releases&gt;
            &lt;enabled&gt;true&lt;/enabled&gt;
            &lt;updatePolicy&gt;never&lt;/updatePolicy&gt;
            &lt;checksumPolicy&gt;fail&lt;/checksumPolicy&gt;
          &lt;/releases&gt;
          &lt;snapshots&gt;
            &lt;enabled&gt;false&lt;/enabled&gt;
            &lt;updatePolicy&gt;always&lt;/updatePolicy&gt;
            &lt;checksumPolicy&gt;fail&lt;/checksumPolicy&gt;
          &lt;/snapshots&gt;
          &lt;url&gt;http://my.repo.url&lt;/url&gt;
          &lt;layout&gt;default&lt;/layout&gt;
        &lt;/repository&gt;</pre>
      </div>
      <p>Typically, for a release repository, <code class="epub__literal">enabled</code> will be <code class="epub__literal">false</code> for <code class="epub__literal">snapshots</code>. For a snapshot repository, <code class="epub__literal">enabled</code> will be <code class="epub__literal">true</code> for <code class="epub__literal">snapshots</code> and <code class="epub__literal">false</code> for <code class="epub__literal">releases</code>. This is so that Maven looks at the right repository for the right artifacts and does not unnecessarily look at the wrong repositories each time it needs a dependency.</p>
      <p>The <code class="epub__literal">checksumPolicy</code> element <a id="id299"/>tells Maven what to do in case the checksum of the downloaded dependency does not match the actual checksum. The value of <code class="epub__literal">fail</code> will stop the build with a checksum error.</p>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>


</body>
</html>
