<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Handling dependency download errors</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div id="page" class="sbo-epubcss">
  <div class="epub__section" title="Handling dependency download errors">
    <div class="epub__titlepage">
      <div>
        <div>
          <h1><a id="ch05lvl1sec54"/>Handling dependency download errors</h1>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    <p>There could be situations when a <a id="id300"/>dependency might not be downloaded due to network problems or other issues. Sometimes, the error reported by Maven might not indicate the problem. It is good to know how to get around this problem.</p>
    <div class="epub__section" title="How to do it...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch05lvl2sec131"/>How to do it...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>It is difficult to simulate this problem in a normal scenario, but we can create a contrived scenario, by using the following steps:</p>
      <div class="epub__orderedlist">
        <ol class="epub__orderedlist epub__arabic">
          <li class="epub__listitem">Modify the dependency version for JUnit in our simple project:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting">&lt;version&gt;3.9.1 &lt;/version&gt;</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Run the following command:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>mvn verify</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">This will attempt to download the dependency and fail (as the version is invalid):<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] Building simple-project 1.0-SNAPSHOT</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] ------------------------------------------------------------------------</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>Downloading:https://repo.maven.apache.org/maven2/junit/junit/3.9.1/junit-3.9.1.pom</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[WARNING] The POM for junit:junit:jar:3.9.1 is missing, no dependency information available</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>Downloading:https://repo.maven.apache.org/maven2/junit/junit/3.9.1/junit-3.9.1.jar</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] ------------------------------------------------------------------------</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] BUILD FAILURE</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] ------------------------------------------------------------------------</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] Total time: 3.329 s</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] Finished at: 2014-11-08T15:59:33+05:30</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] Final Memory: 7M/154M</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] ------------------------------------------------------------------------</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[ERROR] Failed to execute goal on project simple-project: Could not resolve dependencies for project com.packt.cookbook:simple-project:jar:1.0-SNAPSHOT: Could not find artifact junit:junit:jar:3.9.1 in central (https://repo.maven.apache.org/maven2) -&gt; [Help 1]</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Run the <a id="id301"/>command again and observe the results:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>[ERROR] Failed to execute goal on project simple-project: Could not resolve dependencies for project com.packt.cookbook:simple-project:jar:1.0-SNAPSHOT: Failure to find junit:junit:jar:3.9.1 in https://repo.maven.apache.org/maven2 was cached in the local repository, resolution will not be reattempted until the update interval of central has elapsed or updates are forced -&gt; [Help 1]</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Delete the folder <code class="epub__literal">3.9.1</code> (or the files in the folder ending with <code class="epub__literal">.lastUpdated</code>) in the local repo (<code class="epub__literal">.m2/repository/junit/junit/3.9.1</code>) and retry.<p>The <code class="epub__literal">resolution will not be attempted</code> error will go away and Maven will attempt to download the dependency again</p></li>
        </ol>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="epub__section" title="How it works...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch05lvl2sec132"/>How it works...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>Maven first downloads the pom file of the dependency. It analyzes the pom file and recursively downloads the transitive dependencies specified there. It then downloads the actual dependency file, typically, a JAR file.</p>
      <p>When Maven fails to download an artifact, it creates a file with the same name as the artifact it failed to download, but suffixed with <code class="epub__literal">.lastUpdated</code>. In the file, it puts information related to the download, as shown in the following example:</p>
      <div class="epub__informalexample">
        <pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__literal">#NOTE: This is an Aether internal implementation file, its format can be changed without prior notice.</code>
<code class="epub__literal">#Sat Nov 08 15:59:33 IST 2014</code>
<code class="epub__literal">https\://repo.maven.apache.org/maven2/.lastUpdated=1415442573938</code>
<code class="epub__literal">https\://repo.maven.apache.org/maven2/.error=</code>
</pre>
      </div>
      <p>When a request is made to Maven to download the dependency again, maven refers to the contents of this file to decide whether or not maven should reattempt. This is the case for release dependencies. The deletion of this file will ensure maven reattempts to download the dependency when asked.</p>
      <p>We have seen how this works for SNAPSHOT dependencies in the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Understanding the SNAPSHOT dependencies</em></span> recipe of this chapter.</p>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>


</body>
</html>
