<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Manually installing dependencies that are not available in a repository</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div id="page" class="sbo-epubcss">
  <div class="epub__section" title="Manually installing dependencies that are not available in a repository">
    <div class="epub__titlepage">
      <div>
        <div>
          <h1><a id="ch05lvl1sec56"/>Manually installing dependencies that are not available in a repository</h1>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    <p>There may be situations <a id="id304"/>where a library, which is not present in any Maven repository, needs to be used. We have seen one way to use it, that is, specifying it as a dependency with <code class="epub__literal">system</code> scope and explicitly specifying the path to it.</p>
    <p>The problem with this approach is that this dependency will not be available if you need to distribute your project as a library.</p>
    <p>Maven provides a mechanism to install an artifact to your local repository so that you can declare and use it like other dependencies.</p>
    <div class="epub__section" title="How to do it...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch05lvl2sec135"/>How to do it...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>Use the following steps to manually install the dependencies that aren't available in a repository:</p>
      <div class="epub__orderedlist">
        <ol class="epub__orderedlist epub__arabic">
          <li class="epub__listitem">Add the following dependency to the simple project that we created earlier:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting">&lt;dependency&gt;
      &lt;groupId&gt;org.apache.tomcat&lt;/groupId&gt;
      &lt;artifactId&gt;apache-tomcat&lt;/artifactId&gt;
      &lt;version&gt;8.0.14&lt;/version&gt;
      &lt;type&gt;tar.gz&lt;/type&gt;
      &lt;/dependency&gt;</pre></div><p>The project will fail to compile with the error of a missing dependency</p></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Now run the following Maven command:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>C:\projects\apache-maven-cookbook\project-with-dependency-not-in-repo&gt;mvn install:install-file -DgroupId=org.apache.tomcat -DartifactId=apache-tomcat -Dversion=8.0.14 -Dpackaging=tar.gz -Dfile=C:\Users\raghu\Downloads\apache-tomcat-8.0.14.tar.gz -DgeneratePom=true</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Note the result:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] --- maven-install-plugin:2.4:install-file (default-cli) @ project-with-dependency-not-in-repo ---</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] Installing C:\Users\raghu\Downloads\apache-tomcat-8.0.14.tar.gz to C:\software\maven\org\apache\tomcat\apache-tomcat\8.0.14\apache-tomcat-8.0.14.tar.gz</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] Installing 
C:\Users\raghu\AppData\Local\Temp\mvninstall8295760271813162395.pom to C:\software\maven\org\apache\tomcat\apache-tomcat\8.0.14\apache-tomcat-8.0.14.pom</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
        </ol>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="epub__section" title="How it works...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch05lvl2sec136"/>How it works...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>The<a id="id305"/> <code class="epub__literal">install-file</code> goal <a id="id306"/>of the Maven Install plugin allows dependencies to be installed to the local repository. It takes <code class="epub__literal">groupId</code>, <code class="epub__literal">artifactId</code>, <code class="epub__literal">version</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">packaging</code> type as parameters so that it can place the dependency suitably in the repository as well as create a simple pom file for it.</p>
      <p>This method is not ideal in a project with multiple developers, as each developer needs to perform this step manually. One way to deal with this is to install this dependency in a repository manager that is used by the organization. As the developers will be using this repository manager as a <code class="epub__literal">mirror</code>, Maven will find the dependency from the <code class="epub__literal">mirror</code> and proceed.</p>
      <p>In such a case, we could use the <code class="epub__literal">deploy</code> goal of the Maven deploy plugin to install the artifact to the remote repository.</p>
      <p>Some remote repositories have access control. Maven allows access details to be specified in the <code class="epub__literal">server</code> element. It is best to specify this in <code class="epub__literal">settings.xml</code> as this file is specific to each user.</p>
    </div>
    <div class="epub__section" title="There's more...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch05lvl2sec137"/>There's more...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>Projects with dependencies that are installed by this method are again not distributable, as those using them will fail to find the dependencies.</p>
      <p>Where projects are expected to be distributed and included by others as dependencies, a different approach needs to be followed—the static <span class="epub__strong"><strong>in-project repository</strong></span><a id="id307"/> solution. Use the following steps to follow the in-project repository approach:</p>
      <div class="epub__orderedlist">
        <ol class="epub__orderedlist epub__arabic">
          <li class="epub__listitem">Create a repository inside your project by adding the following in your pom file:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting">&lt;repository&gt;
    &lt;id&gt;in-project-repo&lt;/id&gt;
    &lt;releases&gt;
        &lt;checksumPolicy&gt;ignore&lt;/checksumPolicy&gt;
    &lt;/releases&gt;
    &lt;url&gt;file://${project.basedir}/lib&lt;/url&gt;
&lt;/repository&gt;</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Use the following command to install the dependency to this repository:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>mvn install:install-file -DgroupId=org.apache.tomcat -DartifactId=apache-tomcat -Dversion=8.0.14 -Dpackaging=tar.gz -Dfile=C:\Users\raghu\Downloads\apache-tomcat-8.0.14.tar.gz -DgeneratePom=true -DlocalRepositoryPath=lib</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
        </ol>
      </div>
      <p>What have we achieved? Now, the dependency is packaged along with the source code in the <code class="epub__literal">lib</code> folder of our project and available for distribution. This is transparent to the user as they do not need to do anything special to access it.</p>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>


</body>
</html>
