<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Configuring Maven to search for plugins</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div id="page" class="sbo-epubcss">
  <div class="epub__section" title="Configuring Maven to search for plugins">
    <div class="epub__titlepage">
      <div>
        <div>
          <h1><a id="ch08lvl1sec80"/>Configuring Maven to search for plugins</h1>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    <p>You will recall that in the section on using the Maven JaCoCo plugin, to generate code coverage we had to explicitly specify the <code class="epub__literal">projectId</code> and <code class="epub__literal">artifactId</code> values of the plugin to it from the command line. However, for most other plugins, we specified the plugin name without additional information.</p>
    <p>We will see why we had to <a id="id454"/>do this and how to avoid it.</p>
    <div class="epub__section" title="How to do it...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch08lvl2sec198"/>How to do it...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <div class="epub__orderedlist">
        <ol class="epub__orderedlist epub__arabic">
          <li class="epub__listitem">Open the <code class="epub__literal">settings</code> file (specifically the <code class="epub__literal">settings.xml</code> file in your home directory).</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Add the following section:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting">&lt;pluginGroups&gt;
    &lt;pluginGroup&gt;org.jacoco&lt;/pluginGroup&gt;
&lt;/pluginGroups&gt;</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Run the following command on the same project for which you ran JaCoCo earlier:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>mvn clean jacoco:prepare-agent test jacoco:report</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Observe the output:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO]</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] --- jacoco-maven-plugin:0.7.2.201409121644:report (default-cli) @ project-with-tests ---</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] Analyzed bundle 'Project with Tests' with 1 classes</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
        </ol>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="epub__section" title="How it works...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch08lvl2sec199"/>How it works...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>There are two types <a id="id455"/>of Maven plugins, which are as follows:</p>
      <div class="epub__itemizedlist">
        <ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc">Plugins maintained by the Maven team itself (let us call them official plugins). These are in the default plugin groups <code class="epub__literal">org.apache.maven.plugins</code> and <code class="epub__literal">org.codehaus.mojo</code>.</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc">All other plugins (let's say third-party plugins).</li>
        </ul>
      </div>
      <p>All official plugins have the same <code class="epub__literal">groupId</code>, namely <code class="epub__literal">org.apache.maven.plugins</code>. They also have a convention for <code class="epub__literal">artifactId</code>: <code class="epub__literal">maven-${prefix}-plugin</code>, where <code class="epub__literal">prefix</code> stands for the plugin prefix, the short name to refer to the plugin.</p>
      <p>The prefix used to reference the plugin can be customized as well. The prefix can be specified directly through the <code class="epub__literal">goalPrefix</code> configuration parameter on the <code class="epub__literal">Maven-plugin-plugin</code> of the plugin's <code class="epub__literal">pom</code> file.</p>
      <p>So, when we run <code class="epub__literal">mvn clean</code>, Maven looks for the <code class="epub__literal">maven-clean-plugin</code> in the <code class="epub__literal">org.apache.maven.plugins</code> group.</p>
      <p>What about third-party plugins? <code class="epub__literal">pluginGroups</code> lets Maven know the <code class="epub__literal">groupId</code> where it should search for additional plugins. So in the earlier case, Maven searched for plugins in the <code class="epub__literal">org.jacoco</code> group.</p>
      <p>Third-party plugins should be named differently from official plugins. The conventional way to define the <code class="epub__literal">artifactId</code> for third-party plugins is <code class="epub__literal">${prefix}-maven-plugin</code>. When specified in this way, Maven automatically identifies the shortcut name for the plugin. In the earlier case, as the <code class="epub__literal">artifactId</code> is <code class="epub__literal">jacoco-maven-plugin</code>, the shortcut is <code class="epub__literal">jacoco</code>.</p>
    </div>
    <div class="epub__section" title="There's more...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch08lvl2sec200"/>There's more...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>Maven will always search specified <code class="epub__literal">pluginGroups</code> before it <a id="id456"/>searches the following default groups:</p>
      <div class="epub__itemizedlist">
        <ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc">
            <code class="epub__literal">org.apache.maven.plugins</code>
          </li>
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc">
            <code class="epub__literal">org.codehaus.mojo</code>
          </li>
        </ul>
      </div>
      <p>Maven takes the first match for the shortcut that it finds. For instance, if there is a <code class="epub__literal">clean</code> shortcut in a user-specified plugin in <code class="epub__literal">pluginGroups</code>, it will take precedence over a Maven Clean plugin.</p>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>


</body>
</html>
