<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Understanding project aggregation</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div id="page" class="sbo-epubcss">
  <div class="epub__section" title="Understanding project aggregation">
    <div class="epub__titlepage">
      <div>
        <div>
          <h1><a id="ch09lvl1sec88"/>Understanding project aggregation</h1>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    <p>A key difference between <a id="id488"/>inheritance and aggregation is that, aggregation is defined with a top-down approach, whereas inheritance is defined the other way around. In Maven, project aggregation is similar to project inheritance, except that the change is made in the parent pom instead of the child pom.</p>
    <p>Maven uses the term <span class="epub__strong"><strong>module</strong></span><a id="id489"/> to define a child or subproject, which is part of a larger project. An aggregate project can build all the modules together. Also, a Maven command run on the parent pom or the pom file of the aggregate project will also apply to all the modules that it contains.</p>
    <div class="epub__section" title="How to do it...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch09lvl2sec220"/>How to do it...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <div class="epub__orderedlist">
        <ol class="epub__orderedlist epub__arabic">
          <li class="epub__listitem">Open a project <a id="id490"/>that has aggregation; in our case <code class="epub__literal">project-with-aggregation</code>. This has a subfolder named <code class="epub__literal">aggregate-child</code>, which is the module that is aggregated by the parent project.</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Update the parent pom as follows:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting">    &lt;groupId&gt;com.packt.cookbook&lt;/groupId&gt;
    &lt;artifactId&gt;project-with-aggregation&lt;/artifactId&gt;
    &lt;packaging&gt;pom&lt;/packaging&gt;
    &lt;version&gt;1.0-SNAPSHOT&lt;/version&gt;</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Add the <code class="epub__literal">module</code> section and specify the child:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting">   &lt;modules&gt;
      &lt;module&gt;aggregate-child&lt;/module&gt;
   &lt;/module&gt;</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Run the following Maven command in the <code class="epub__literal">parent</code> folder:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>mvn clean package</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Observe the output:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>C:\projects\apache-maven-cookbook\project-with-aggregation&gt;mvn clean package</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] Scanning for projects...</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] ------------------------------------------------------------------------</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] Reactor Build Order:</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO]</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] Aggregate child Project</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] project-with-aggregation</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>…</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] ------------------------------------------------------------------------</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] Reactor Summary:</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO]</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] Child Project ...................................... SUCCESS [  2.866 s]</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] project-with-aggregation ........................... SUCCESS [  0.004 s]</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] ------------------------------------------------------------------------</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] BUILD SUCCESS</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] ------------------------------------------------------------------------</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
        </ol>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="epub__section" title="How it works...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch09lvl2sec221"/>How it works...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>We specified the <code class="epub__literal">child</code> project as<a id="id491"/> a module in the aggregator pom. The child project is a normal Maven project, which has no information about the fact that there exists an aggregator pom.</p>
      <p>When the aggregator project is built, it builds the child project in turn. You will notice the word <code class="epub__literal">Reactor</code> in the Maven output. Reactor is a part of Maven, which allows it to execute a goal on a set of modules. While modules are discrete units of work; they can be gathered together using the reactor to build them simultaneously. The reactor determines the correct build order from the dependencies stated by each module.</p>
    </div>
    <div class="epub__section" title="There's more...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch09lvl2sec222"/>There's more...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>As in the case of inheritance, what the module is, is not a subfolder of the aggregator project, but a sibling.</p>
      <div class="epub__orderedlist">
        <ol class="epub__orderedlist epub__arabic">
          <li class="epub__listitem">Update the <code class="epub__literal">module</code> section as follows:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting">  &lt;modules&gt;
      &lt;module&gt;../aggregate-child&lt;/module&gt;
   &lt;/module&gt;
 </pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Build the aggregator project:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>mvn clean package</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
        </ol>
      </div>
      <p>Maven now determines the location of the module by virtue of the path specified, which indicates the folder where the parent pom is located. By convention, the module name is expected to be identical to the folder name.</p>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>


</body>
</html>
