<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Combining inheritance and aggregation</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div id="page" class="sbo-epubcss">
  <div class="epub__section" title="Combining inheritance and aggregation">
    <div class="epub__titlepage">
      <div>
        <div>
          <h1><a id="ch09lvl1sec89"/>Combining inheritance and aggregation</h1>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    <p>By using the project<a id="id492"/> inheritance feature of <a id="id493"/>Maven, we can share common build attributes such as <code class="epub__literal">properties</code> and <code class="epub__literal">dependencies</code> across all children. We can also aggregate modules and build them together.</p>
    <p>When project inheritance is used, the parent is not aware of the child. In the case of project aggregation, each module is not aware of the aggregation.</p>
    <p>We will now see how to combine and get the benefits of both.</p>
    <div class="epub__section" title="How to do it...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch09lvl2sec223"/>How to do it...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <div class="epub__orderedlist">
        <ol class="epub__orderedlist epub__arabic">
          <li class="epub__listitem">Open <a id="id494"/>a multi-module<a id="id495"/> project; in our case, <code class="epub__literal">simple-multi-module</code>. This has a subfolder <code class="epub__literal">child</code>, which is the module that is aggregated by the parent project.</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Update the parent pom as follows:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting">    &lt;groupId&gt;com.packt.cookbook&lt;/groupId&gt;
    &lt;artifactId&gt;simple-multi-module&lt;/artifactId&gt;
    &lt;packaging&gt;pom&lt;/packaging&gt;
    &lt;version&gt;1.0-SNAPSHOT&lt;/version&gt;</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Add the <code class="epub__literal">module</code> section and specify the child:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting">   &lt;modules&gt;
      &lt;module&gt;child&lt;/module&gt;</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem"> Update the child pom to specify the <code class="epub__literal">parent</code> element:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting">    &lt;parent&gt;
      &lt;groupId&gt;com.packt.cookbook&lt;/groupId&gt;
      &lt;artifactId&gt;simple-multi-module&lt;/artifactId&gt;
      &lt;version&gt;1.0-SNAPSHOT&lt;/version&gt;
     &lt;/parent&gt;</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Run the following Maven command in the parent folder:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>mvn clean package</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Observe the output:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] Reactor Summary:</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO]</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] simple-multi-module ................................ SUCCESS [  0.162 s]</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] Child Project ...................................... SUCCESS [  2.411 s]</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
        </ol>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="epub__section" title="How it works...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch09lvl2sec224"/>How it works...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>We have <a id="id496"/>specified the <code class="epub__literal">parent</code> <a id="id497"/>element in the <code class="epub__literal">child</code> pom to indicate who the parent is. We have also specified the <code class="epub__literal">child</code> project as a module in the parent pom. Thus, both the relationships—inheritance and aggregation—are defined.</p>
      <p>When we build the parent project, it automatically builds the child by virtue of the <code class="epub__literal">modules</code> element. At the same time, the child project can be built independently as well.</p>
    </div>
    <div class="epub__section" title="There's more...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch09lvl2sec225"/>There's more...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>The child project need not necessarily be a subfolder of the parent project. If it is elsewhere, as we have seen in the earlier recipes, it can be one of the following:</p>
      <div class="epub__itemizedlist">
        <ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc"><code class="epub__literal">relativePath</code>: <code class="epub__literal">relativePath</code> of the <a id="id498"/>parent element should point to the appropriate location of the parent</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc"><code class="epub__literal">module</code>: The <code class="epub__literal">module</code> element<a id="id499"/> should contain the appropriate path to the child project</li>
        </ul>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>


</body>
</html>
