<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Performing multi-module dependency management</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div id="page" class="sbo-epubcss">
  <div class="epub__section" title="Performing multi-module dependency management">
    <div class="epub__titlepage">
      <div>
        <div>
          <h1><a id="ch09lvl1sec90"/>Performing multi-module dependency management</h1>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    <p>Dependency management<a id="id500"/> is a mechanism to centralize dependency information. When there are a set of projects (or modules) that inherit a common parent, all information about the dependency can be put in the parent pom and the projects can have simpler references to them. This makes it easy to maintain the dependencies across multiple projects and reduces the<a id="id501"/> issues that typically arise due to multiple versions of the same dependencies.</p>
    <div class="epub__section" title="How to do it...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch09lvl2sec226"/>How to do it...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <div class="epub__orderedlist">
        <ol class="epub__orderedlist epub__arabic">
          <li class="epub__listitem">Open a multi-module project (<code class="epub__literal">simple-multi-module</code>).</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Add a dependency for <code class="epub__literal">junit</code> in the <code class="epub__literal">dependencyManagement</code> section:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting">&lt;dependencyManagement&gt;
    &lt;dependencies&gt;
      &lt;dependency&gt;
        &lt;groupId&gt;junit&lt;/groupId&gt;
        &lt;artifactId&gt;junit&lt;/artifactId&gt;
        &lt;version&gt;3.8.1&lt;/version&gt;
        &lt;scope&gt;test&lt;/scope&gt;
      &lt;/dependency&gt;
    &lt;/dependencies&gt;
&lt;/dependencyManagement&gt;</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Update the <code class="epub__literal">dependencies</code> section of the child project as follows:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting">&lt;dependencies&gt;
     &lt;dependency&gt;
       &lt;groupId&gt;junit&lt;/groupId&gt;
       &lt;artifactId&gt;junit&lt;/artifactId&gt;
     &lt;/dependency&gt;
&lt;/dependencies&gt;</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Run the following command:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>mvn clean test</strong></span>
</pre></div><p>Ensure<a id="id502"/> that the build completes successfully.</p></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Run the Maven command to check the dependency:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>mvn dependency:tree</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Observe the results:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] --- maven-dependency-plugin:2.8:tree (default-cli) @ simple-multi-module</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>---</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] com.packt.cookbook:simple-multi-module:pom:1.0-SNAPSHOT</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO]</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] ------------------------------------------------------------------------</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] Building Child Project 1.0-SNAPSHOT</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] ------------------------------------------------------------------------</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO]</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] --- maven-dependency-plugin:2.8:tree (default-cli) @ child ---</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] com.packt.cookbook:child:jar:1.0-SNAPSHOT</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] \- junit:junit:jar:3.8.1:test</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
        </ol>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="epub__section" title="How it works...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch09lvl2sec227"/>How it works...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>Dependencies that are specified within the <code class="epub__literal">dependencyManagement</code> section of the parent pom are available for use to all the child projects. The child project needs to choose the dependencies by explicitly specifying the required dependencies in the <code class="epub__literal">dependencies</code> section. While doing this, the child projects can omit the <code class="epub__literal">version</code> and <code class="epub__literal">scope</code> information so that they are inherited from the parent.</p>
      <p>You may ask, "Why <a id="id503"/>have the <code class="epub__literal">dependencyManagement</code> section when child projects inherit dependencies defined in the parent pom anyway?" The reason is, the parent centralizes dependencies across several projects. A child project typically needs only some of the dependencies that the parent defines and not all of them. The <code class="epub__literal">dependencyManagement</code> section allows child projects to selectively choose these.</p>
    </div>
    <div class="epub__section" title="There's more...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch09lvl2sec228"/>There's more...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>The <code class="epub__literal">dependencyManagement</code> section also helps address any surprises of Maven's dependency mediation. Dependency mediation is what determines what version of dependency will be used when multiple versions of an artifact are encountered. However, <code class="epub__literal">dependencyManagement</code> takes precedence over dependency mediation and ensures that dependency mediation does not pick a version over the one specified in <code class="epub__literal">dependencyManagement</code>.</p>
      <p>It should be noted that dependencies on different versions are error prone and <code class="epub__literal">dependencyManagement</code> cannot always save them from library version incompatibilities.</p>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>


</body>
</html>
