<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Determining updates to Maven plugin AntRun</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div id="page" class="sbo-epubcss">
  <div class="epub__section" title="Determining updates to Maven plugin AntRun">
    <div class="epub__titlepage">
      <div>
        <div>
          <h1><a id="ch11lvl1sec108"/>Determining updates to Maven plugin AntRun</h1>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    <p>In our build scripts, we <a id="id575"/>explicitly specify the version of the Maven<a id="id576"/> plugins that we use. This is required in order to create reproducible builds. In the absence of the version, Maven gives a warning such as the following:</p>
    <div class="epub__informalexample">
      <pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>[WARNING] Some problems were encountered while building the effective model for</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>com.packt.cookbook:project-with-exec:jar:1.0-SNAPSHOT</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[WARNING] 'build.plugins.plugin.version' for org.codehaus.mojo:exec-maven-plugin is missing. @ line 42, column 17</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[WARNING]</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[WARNING] It is highly recommended to fix these problems because they threaten the stability of your build.</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[WARNING]</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[WARNING] For this reason, future Maven versions might no longer support building such malformed projects.</strong></span>
</pre>
    </div>
    <p>Over a period of time, there could be updates to these plugins. It would be good to know if there are any so that we can suitably update the plugin versions. Let us see how we can do this.</p>
    <div class="epub__section" title="How to do it...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch11lvl2sec274"/>How to do it...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <div class="epub__orderedlist">
        <ol class="epub__orderedlist epub__arabic">
          <li class="epub__listitem">Take a project for which you want to check the plugin update (<code class="epub__literal">project-with-exec</code>).</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Change the version of the plugin to an older one:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting">  &lt;artifactId&gt;exec-maven-plugin&lt;/artifactId&gt;
   &lt;version&gt;1.2&lt;/version&gt;&gt;</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Run the<a id="id577"/> following<a id="id578"/> command:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>mvn versions:display-plugin-updates</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Observe the output:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] --- versions-maven-plugin:2.0:display-plugin-updates (default-cli) @ proj</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>ect-with-exec ---</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO]</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] All plugins with a version specified are using the latest versions.</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>...</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[WARNING] The following plugins do not have their version specified:</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[WARNING]   maven-clean-plugin .......................... (from super-pom) 2.5</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[WARNING]   maven-compiler-plugin ....................... (from super-pom) 3.1</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>...</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[WARNING] Project does not define minimum Maven version, default is: 2.0</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] Plugins require minimum Maven version of: 2.2.1</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>...</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[ERROR] Project does not define required minimum version of Maven.</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[ERROR] Update the pom.xml to contain</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[ERROR]     &lt;prerequisites&gt;</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[ERROR]       &lt;maven&gt;2.2.1&lt;/maven&gt;</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[ERROR]     &lt;/prerequisites&gt;</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>...</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] Require Maven 2.2.1 to use the following plugin updates:</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO]   maven-jar-plugin ................................................ 2.5</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO]   maven-site-plugin ............................................... 3.2</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO]   org.codehaus.mojo:exec-maven-plugin ........................... 1.3.2</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
        </ol>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="epub__section" title="How it works...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch11lvl2sec275"/>How it works...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>The <code class="epub__literal">display-plugin-updates</code> goal<a id="id579"/> of the Maven Versions plugin downloads the metadata for all <a id="id580"/>the plugins specified in the pom file and then <a id="id581"/>produces a report. The report reveals a number of things that are of interest.</p>
      <div class="epub__itemizedlist">
        <ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc">A <code class="epub__literal">prerequisites</code> tag is absent. The <code class="epub__literal">prerequisites</code> tag in the pom file specifies the minimum version of Maven that is required to build the project. In the absence of this, Maven takes the minimum version as <code class="epub__literal">2.0</code>. There is a risk of nonreproducible builds if different developers use different versions of Maven. Hence, it is a good practice to specify a minimum version by using this tag.</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc">There is a warning about plugin versions not being defined. As we have seen, plugins in the pom file don't need to be specified explicitly unless they need to be configured. Now, Maven still uses various plugins for execution (such as clean, resources, compile, test, and so on) and it needs to determine the version to be used. It uses the version specified by the super pom, which is fine in most cases. However, the Versions plugin alerts us that this is the case, so we can take action as appropriate.</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc">There is a difference in plugin versions based on the Maven version. The report specifies different versions of various plugins based on the Maven version used. This is all the more reason why it is important to specify a prerequisite.</li>
        </ul>
      </div>
      <p>As the output indicates, if we specify that we need at least the <code class="epub__literal">2.2.1</code> version of Maven, then we can see that there is a newer version of the Maven Exec plugin, which is <code class="epub__literal">1.3.2</code>.</p>
    </div>
    <div class="epub__section" title="There's more...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch11lvl2sec276"/>There's more...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>Let us now specify the <code class="epub__literal">prerequisites</code> element in the pom file and see how it affects the output of the goal:</p>
      <div class="epub__orderedlist">
        <ol class="epub__orderedlist epub__arabic">
          <li class="epub__listitem">Add the following to the pom file:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting">  &lt;prerequisites&gt;
    &lt;maven&gt;3.2.5&lt;/maven&gt;
  &lt;/prerequisites&gt;</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Run the following command:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>mvn versions:display-plugin-updates</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Observe the output:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] --- versions-maven-plugin:2.0:display-plugin-updates (default-cli) @ project-with-exec ---</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>...</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO]</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] The following plugin updates are available:</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO]   org.codehaus.mojo:exec-maven-plugin .................... 1.2 -&gt; 1.3.2</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO]</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
        </ol>
      </div>
      <p>We now see that the<a id="id582"/> plugin reports a plugin update based on the <a id="id583"/>prerequisite that we specified.</p>
      <p>It is difficult to determine if there are updates to plugins that we do not explicitly define in the pom file. For instance, as per the output from the preceding command, which is as follows:</p>
      <div class="epub__informalexample">
        <pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>[WARNING] The following plugins do not have their version specified:</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[WARNING]   maven-clean-plugin .......................... (from super-pom) 2.5</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[WARNING]   maven-compiler-plugin ....................... (from super-pom) 3.1</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[WARNING]   maven-deploy-plugin ......................... (from super-pom) 2.7</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[WARNING]   maven-install-plugin ........................ (from super-pom) 2.4</strong></span>
</pre>
      </div>
      <p>However, as of writing this book, the latest version of the Maven Clean plugin is 2.6.1, that of the Maven Compiler plugin is 3.2, and so on. The version that the super pom has is the version that must have been the latest when it was created. The versions of these dependencies become important when bugs or newer features are present in the newer versions. In this case, we do want to get the newer version of these plugins. It is easy to get these by explicitly specifying the version of the plugins in the pom file.</p>
      <p>Add the following to the pom file:</p>
      <div class="epub__informalexample">
        <pre class="epub__programlisting">        &lt;plugin&gt;
          &lt;groupId&gt;org.apache.maven.plugins&lt;/groupId&gt;
          &lt;artifactId&gt;maven-clean-plugin&lt;/artifactId&gt;
          &lt;version&gt;2.5&lt;/version&gt;
        &lt;/plugin&gt;
        &lt;plugin&gt;
          &lt;groupId&gt;org.apache.maven.plugins&lt;/groupId&gt;
          &lt;artifactId&gt;maven-compiler-plugin&lt;/artifactId&gt;
          &lt;version&gt;3.1&lt;/version&gt;
        &lt;/plugin&gt;</pre>
      </div>
      <p>Now, re-run the <a id="id584"/>previous<a id="id585"/> command and note the output:</p>
      <div class="epub__informalexample">
        <pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] The following plugin updates are available:</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO]   maven-clean-plugin ..................................... 2.5 -&gt; 2.6.1</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO]   maven-compiler-plugin .................................... 3.1 -&gt; 3.2</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO]   org.codehaus.mojo:exec-maven-plugin .................... 1.2 -&gt; 1.3.2</strong></span>
</pre>
      </div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>


</body>
</html>
