<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Determining updates to Maven dependencies</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div id="page" class="sbo-epubcss">
  <div class="epub__section" title="Determining updates to Maven dependencies">
    <div class="epub__titlepage">
      <div>
        <div>
          <h1><a id="ch11lvl1sec109"/>Determining updates to Maven dependencies</h1>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    <p>We use a number of third-party<a id="id586"/> libraries to build our projects. As<a id="id587"/> you recall, we specify the <code class="epub__literal">groupId</code>, <code class="epub__literal">artifactId</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">version</code> elements of each of these dependant libraries in our pom file. There may be many occasions when there are updates to these libraries and new versions are released. It will be good to have a mechanism to get notified about these releases and update the project build file suitably.</p>
    <div class="epub__section" title="How to do it...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch11lvl2sec277"/>How to do it...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <div class="epub__orderedlist">
        <ol class="epub__orderedlist epub__arabic">
          <li class="epub__listitem">Take a project for which you want to check for a dependency update, <code class="epub__literal">simple-project</code>, which we had created using the quick-start archetype.</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Run the following command:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>mvn versions:display-dependency-updates</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Observe the output:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] --- versions-maven-plugin:2.1:display-dependency-updates (default-cli) @</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>simple-project ---</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] artifact junit:junit: checking for updates from central</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] The following dependencies in Dependencies have newer versions:</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO]   junit:junit ............................................ 3.8.1 -&gt; 4.12</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
        </ol>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="epub__section" title="How it works...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch11lvl2sec278"/>How it works...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>The <code class="epub__literal">display-dependency-updates</code> goal <a id="id588"/>of the Maven Versions plugin uses the metadata of each of the maven dependencies to determine the latest version of each dependency. If it does not match the current version, it displays a report about the difference.</p>
      <p>We have already seen <a id="id589"/>earlier that <code class="epub__literal">SNAPSHOT</code> versions are <a id="id590"/>handled differently by Maven, and it automatically checks and updates these dependencies for each build as per the configuration. If the version number of the <code class="epub__literal">SNAPSHOT</code> changes (<code class="epub__literal">1.0-SNAPSHOT</code> to <code class="epub__literal">1.1-SNAPSHOT</code>), then the Versions plugin indicates that.</p>
    </div>
    <div class="epub__section" title="There's more...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch11lvl2sec279"/>There's more...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>The Maven Versions plugin provides several other goals to manage updates to dependency and plugin versions. This includes automatically changing the versions to the latest release versions, replacing <code class="epub__literal">SNAPSHOT</code> with release versions, and so on.</p>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>


</body>
</html>
