<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Generating unique builds</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div id="page" class="sbo-epubcss">
  <div class="epub__section" title="Generating unique builds">
    <div class="epub__titlepage">
      <div>
        <div>
          <h1><a id="ch11lvl1sec111"/>Generating unique builds</h1>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    <p>As we have seen, we use<a id="id599"/> a <code class="epub__literal">SNAPSHOT</code> version to specify that the project is under development. In the course of development, we will create several builds for the project. In many situations, it will be useful to distinguish one such build from another. One could be when we use continuous integration. Another would be when a tester needs to log defects against a build.</p>
    <p>It would be nice if there was a way to generate a unique build number to identify a build in the case of <code class="epub__literal">SNAPSHOT</code> versions.</p>
    <div class="epub__section" title="How to do it...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch11lvl2sec283"/>How to do it...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <div class="epub__orderedlist">
        <ol class="epub__orderedlist epub__arabic">
          <li class="epub__listitem">Open the project for which you want to have a build number (<code class="epub__literal">project-with-build-number</code>).</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Add the following plugin configuration:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting">    &lt;plugin&gt;
        &lt;groupId&gt;org.codehaus.mojo&lt;/groupId&gt;
        &lt;artifactId&gt;buildnumber-maven-plugin&lt;/artifactId&gt;
        &lt;version&gt;1.3&lt;/version&gt;
        &lt;executions&gt;
          &lt;execution&gt;
            &lt;phase&gt;validate&lt;/phase&gt;
            &lt;goals&gt;
              &lt;goal&gt;create&lt;/goal&gt;
            &lt;/goals&gt;
          &lt;/execution&gt;
        &lt;/executions&gt;
        &lt;configuration&gt;
           &lt;shortRevisionLength&gt;5&lt;/shortRevisionLength&gt;
        &lt;/configuration&gt;
      &lt;/plugin&gt;</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Add the following to use the unique build number created:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting">&lt;finalName&gt;${project.artifactId}-${project.version}-r${buildNumber}&lt;/finalName&gt;</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Add the SCM configuration for the project:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting">&lt;scm&gt;
     &lt;developerConnection&gt;scm:git:https://bitbucket.org/maruhgar/apache-maven-cookbook&lt;/developerConnection&gt;
      &lt;url&gt;https://bitbucket.org/maruhgar/apache-maven-cookbook&lt;/url&gt;
  &lt;/scm&gt;</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Build the project:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>mvn clean package</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem">Observe the<a id="id600"/> output:<div class="epub__informalexample"><pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] --- buildnumber-maven-plugin:1.3:create (default) @ project-with-build-nu</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>mber ---</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] ShortRevision tag detected. The value is '5'.</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] Executing: cmd.exe /X /C "git rev-parse --verify --short=5 HEAD"</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] Working directory: C:\projects\apache-maven-cookbook\project-with-build-n</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>umber</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] Storing buildNumber: 0950d at timestamp: 1421244408851</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] Storing buildScmBranch: master</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>...</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] --- maven-jar-plugin:2.4:jar (default-jar) @ project-with-build-number --</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>-</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[INFO] Building jar: C:\projects\apache-maven-cookbook\project-with-build-number</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>\target\project-with-build-number-1.0-SNAPSHOT-r0950d.jar</strong></span>
</pre></div></li>
        </ol>
      </div>
    </div>
    <div class="epub__section" title="How it works...">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h2><a id="ch11lvl2sec284"/>How it works...</h2>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>The Maven Build Number plugin provides three ways to generate a unique number, namely by using SCM, a sequential build number, or a timestamp.</p>
      <p>In the preceding example, we used SCM as it is easy to map the build against the corresponding SCM version. We used <code class="epub__literal">git</code> and specified the SCM details in the SCM tag of the pom file.</p>
      <p>We also specified to the<a id="id601"/> Maven Build Number plugin to use five characters and create the short revision, as a typical git revision is a long hash value. We also configured the plugin to run during the validation phase of the lifecycle.</p>
      <p>We used the generated Build Number in the name of the generated artifact, by appending it along with the version number.</p>
      <p>Now, each time a new check-in is done and the build is completed, an artifact with a unique name is generated. Based on the requirement, each such artifact can be archived or traced to a corresponding source.</p>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>


</body>
</html>
