<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>1. Getting Started with C++</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h2 class="docChapterTitle" id="title-ID0EBDAE">1. Getting Started with C++</h2>
<p class="docText">In this chapter you’ll learn about the following:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">The history and philosophy of C and of C++</p></li><li><p class="docList">Procedural versus object-oriented programming</p></li><li><p class="docList">How C++ adds object-oriented concepts to the C language</p></li><li><p class="docList">How C++ adds generic programming concepts to the C language</p></li><li><p class="docList" style="display: block;">Programming language standards</p></li><li><p class="docList">The mechanics of creating a program</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">Welcome to C++! This 
exciting language, which blends the C language with support for 
object-oriented programming and for generic programming, became one of 
the most important programming languages of the 1990s and continues 
strongly in the 2000s. Its C ancestry brings to C++ the tradition of an 
efficient, compact, fast, and portable language. Its object-oriented 
heritage brings C++ a fresh programming methodology, designed to cope 
with the escalating complexity of modern programming tasks. Its template
 features bring yet another new programming methodology: generic 
programming. This triple heritage is both a blessing and a bane. It 
makes the language very powerful, but it also means there’s a lot to 
learn.</p>
<p class="docText">This chapter explores C++’s 
background further and then goes over some of the ground rules for 
creating C++ programs. The rest of the book teaches you to use the C++ 
language, going from the modest basics of the language to the glory of 
object-oriented programming (OOP) and its supporting cast of new 
jargon—objects, classes, encapsulation, data hiding, polymorphism, and 
inheritance—and then on to its support of generic programming. (Of 
course, as you learn C++, these terms will be transformed from buzzwords
 to the necessary vocabulary of cultivated discourse.)</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
