<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Learning C++: What Lies Before You</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Learning C++: What Lies Before You</h3>
<p class="docText">C++
 joins three separate programming categories: the procedural language, 
represented by C; the object-oriented language, represented by the class
 enhancements C++ adds to C; and generic programming, supported by C++ 
templates. This chapter looks into those traditions. But first, let’s 
consider what this heritage implies about learning C++. One reason to 
use C++ is to avail yourself of its object-oriented features. To do so, 
you need a sound background in standard C, for that language provides 
the basic types, operators, control structures, and syntax rules. So if 
you already know C, you’re poised to learn C++. But it’s not just a 
matter of learning a few more keywords and constructs. Going from C to 
C++ involves perhaps more work than learning C in the first place. Also 
if you know C, you must unlearn some programming habits as you make the 
transition to C++. If you don’t know C, you have to master the C 
components, the OOP components, and the generic components to learn C++,
 but at least you may not have to unlearn programming habits. If you are
 beginning to think that learning C++ may involve some mind-stretching 
effort on your part, you’re right. This book will guide you through the 
process in a clear, helpful manner, one step at a time, so the 
mind-stretching will be sufficiently gentle to leave your brain 
resilient.</p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">C++ Primer Plus</span>
 approaches C++ by teaching both its C basis and its new components, so 
it assumes that you have no prior knowledge of C. You’ll start by 
learning the features C++ shares with C. Even if you know C, you may 
find this part of the book a good review. Also it points out concepts 
that will become important later, and it indicates where C++ differs 
from C. After you have a good grounding in the basics of C, you’ll learn
 about the C++ superstructure. At that point, you’ll learn about objects
 and classes and how C++ implements them. And you will learn about 
templates.</p>
<p class="docText">This book is not intended to be a
 complete C++ reference; it doesn’t explore every nook and cranny of the
 language. But you will learn most of the major features of the 
language, including templates, exceptions, and namespaces.</p>
<p class="docText">Now let’s take a brief look at some of C++’s background.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
