<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Portability and Standards</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Portability and Standards</h3>
<p class="docText">Say you’ve written a handy C++ 
program for the elderly Pentium PC computer running Windows 2000 at 
work, but management decides to replace the machine with a new computer 
using a different operating system, say Mac OS X or Linux, perhaps one 
with a different processor design, such as a SPARC processor. Can you 
run your program on the new platform? Of course you’ll have to recompile
 the program using a C++ compiler designed for the new platform. But 
will you have to make any changes to the code you wrote? If you can 
recompile the program without making changes and it runs without a 
hitch, we say the program is <span class="docEmphasis">portable</span>.</p>
<p class="docText">There
 are a couple obstacles to portability, the first of which is hardware. A
 program that is hardware specific is not likely to be portable. One 
that takes direct control of an IBM PC video board, for example, speaks 
gibberish as far as, say, a Sun is concerned. (You can minimize 
portability problems by localizing the hardware-dependent parts in 
function modules; then you just have to rewrite those specific modules.)
 We avoid that sort of programming in this book.</p>
<p class="docText">The second obstacle to 
portability is language divergence. Certainly, that can be a problem 
with spoken languages. A Yorkshireman’s description of the day’s events 
may not be portable to Brooklyn, even though English is said to be 
spoken in both areas. Computer languages, too, can develop dialects. 
Although most implementers would like to make their versions of C++ 
compatible with others, it’s difficult to do so without a published 
standard describing exactly how the language works. Therefore, the 
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) created a committee in 1990
 (ANSI X3J16) to develop a standard for C++. (ANSI had already developed
 a standard for C.) The International Organization for Standardization 
(ISO) soon joined the process with its own committee (ISO-WG-21), 
creating a joint ANSI/ISO effort to develop the standard for C++.</p>
<p class="docText">Several
 years of work eventually led to the International Standard (ISO/IEC 
14882:1998), which was adopted in 1998 by the ISO, the International 
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), and ANSI. This standard, often called
 C++98, not only refined the description of existing C++ features but 
also extended the language with exceptions, runtime type identification 
(RTTI), templates, and the Standard Template Library (STL). The year 
2003 brought the publication of the second edition of the C++ standard 
(ISO/IEC 14882:2003); the new edition is a technical revision, meaning 
that it tidies up the first edition—fixing typos, reducing ambiguities, 
and the like—but doesn’t change the language features. This edition 
often is called C++03. Because C++03 didn’t change language features, 
we’ll follow a common usage and use C++98 to refer to C++98/C++03.</p>
<p class="docText">C++ continues to evolve, 
and the ISO committee approved a new standard August 2011 titled ISO/IEC
 14882:2011 and informally dubbed C++11. Like C++98, C++11 adds many 
features to the language. In addition, it has the goals of removing 
inconsistencies and of making C++ easier to learn and use. This standard
 had been dubbed C++0x, with the original expectation that x would be 7 
or 8, but standards work is a slow, exhaustive, and exhausting process. 
Fortunately, it was soon realized that 0x could be a hexadecimal integer
 (see Appendix A,
 “Number Bases”), which meant the committee had until 2015 to finish the
 work. So by that measure, they have finished ahead of schedule.</p>
<p class="docText">The ISO C++ Standard 
additionally draws on the ANSI C Standard because C++ is supposed to be,
 as far as possible, a superset of C. That means that any valid C 
program ideally should also be a valid C++ program. There are a few 
differences between ANSI C and the corresponding rules for C++, but they
 are minor. Indeed, ANSI C incorporates some features first introduced 
in C++, such as function prototyping and the <tt>const</tt> type qualifier.</p>
<p class="docText">Prior to the emergence of ANSI C, the C community followed a de facto standard based on the book <span class="docEmphasis">The C Programming Language</span>,
 by Kernighan and Ritchie (Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, Reading, 
MA, 1978). This standard was often termed K&amp;R C; with the emergence 
of ANSI C, the simpler K&amp;R C is now sometimes called <span class="docEmphasis">classic C</span>.</p>
<p class="docText">The ANSI C Standard not only 
defines the C language, it also defines a standard C library that ANSI C
 implementations must support. C++ also uses that library; this book 
refers to it as the <span class="docEmphasis">standard C library</span> or the <span class="docEmphasis">standard library</span>. In addition, the ISO C++ standard provides a standard library of C++ classes.</p>
<p class="docText">The C Standard was last 
revised as C99, which was adopted by the ISO in 1999 and ANSI in 2000. 
This standard adds some features to C, such as a new integer type, that 
some C++ compilers support.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E6MAE">Language Growth</h4>
<p class="docText">Originally, the de facto standard for C++ was a 65-page reference manual included in the 328-page <span class="docEmphasis">The C++ Programming Language</span>, by Stroustrup (Addison-Wesley, 1986).</p>
<p class="docText">The next major published de facto standard was <span class="docEmphasis">The Annotated C++ Reference Manual</span>,
 by Ellis and Stroustrup (Addison-Wesley, 1990). This is a 453-page 
work; it includes substantial commentary in addition to reference 
material.</p>
<p class="docText">The C++98 standard, with the addition of many features, reached nearly 800 pages, even with only minimal commentary.</p>
<p class="docText">The C++11 standard is over 1,350 pages long, so it augments the old standard substantially.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EJRAE">This Book and C++ Standards</h4>
<p class="docText">Contemporary compilers 
provide good support for C++98. Some compilers at the time of this 
writing also support some C++11 features, and we can expect the level of
 support to increase quickly now that the new standard is adopted. This 
book reflects the current situation, covering C++98 pretty thoroughly 
and introducing several C++11 features. Some of these features are 
integrated with the coverage of related C++98 topics. Chapter 18,
 “Visiting with the New C++ Standard,” concentrates on the new features,
 summarizing the ones mentioned earlier in the book and presenting 
additional features.</p>
<p class="docText">With the incomplete 
support available at the time of this writing, it would be very 
difficult to cover adequately all the new C++11 features. But even when 
the new standard is completely supported, it’s clear that comprehensive 
coverage would be beyond the scope of any reasonably sized single volume
 book. This book takes the approach of concentrating on features that 
are already available on some compilers and briefly summarizing many of 
the other features.</p>
<p class="docText">Before getting to the C++ language proper, let’s cover some of the groundwork related to creating programs.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
