<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Summary</h3>
<p class="docText">As computers have grown 
more powerful, computer programs have become larger and more complex. In
 response to these conditions, computer languages have evolved so that 
it’s easier to manage the programming process. The C language 
incorporated features such as control structures and functions to better
 control the flow of a program and to enable a more structured, modular 
approach. To these tools C++ adds support for object-oriented 
programming and generic programming. This enables even more modularity 
and facilitates the creation of reusable code, which saves time and 
increases program reliability.</p>
<p class="docText">The popularity of C++ has 
resulted in a large number of implementations for many computing 
platforms; the C++ ISO standards (C++98/03 and C++11) provide a basis 
for keeping these many implementations mutually compatible. The 
standards establishes the features the language should have, the 
behavior the language should display, and a standard library of 
functions, classes, and templates. The standards supports the goal of a 
portable language across different computing platforms and different 
implementations of the language.</p>
<p class="docText">To create a C++ program, you create
 one or more source files containing the program as expressed in the C++
 language. These are text files that must be compiled and linked to 
produce the machine-language files that constitute executable programs. 
These tasks are often accomplished in an IDE that provides a text editor
 for creating the source files, a compiler and a linker for producing 
executable files, and other resources, such as project management and 
debugging capabilities. But the same tasks can also be performed in a 
command-line environment by invoking the appropriate tools individually.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
