<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Summary</h3>
<p class="docText">A C++ program consists of one or 
more modules called functions. Programs begin executing at the beginning
 of the function called <tt>main()</tt> (all 
lowercase), so you should always have a function by this name. A 
function, in turn, consists of a header and a body. The function header 
tells you what kind of return value, if any, the function produces and 
what sort of information it expects arguments to pass to it. The 
function body consists of a series of C++ statements enclosed in paired 
braces (<tt>{}</tt>).</p>
<p class="docText">C++ statement types include the following:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Declaration statement—</span> A declaration statement announces the name and the type of a variable used in a function.</p></li><li><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Assignment statement—</span> An assignment statement uses the assignment operator (<tt>=</tt>) to assign a value to a variable.</p></li><li><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Message statement—</span> A message statement sends a message to an object, initiating some sort of action.</p></li><li><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Function call—</span>
 A function call activates a function. When the called function 
terminates, the program returns to the statement in the calling function
 immediately following the function call.</p></li><li><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Function prototype—</span> A function prototype declares the return type for a function, along with the number and type of arguments the function expects.</p></li><li><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Return statement—</span> A return statement sends a value from a called function back to the calling function.</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">A class is a user-defined 
specification for a data type. This specification details how 
information is to be represented and also the operations that can be 
performed with the data. An object is an entity created according to a 
class prescription, just as a simple variable is an entity created 
according to a data type description.</p>
<p class="docText">C++ provides two predefined objects (<tt>cin</tt> and <tt>cout</tt>) for handling input and output. They are examples of the <tt>istream</tt> and <tt>ostream</tt> classes, which are defined in the <tt>iostream</tt> file. These classes view input and output as streams of characters. The insertion operator (<tt>&lt;&lt;</tt>), which is defined for the <tt>ostream</tt> class, lets you insert data into the output stream, and the extraction operator (<tt>&gt;&gt;</tt>), which is defined for the <tt>istream</tt> class, lets you extract information from the input stream. Both <tt>cin</tt> and <tt>cout</tt> are smart objects, capable of automatically converting information from one form to another according to the program context.</p>
<p class="docText">C++ can use the 
extensive set of C library functions. To use a library function, you 
should include the header file that provides the prototype for the 
function.</p>
<p class="docText">Now that you have an overall 
view of simple C++ programs, you can go on in the next chapters to fill 
in details and expand horizons.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
