<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter Review</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Chapter Review</h3>
<p class="docText">You can find the answers to the chapter review at the end of each chapter in Appendix J, “Answers to Chapter Review.”</p>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1.</b></td><td class="docText">What are the modules of C++ programs called?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2.</b></td><td class="docText">What does the following preprocessor directive do?
<div class="docText"><pre>#include &lt;iostream&gt;</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3.</b></td><td class="docText">What does the following statement do?
<div class="docText"><pre>using namespace std;</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4.</b></td><td class="docText">What statement would you use to print the phrase “Hello, world” and then start a new line?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5.</b></td><td class="docText">What statement would you use to create an integer variable with the name <tt>cheeses</tt>?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6.</b></td><td class="docText">What statement would you use to assign the value 32 to the variable <tt>cheeses</tt>?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>7.</b></td><td class="docText">What statement would you use to read a value from keyboard input into the variable <tt>cheeses</tt>?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>8.</b></td><td class="docText">What statement would you use to print “We have X varieties of cheese,” where the current value of the <tt>cheeses</tt> variable replaces <tt>X</tt>?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9.</b></td><td class="docText">What do the following function prototypes tell you about the functions?
<div class="docText"><pre>int froop(double t);
void rattle(int n);
int prune(void);</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>10.</b></td><td class="docText">When do you not have to use the keyword <tt>return</tt> when you define a function?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11.</b></td><td class="docText">Suppose your <tt>main()</tt> function has the following line:
<div class="docText"><pre>cout &lt;&lt; "Please enter your PIN: ";</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">And suppose the compiler complains that <tt>cout</tt> is an unknown identifier. What is the likely cause of this complaint, and what are three ways to fix the problem?</p></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
