<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Programming Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Programming Exercises</h3>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1.</b></td><td class="docText">Write a C++ program that displays your name and address (or if you value your privacy, a fictitious name and address).</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2.</b></td><td class="docText">Write a C++ program that asks for a distance in furlongs and converts it to yards. (One furlong is 220 yards.)</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3.</b></td><td class="docText">Write a C++ program that uses three user-defined functions (counting <tt>main()</tt> as one) and produces the following output:
<div class="docText"><pre>Three blind mice
Three blind mice
See how they run
See how they run</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">One function, called two times,
 should produce the first two lines, and the remaining function, also 
called twice, should produce the remaining output.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4.</b></td><td class="docText">Write a program that asks the user to enter his or her age. The program then should display the age in months:
<div class="docText"><pre>Enter your age: 2<span class="docEmphStrong">9</span></pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Your age in months is 384.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5.</b></td><td class="docText">Write a program that has <tt>main()</tt>
 call a user-defined function that takes a Celsius temperature value as 
an argument and then returns the equivalent Fahrenheit value. The 
program should request the Celsius value as input from the user and 
display the result, as shown in the following code:
<div class="docText"><pre>Please enter a Celsius value: 20
20 degrees Celsius is 68 degrees Fahrenheit.</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">For reference, here is the formula for making the conversion:</p>
<p class="docText">Fahrenheit = 1.8 × degrees Celsius + 32.0</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6.</b></td><td class="docText">Write a program that has <tt>main()</tt>
 call a user-defined function that takes a distance in light years as an
 argument and then returns the distance in astronomical units. The 
program should request the light year value as input from the user and 
display the result, as shown in the following code:
<div class="docText"><pre>Enter the number of light years: <span class="docEmphStrong">4.2</span>
4.2 light years = 265608 astronomical units.</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">An astronomical unit is the 
average distance from the earth to the sun (about 150,000,000 km or 
93,000,000 miles), and a light year is the distance light travels in a 
year (about 10 trillion kilometers or 6 trillion miles). (The nearest 
star after the sun is about 4.2 light years away.) Use type <tt>double</tt> (as in Listing 2.4) and this conversion factor:</p>
<p class="docText">1 light year = 63,240 astronomical units</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>7.</b></td><td class="docText">Write a program that asks the user to enter an hour value and a minute value. The <tt>main()</tt> function should then pass these two values to a type <tt>void</tt> function that displays the two values in the format shown in the following sample run:
<div class="docText"><pre>Enter the number of hours: <span class="docEmphStrong">9</span>
Enter the number of minutes: <span class="docEmphStrong">28</span>
Time: 9:28</pre></div><br/></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
<p class="docText"> </p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
