<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>3. Dealing with Data</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h2 class="docChapterTitle" id="title-ID0E23AE">3. Dealing with Data</h2>
<p class="docText">In this chapter you’ll learn about the following:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">Rules for naming C++ variables</p></li><li><p class="docList">C++’s built-in integer types: <tt>unsigned long</tt>, <tt>long</tt>, <tt>unsigned int</tt>, <tt>int</tt>, <tt>unsigned short</tt>, <tt>short</tt>, <tt>char</tt>, <tt>unsigned char</tt>, <tt>signed char</tt>, <tt>bool</tt></p></li><li><p class="docList">C++11’s additions: <tt>unsigned long long</tt> and <tt>long long</tt></p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>climits</tt> file, which represents system limits for various integer types</p></li><li><p class="docList">Numeric literals (constants) of various integer types</p></li><li><p class="docList">Using the <tt>const</tt> qualifier to create symbolic constants</p></li><li><p class="docList">C++’s built-in floating-point types: <tt>float</tt>, <tt>double</tt>, and <tt>long double</tt></p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>cfloat</tt> file, which represents system limits for various floating-point types</p></li><li><p class="docList">Numeric literals of various floating-point types</p></li><li><p class="docList">C++’s arithmetic operators</p></li><li><p class="docList">Automatic type conversions</p></li><li><p class="docList">Forced type conversions (type casts)</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">The essence of object-oriented
 programming (OOP) is designing and extending your own data types. 
Designing your own data types represents an effort to make a type match 
the data. If you do this properly, you’ll find it much simpler to work 
with the data later. But before you can create your own types, you must 
know and understand the types that are built in to C++ because those 
types will be your building blocks.</p>
<p class="docText">The built-in C++ types 
come in two groups: fundamental types and compound types. In this 
chapter you’ll meet the fundamental types, which represent integers and 
floating-point numbers. That might sound like just two types; however, 
C++ recognizes that no one integer type and no one floating-point type 
match all programming requirements, so it offers several variants on 
these two data themes. Chapter 4,
 “Compound Types,” follows up by covering several types that are built 
on the basic types; these additional compound types include arrays, 
strings, pointers, and structures.</p>
<p class="docText">Of
 course, a program also needs a means to identify stored data. In this 
chapter you’ll examine one method for doing so—using variables. Then 
you’ll look at how to do arithmetic in C++. Finally, you’ll see how C++ 
converts values from one type to another.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
