<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>The const Qualifier</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">The <tt>const</tt> Qualifier</h3>
<p class="docText">Now let’s return to the topic 
of symbolic names for constants. A symbolic name can suggest what the 
constant represents. Also if the program uses the constant in several 
places and you need to change the value, you can just change the single 
symbol definition. The note about <tt>#define</tt> statements earlier in this chapter (see the sidebar “Symbolic Constants the Preprocessor Way”) promises that C++ has a better way to handle symbolic constants. That way is to use the <tt>const</tt>
 keyword to modify a variable declaration and initialization. Suppose, 
for example, that you want a symbolic constant for the number of months 
in a year. Just enter this line in a program:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>const int Months = 12;  // Months is symbolic constant for 12</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Now you can use <tt>Months</tt> in a program instead of <tt>12</tt>. (A bare <tt>12</tt> in a program might represent the number of inches in a foot or the number of donuts in a dozen, but the name <tt>Months</tt> tells you what the value <tt>12</tt> represents.) After you initialize a constant such as <tt>Months</tt>, its value is set. The compiler does not let you subsequently change the value <tt>Months</tt>.
 If you try to, for example, g++ gives an error message that the program
 used an assignment of a read-only variable. The keyword <tt>const</tt> is termed a <span class="docEmphasis">qualifier</span> because it qualifies the meaning of a declaration.</p>
<p class="docText">A common practice is to capitalize the first character in a name to help remind yourself that <tt>Months</tt>
 is a constant. This is by no means a universal convention, but it helps
 separate the constants from the variables when you read a program. 
Another convention is to make all the characters uppercase; this is the 
usual convention for constants created using <tt>#define</tt>. Yet another convention is to begin constant names with the letter k, as in <tt>kmonths</tt>.
 And there are yet other conventions. Many organizations have particular
 coding conventions they expect their programmers to follow.</p>
<p class="docText">The general form for creating a constant is this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>const <span class="docEmphasis">type name</span> = <span class="docEmphasis">value</span>;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Note that you initialize a <tt>const</tt> in the declaration. The following sequence is no good:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>const int toes;    // value of toes undefined at this point
toes = 10;         // too late!</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">If you don’t provide a value when you declare the constant, it ends up with an unspecified value that you cannot modify.</p>
<p class="docText">If your background is in C, you might feel that the <tt>#define</tt> statement, which is discussed earlier, already does the job adequately. But <tt>const</tt>
 is better. For one thing, it lets you specify the type explicitly. 
Second, you can use C++’s scoping rules to limit the definition to 
particular functions or files. (Scoping rules describe how widely known a
 name is to different modules; you’ll learn about this in more detail in
 Chapter 9, “Memory Models and Namespaces.”) Third, you can use <tt>const</tt> with more elaborate types, such as arrays and structures, as discussed in Chapter 4.</p>
<div class="docNote"><p class="docNoteTitle">Tip</p>
<p class="docText">If you are coming to C++ from C and you are about to use <tt>#define</tt> to define a symbolic constant, use <tt>const</tt> instead.</p>
</div><br/>
<p class="docText">ANSI C also uses the <tt>const</tt>
 qualifier, which it borrows from C++. If you’re familiar with the ANSI C
 version, you should be aware that the C++ version is slightly 
different. One difference relates to the scope rules, and Chapter 9 covers that point. The other main difference is that in C++ (but not in C), you can use a <tt>const</tt> value to declare the size of an array. You’ll see examples in Chapter 4.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
