<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Summary</h3>
<p class="docText">C++’s basic types fall into
 two groups. One group consists of values that are stored as integers. 
The second group consists of values that are stored in floating-point 
format. The integer types differ from each other in the amount of memory
 used to store values and in whether they are signed or unsigned. From 
smallest to largest, the integer types are <tt>bool</tt>, <tt>char</tt>, <tt>signed char</tt>, <tt>unsigned char</tt>, <tt>short</tt>, <tt>unsigned short</tt>, <tt>int</tt>, <tt>unsigned int</tt>, <tt>long</tt>, <tt>unsigned long</tt>, and, with C++11, <tt>long long</tt>, and <tt>unsigned long long</tt>. There is also a <tt>wchar_t</tt> type whose placement in this sequence of size depends on the implementation. C++11 adds the <tt>char16_t</tt> and <tt>char32_t</tt> types, which are wide enough to hold 16-bit and 32-bit character codes, respectively. C++ guarantees that <tt>char</tt> is large enough to hold any member of the system’s basic character set, <tt>wchar_t</tt> can hold any member of the system’s extended character set, <tt>short</tt> is at least 16 bits, <tt>int</tt> is at least as big as <tt>short</tt>, and <tt>long</tt> is at least 32 bits and at least as large as <tt>int</tt>. The exact sizes depend on the implementation.</p>
<p class="docText">Characters are represented by 
their numeric codes. The I/O system determines whether a code is 
interpreted as a character or as a number.</p>
<p class="docText">The floating-point types 
can represent fractional values and values much larger than integers can
 represent. The three floating-point types are <tt>float</tt>, <tt>double</tt>, and <tt>long double</tt>. C++ guarantees that <tt>float</tt> is no larger than <tt>double</tt> and that <tt>double</tt> is no larger than <tt>long double</tt>. Typically, <tt>float</tt> uses 32 bits of memory, <tt>double</tt> uses 64 bits, and <tt>long double</tt> uses 80 to 128 bits.</p>
<p class="docText">By providing a variety of types 
in different sizes and in both signed and unsigned varieties, C++ lets 
you match the type to particular data requirements.</p>
<p class="docText">C++ uses operators to 
provide the usual arithmetical support for numeric types: addition, 
subtraction, multiplication, division, and taking the modulus. When two 
operators seek to operate on the same value, C++’s precedence and 
associativity rules determine which operation takes place first.</p>
<p class="docText">C++ converts values from one 
type to another when you assign values to a variable, mix types in 
arithmetic, and use type casts to force type conversions. Many type 
conversions are “safe,” meaning you can make them with no loss or 
alteration of data. For example, you can convert an <tt>int</tt> value to a <tt>long</tt> value with no problems. Others, such as conversions of floating-point types to integer types, require more care.</p>
<p class="docText">At first, you might find the 
large number of basic C++ types a little excessive, particularly when 
you take into account the various conversion rules. But most likely you 
will eventually find occasions when one of the types is just what you 
need at the time, and you’ll thank C++ for having it.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
