<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Programming Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Programming Exercises</h3>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1.</b></td><td class="docText">Write
 a short program that asks for your height in integer inches and then 
converts your height to feet and inches. Have the program use the 
underscore character to indicate where to type the response. Also use a <tt>const</tt> symbolic constant to represent the conversion factor.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2.</b></td><td class="docText">Write
 a short program that asks for your height in feet and inches and your 
weight in pounds. (Use three variables to store the information.) Have 
the program report your body mass index (BMI). To calculate the BMI, 
first convert your height in feet and inches to your height in inches (1
 foot = 12 inches). Then convert your height in inches to your height in
 meters by multiplying by 0.0254. Then convert your weight in pounds 
into your mass in kilograms by dividing by 2.2. Finally, compute your 
BMI by dividing your mass in kilograms by the square of your height in 
meters. Use symbolic constants to represent the various conversion 
factors.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3.</b></td><td class="docText">Write
 a program that asks the user to enter a latitude in degrees, minutes, 
and seconds and that then displays the latitude in decimal format. There
 are 60 seconds of arc to a minute and 60 minutes of arc to a degree; 
represent these values with symbolic constants. You should use a 
separate variable for each input value. A sample run should look like 
this:
<div class="docText"><pre>Enter a latitude in degrees, minutes, and seconds:
First, enter the degrees: <span class="docEmphStrong">37</span>
Next, enter the minutes of arc: <span class="docEmphStrong">51</span>
Finally, enter the seconds of arc: <span class="docEmphStrong">19</span>
37 degrees, 51 minutes, 19 seconds = 37.8553 degrees</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4.</b></td><td class="docText">Write a program that asks the user to enter the number of seconds as an integer value (use type <tt>long</tt>, or, if available, <tt>long long</tt>)
 and that then displays the equivalent time in days, hours, minutes, and
 seconds. Use symbolic constants to represent the number of hours in the
 day, the number of minutes in an hour, and the number of seconds in a 
minute. The output should look like this:
<div class="docText"><pre>Enter the number of seconds: <span class="docEmphStrong">31600000</span>
31600000 seconds = 365 days, 17 hours, 46 minutes, 40 seconds</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5.</b></td><td class="docText">Write
 a program that requests the user to enter the current world population 
and the current population of the U.S. (or of some other nation of your 
choice). Store the information in variables of type <tt>long long</tt>.
 Have the program display the percent that the U.S. (or other nation’s) 
population is of the world’s population. The output should look 
something like this:
<div class="docText"><pre>Enter the world's population: <span class="docEmphStrong">6898758899</span>
Enter the population of the US: <span class="docEmphStrong">310783781</span>
The population of the US is 4.50492% of the world population.</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">You can use the Internet to get more recent figures.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6.</b></td><td class="docText">Write
 a program that asks how many miles you have driven and how many gallons
 of gasoline you have used and then reports the miles per gallon your 
car has gotten. Or, if you prefer, the program can request distance in 
kilometers and petrol in liters and then report the result European 
style, in liters per 100 kilometers.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>7.</b></td><td class="docText">Write
 a program that asks you to enter an automobile gasoline consumption 
figure in the European style (liters per 100 kilometers) and converts to
 the U.S. style of miles per gallon. Note that in addition to using 
different units of measurement, the U.S. approach (distance / fuel) is 
the inverse of the European approach (fuel / distance). Note that 100 
kilometers is 62.14 miles, and 1 gallon is 3.875 liters. Thus, 19 mpg is
 about 12.4 l/100 km, and 27 mpg is about 8.7 l/100 km.</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
<p class="docText"> </p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
