<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>4. Compound Types</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h2 class="docChapterTitle" id="title-ID0ENSAG">4. Compound Types</h2>
<p class="docText">In this chapter you’ll learn about the following:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">Creating and using arrays</p></li><li><p class="docList">Creating and using C-style strings</p></li><li><p class="docList">Creating and using <tt>string</tt>-class strings</p></li><li><p class="docList">Using the <tt>getline()</tt> and <tt>get()</tt> methods for reading strings</p></li><li><p class="docList">Mixing string and numeric input</p></li><li><p class="docList">Creating and using structures</p></li><li><p class="docList">Creating and using unions</p></li><li><p class="docList">Creating and using enumerations</p></li><li><p class="docList">Creating and using pointers</p></li><li><p class="docList">Managing dynamic memory with <tt>new</tt> and <tt>delete</tt></p></li><li><p class="docList">Creating dynamic arrays</p></li><li><p class="docList">Creating dynamic structures</p></li><li><p class="docList">Automatic, static, and dynamic storage</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>vector</tt> and <tt>array</tt> classes (an introduction)</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">Say you’ve developed a 
computer game called User-Hostile in which players match wits with a 
cryptic and abusive computer interface. Now you must write a program 
that keeps track of your monthly game sales for a five-year period. Or 
you want to inventory your accumulation of hacker-hero trading cards. 
You soon conclude that you need something more than C++’s simple basic 
types to meet these data requirements, and C++ offers something 
more—compound types. These are types built from the basic integer and 
floating-point types. The most far-reaching compound type is the class, 
that bastion of OOP toward which we are progressing. But C++ also 
supports several more modest compound types taken from C. The array, for
 example, can hold several values of the same type. A particular kind of
 array can hold a string, which is a series of characters. Structures 
can hold several values of differing types. Then there are pointers, 
which are variables that tell a computer where data is placed. You’ll 
examine all these compound forms (except classes) in this chapter, take a first look at <tt>new</tt> and <tt>delete</tt> and how you can use them to manage data, and take an introductory look at the C++ <tt>string</tt> class, which gives you an alternative way to work with strings.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
