<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Introducing the string Class</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Introducing the <tt>string</tt> Class</h3>
<p class="docText">The ISO/ANSI C++98 Standard expanded the C++ library by adding a <tt>string</tt> class. So now, instead of using a character array to hold a string, you can use a type <tt>string</tt> variable (or object, to use C++ terminology). As you’ll see, the <tt>string</tt> class is simpler to use than the array and also provides a truer representation of a string as a type.</p>
<p class="docText">To use the <tt>string</tt> class, a program has to include the <tt>string</tt> header file. The <tt>string</tt> class is part of the <tt>std</tt> namespace, so you have to provide a <tt>using</tt> directive or declaration or else refer to the class as <tt>std::string</tt>. The class definition hides the array nature of a string and lets you treat a string much like an ordinary variable. Listing 4.7 illustrates some of the similarities and differences between <tt>string</tt> objects and character arrays.</p>
<p class="docText"></p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E11AG">Listing 4.7. <tt>strtype1.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// strtype1.cpp -- using the C++ string class
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;               // make string class available
int main()
{
    using namespace std;
    char charr1[20];            // create an empty array
    char charr2[20] = "jaguar"; // create an initialized array
    string str1;                // create an empty string object
    string str2 = "panther";    // create an initialized string

    cout &lt;&lt; "Enter a kind of feline: ";
    cin &gt;&gt; charr1;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Enter another kind of feline: ";
    cin &gt;&gt; str1;                // use cin for input
    cout &lt;&lt; "Here are some felines:\n";
    cout &lt;&lt; charr1 &lt;&lt; " " &lt;&lt; charr2 &lt;&lt; " "
         &lt;&lt; str1 &lt;&lt; " " &lt;&lt; str2 // use cout for output
         &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "The third letter in " &lt;&lt; charr2 &lt;&lt; " is "
         &lt;&lt; charr2[2] &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "The third letter in " &lt;&lt; str2 &lt;&lt; " is "
         &lt;&lt; str2[2] &lt;&lt; endl;    // use array notation

    return 0;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here is a sample run of the program in Listing 4.7:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Enter a kind of feline: <span class="docEmphStrong">ocelot</span>
Enter another kind of feline: <span class="docEmphStrong">tiger</span>
Here are some felines:
ocelot jaguar tiger panther
The third letter in jaguar is g
The third letter in panther is n</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">You should learn from this example that, in many ways, you can use a string object in the same manner as a character array:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">You can initialize a <tt>string</tt> object to a C-style string.</p></li><li><p class="docList">You can use <tt>cin</tt> to store keyboard input in a <tt>string</tt> object.</p></li><li><p class="docList">You can use <tt>cout</tt> to display a <tt>string</tt> object.</p></li><li><p class="docList">You can use array notation to access individual characters stored in a <tt>string</tt> object.</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">The main difference between <tt>string</tt> objects and character arrays shown in Listing 4.7 is that you declare a <tt>string</tt> object as a simple variable, not as an array:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>string str1;                // create an empty string object
string str2 = "panther";    // create an initialized string</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The class design allows the program to handle the sizing automatically. For instance, the declaration for <tt>str1</tt> creates a <tt>string</tt> object of length zero, but the program automatically resizes <tt>str1</tt> when it reads input into <tt>str1</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>cin &gt;&gt; str1;                // str1 resized to fit input</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This makes using a <tt>string</tt> object both more convenient and safer than using an array. Conceptually, one thinks of an array of <tt>char</tt> as a collection of <tt>char</tt> storage units used to store a string but of a <tt>string</tt> class variable as a single entity representing the string.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EFHBG">C++11 String Initialization</h4>
<p class="docText">As you might expect by now, C++11 enables list-initialization for C-style strings and <tt>string</tt> objects:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>char first_date[] = {"Le Chapon Dodu"};
char second_date[] {"The Elegant Plate"};
string third_date = {"The Bread Bowl"};
string fourth_date {"Hank's Fine Eats"};</pre></div><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E1HBG">Assignment, Concatenation, and Appending</h4>
<p class="docText">The <tt>string</tt> class makes 
some operations simpler than is the case for arrays. For example, you 
can’t simply assign one array to another. But you can assign one string 
object to another:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>char charr1[20];            // create an empty array
char charr2[20] = "jaguar"; // create an initialized array
string str1;                // create an empty string object
string str2 = "panther";    // create an initialized string
charr1 = charr2;            // INVALID, no array assignment
str1 = str2;                // VALID, object assignment ok</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>string</tt> class simplifies combining strings. You can use the <tt>+</tt> operator to add two <tt>string</tt> objects together and the <tt>+=</tt> operator to tack on a string to the end of an existing <tt>string</tt> object. Continuing with the preceding code, we have the following possibilities:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>string str3;
str3 = str1 + str2;         // assign str3 the joined strings
str1 += str2;               // add str2 to the end of str1</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Listing 4.8 illustrates these usages. Note that you can add and append C-style strings as well as <tt>string</tt> objects to a <tt>string</tt> object.</p>
<p class="docText"></p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EQJBG">Listing 4.8. <tt>strtype2.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// strtype2.cpp –- assigning, adding, and appending
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;               // make string class available
int main()
{
    using namespace std;
    string s1 = "penguin";
    string s2, s3;

    cout &lt;&lt; "You can assign one string object to another: s2 = s1\n";
    s2 = s1;
    cout &lt;&lt; "s1: " &lt;&lt; s1 &lt;&lt; ", s2: " &lt;&lt; s2 &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "You can assign a C-style string to a string object.\n";
    cout &lt;&lt; "s2 = \"buzzard\"\n";
    s2 = "buzzard";
    cout &lt;&lt; "s2: " &lt;&lt; s2 &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "You can concatenate strings: s3 = s1 + s2\n";
    s3 = s1 + s2;
    cout &lt;&lt; "s3: " &lt;&lt; s3 &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "You can append strings.\n";
    s1 += s2;
    cout &lt;&lt;"s1 += s2 yields s1 = " &lt;&lt; s1 &lt;&lt; endl;
    s2 += " for a day";
    cout &lt;&lt;"s2 += \" for a day\" yields s2 = " &lt;&lt; s2 &lt;&lt; endl;

    return 0;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Recall that the escape sequence <tt>\"</tt>
 represents a double quotation mark that is used as a literal character 
rather than as marking the limits of a string. Here is the output from 
the program in Listing 4.8:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>You can assign one string object to another: s2 = s1
s1: penguin, s2: penguin
You can assign a C-style string to a string object.
s2 = "buzzard"
s2: buzzard
You can concatenate strings: s3 = s1 + s2
s3: penguinbuzzard
You can append strings.
s1 += s2 yields s1 = penguinbuzzard
s2 += " for a day" yields s2 = buzzard for a day</pre></div><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EFLBG">More <tt>string</tt> Class Operations</h4>
<p class="docText">Even
 before the string class was added to C++, programmers needed to do 
things like assign strings. For C-style strings, they used functions 
from the C library for these tasks. The <tt>cstring</tt> header file (formerly <tt>string.h</tt>) supports these functions. For example, you can use the <tt>strcpy()</tt> function to copy a string to a character array, and you can use the <tt>strcat()</tt> function to append a string to a character array:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>strcpy(charr1, charr2);  // copy charr2 to charr1
strcat(charr1, charr2);  // append contents of charr2 to char1</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Listing 4.9 compares techniques used with <tt>string</tt> objects with techniques used with character arrays.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EPOBG">Listing 4.9. <tt>strtype3.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// strtype3.cpp -- more string class features
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;               // make string class available
#include &lt;cstring&gt;              // C-style string library
int main()
{
    using namespace std;
    char charr1[20];
    char charr2[20] = "jaguar";
    string str1;
    string str2 = "panther";

    // assignment for string objects and character arrays
    str1 = str2;                // copy str2 to str1
    strcpy(charr1, charr2);     // copy charr2 to charr1

    // appending for string objects and character arrays
    str1 += " paste";           // add paste to end of str1
    strcat(charr1, " juice");   // add juice to end of charr1

    // finding the length of a string object and a C-style string
    int len1 = str1.size();     // obtain length of str1
    int len2 = strlen(charr1);  // obtain length of charr1

    cout &lt;&lt; "The string " &lt;&lt; str1 &lt;&lt; " contains "
         &lt;&lt; len1 &lt;&lt; " characters.\n";
    cout &lt;&lt; "The string " &lt;&lt; charr1 &lt;&lt; " contains "
         &lt;&lt; len2 &lt;&lt; " characters.\n";

    return 0;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here is the output:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>The string panther paste contains 13 characters.
The string jaguar juice contains 12 characters.</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The syntax for working with 
string objects tends to be simpler than using the C string functions. 
This is especially true for more complex operations. For example, the C 
library equivalent of</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>str3 = str1 + str2;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">is this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>strcpy(charr3, charr1);
strcat(charr3, charr2);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Furthermore, with arrays, there 
is always the danger of the destination array being too small to hold 
the information, as in this example:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>char site[10] = "house";
strcat(site, " of pancakes");  // memory problem</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>strcat()</tt> function would attempt to copy all 12 characters into the <tt>site</tt>
 array, thus overrunning adjacent memory. This might cause the program 
to abort, or the program might continue running but with corrupted data.
 The <tt>string</tt> class, with its automatic resizing as necessary, avoids this sort of problem. The C library does provide cousins to <tt>strcat()</tt> and <tt>strcpy()</tt>, called <tt>strncat()</tt> and <tt>strncpy()</tt>,
 that work more safely by taking a third argument to indicate the 
maximum allowed size of the target array, but using them adds another 
layer of complexity in writing programs.</p>
<p class="docText">Notice the different syntax used to obtain the number of characters in a string:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int len1 = str1.size();     // obtain length of str1
int len2 = strlen(charr1);  // obtain length of charr1</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>strlen()</tt> 
function is a regular function that takes a C-style string as its 
argument and that returns the number of characters in the string. The <tt>size()</tt> function basically does the same thing, but the syntax for it is different. Instead of appearing as a function argument, <tt>str1</tt> precedes the function name and is connected to it with a dot. As you saw with the <tt>put()</tt> method in Chapter 3, this syntax indicates that <tt>str1</tt> is an object and that <tt>size()</tt>
 is a class method. A method is a function that can be invoked only by 
an object belonging to the same class as the method. In this particular 
case, <tt>str1</tt> is a <tt>string</tt> object, and <tt>size()</tt> is a <tt>string</tt> method. In short, the C functions use a function argument to identify which string to use, and the C++ <tt>string</tt> class objects use the object name and the dot operator to indicate which string to use.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EOUBG">More on <tt>string</tt> Class I/O</h4>
<p class="docText">As you’ve seen, you can use <tt>cin</tt> with the <tt>&gt;&gt;</tt> operator to read a <tt>string</tt> object and <tt>cout</tt> with the <tt>&lt;&lt;</tt> operator to display a <tt>string</tt> object using the same syntax you use with a C-style string. But reading a line at a time instead of a word at time uses a different syntax. Listing 4.10 shows this difference.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EFWBG">Listing 4.10. <tt>strtype4.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// strtype4.cpp -- line input
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;               // make string class available
#include &lt;cstring&gt;              // C-style string library
int main()
{
    using namespace std;
    char charr[20];
    string str;

    cout &lt;&lt; "Length of string in charr before input: "
         &lt;&lt; strlen(charr) &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Length of string in str before input: "
         &lt;&lt; str.size() &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Enter a line of text:\n";
    cin.getline(charr, 20);     // indicate maximum length
    cout &lt;&lt; "You entered: " &lt;&lt; charr &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Enter another line of text:\n";
    getline(cin, str);          // cin now an argument; no length specifier
    cout &lt;&lt; "You entered: " &lt;&lt; str &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Length of string in charr after input: "
         &lt;&lt; strlen(charr) &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Length of string in str after input: "
         &lt;&lt; str.size() &lt;&lt; endl;

    return 0;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here’s a sample run of the program in Listing 4.10:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Length of string in charr before input: 27
Length of string in str before input: 0
Enter a line of text:
<span class="docEmphStrong">peanut butter</span>
You entered: peanut butter
Enter another line of text:
<span class="docEmphStrong">blueberry jam</span>
You entered: blueberry jam
Length of string in charr after input: 13
Length of string in str after input: 13</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Note that the program says the length of the string in the array <tt>charr</tt>
 before input is 27, which is larger than the size of the array! Two 
things are going on here. The first is that the contents of an 
uninitialized array are undefined. The second is that the <tt>strlen()</tt>
 function works by starting at the first element of the array and 
counting bytes until it reaches a null character. In this case, the 
first null character doesn’t appear until several bytes <span class="docEmphasis">after</span>
 the end of the array. Where the first null character appears in 
uninitialized data is essentially random, so you very well could get a 
different numeric result using this program.</p>
<p class="docText">Also note that the length of the string in <tt>str</tt> before input is 0. That’s because an uninitialized <tt>string</tt> object is automatically set to zero size.</p>
<p class="docText">This is the code for reading a line into an array:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>cin.getline(charr, 20);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The dot notation indicates that the <tt>getline()</tt> function is a class method for the <tt>istream</tt> class. (Recall that <tt>cin</tt> is an <tt>istream</tt>
 object.) As mentioned earlier, the first argument indicates the 
destination array, and the second argument is the array size, which <tt>getline()</tt> used to avoid overrunning the array.</p>
<p class="docText">This is the code for reading a line into a <tt>string</tt> object:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>getline(cin,str);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">There is no dot notation, which indicates that <span class="docEmphasis">this</span> <tt>getline()</tt> is <span class="docEmphasis">not</span> a class method. So it takes <tt>cin</tt> as an argument that tells it where to find the input. Also there isn’t an argument for the size of the string because the <tt>string</tt> object automatically resizes to fit the string.</p>
<p class="docText">So why is one <tt>getline()</tt> an <tt>istream</tt> class method and the other <tt>getline()</tt> not? The <tt>istream</tt> class was part of C++ long before the <tt>string</tt> class was added. So the <tt>istream</tt> design recognizes basic C++ types such as <tt>double</tt> and <tt>int</tt>, but it is ignorant of the <tt>string</tt> type. Therefore, there are <tt>istream</tt> class methods for processing <tt>double</tt>, <tt>int</tt>, and the other basic types, but there are no <tt>istream</tt> class methods for processing <tt>string</tt> objects.</p>
<p class="docText">Because there are no <tt>istream</tt> class methods for processing string objects, you might wonder why code like this works:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>cin &gt;&gt; str;  // read a word into the str string object</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">It turns out that code like the following does (in disguised notation) use a member function of the <tt>istream</tt> class:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>cin &gt;&gt; x;  // read a value into a basic C++ type</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">But the <tt>string</tt> class equivalent uses a friend function (also in disguised notation) of the <tt>string</tt> class. You’ll have to wait until Chapter 11 to see what a friend function is and how this technique works. In the meantime, you can use <tt>cin</tt> and <tt>cout</tt> with <tt>string</tt> objects and not worry about the inner workings.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ET2BG">Other Forms of String Literals</h4>
<p class="docText">C++, recall, has the <tt>wchar_t</tt> type in addition to <tt>char</tt>. And C++11 adds the <tt>char16_t</tt> and <tt>char32_t</tt> types. It’s possible to create arrays of these types and string literals of these types. C++ uses the <tt>L</tt>, <tt>u</tt>, and <tt>U</tt> prefixes, respectively, for string literals of these types. Here’s an example of how they can be used:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>wchar_t title[] = L"Chief Astrogator";  // w_char string
char16_t name[] = u"Felonia Ripova";    // char_16 string
char32_t car[] = U"Humber Super Snipe"; // char_32 string</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">C++11 also supports an 
encoding scheme for Unicode characters called UTF-8. In this scheme a 
given character may be stored in anywhere from one 8-bit unit, or octet,
 to four 8-bit units, depending on the numeric value. C++ uses the <tt>u8</tt> prefix to indicate string literals of that type.</p>
<p class="docText">Another C++11 addition is the raw string. In a raw string, characters simply stand for themselves. For example, the sequence <tt>\n</tt> is not interpreted as representing the newline character; instead, it is two ordinary characters, a backslash and an <tt>n</tt>, and it would display as those two characters onscreen. As another example, you can use a simple <tt>"</tt> inside a string instead of the more awkward <tt>\"</tt> we used in Listing 4.8. Of course, if you allow a <tt>"</tt> inside a string literal, you no longer can use it to delimit the ends of a string. Therefore, raw strings use <tt>"(</tt> and <tt>)"</tt> as delimiters, and they use an <tt>R</tt> prefix to identify them as raw strings:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>cout &lt;&lt; R"(Jim "King" Tutt uses "\n" instead of endl.)" &lt;&lt; '\n';</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This would display the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Jim "King" Tutt uses \n instead of endl.</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The standard string literal equivalent would be this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>cout &lt;&lt; "Jim \"King\" Tutt uses \" \\n\" instead of endl." &lt;&lt; '\n';</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here we had to use <tt>\\</tt> to display <tt>\</tt> because a single <tt>\</tt> is interpreted as the first character of an escape sequence.</p>
<p class="docText">If you press the Enter or 
Return key while typing a raw string, that not only moves the cursor to 
the next line onscreen, it also places a carriage return character in 
the raw string.</p>
<p class="docText">What if you want to display the combination <tt>)"</tt> in a raw string? (Who wouldn’t?) Won’t the compiler interpret the first occurrence of <tt>)"</tt>
 as the end of the string? Yes, it will. But the raw string syntax 
allows you to place additional characters between the opening <tt>"</tt> and <tt>(</tt>. This implies that the same additional characters must appear between the final <tt>)</tt> and <tt>"</tt>. So a raw string beginning with <tt>R"+*</tt> ( must terminate with <tt>)+*"</tt>. Thus, the statement</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>cout &lt;&lt; R"+*("(Who wouldn't?)", she whispered.)+*" &lt;&lt; endl;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">would display the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>"(Who wouldn't?)", she whispered.</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In short, the default delimiters of <tt>"(</tt> and <tt>)"</tt> have been replaced with <tt>"+*(</tt> and <tt>)+*"</tt>.
 You can use any of the members of the basic character set as part of 
the delimiter other than the space, the left parenthesis, the right 
parenthesis, the backslash, and control characters such as a tab or a 
newline.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>R</tt> prefix can be combined with the other string prefixes to produce raw strings of <tt>wchar_t</tt> and so on. It can be either the first or the last part of a compound prefix: <tt>Ru</tt>, <tt>UR</tt>, and so on.</p>
<p class="docText">Now let’s go on to another compound type—the structure.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
