<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Unions</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Unions</h3>
<p class="docText">A <span class="docEmphasis">union</span>
 is a data format that can hold different data types but only one type 
at a time. That is, whereas a structure can hold, say, an <tt>int</tt> <span class="docEmphasis">and</span> a <tt>long</tt> <span class="docEmphasis">and</span> a <tt>double</tt>, a union can hold an <tt>int</tt> <span class="docEmphasis">or</span> a <tt>long</tt> <span class="docEmphasis">or</span> a <tt>double</tt>. The syntax is like that for a structure, but the meaning is different. For example, consider the following declaration:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>union one4all
{
    int int_val;
    long long_val;
    double double_val;
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">You can use a <tt>one4all</tt> variable to hold an <tt>int</tt>, a <tt>long</tt>, or a <tt>double</tt>, just as long as you do so at different times:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>one4all pail;
pail.int_val = 15;        // store an int
cout &lt;&lt; pail.int_val;
pail.double_val = 1.38;   // store a double, int value is lost
cout &lt;&lt; pail.double_val;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Thus, <tt>pail</tt> can serve as an <tt>int</tt> variable on one occasion and as a <tt>double</tt>
 variable at another time. The member name identifies the capacity in 
which the variable is acting. Because a union holds only one value at a 
time, it has to have space enough to hold its largest member. Hence, the
 size of the union is the size of its largest member.</p>
<p class="docText">One use for a union is to 
save space when a data item can use two or more formats but never 
simultaneously. For example, suppose you manage a mixed inventory of 
widgets, some of which have an integer ID, and some of which have a 
string ID. In that case, you could use the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>struct widget
{
char brand[20];
int type;
union id              // format depends on widget type
{
    long id_num;      // type 1 widgets
    char id_char[20]; // other widgets
} id_val;
};
...
widget prize;
...
if (prize.type == 1)               // if-else statement (Chapter 6)
    cin &gt;&gt; prize.id_val.id_num;    // use member name to indicate mode
else
    cin &gt;&gt; prize.id_val.id_char;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">An <span class="docEmphasis">anonymous union</span>
 has no name; in essence, its members become variables that share the 
same address. Naturally, only one member can be current at a time:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>struct widget
{
    char brand[20];
    int type;
    union                 // anonymous union
{
        long id_num;      // type 1 widgets
        char id_char[20]; // other widgets
    };
};
...
widget prize;
...
if (prize.type == 1)
    cin &gt;&gt; prize.id_num;
else
    cin &gt;&gt; prize.id_char;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Because the union is anonymous, <tt>id_num</tt> and <tt>id_char</tt> are treated as two members of <tt>prize</tt> that share the same address. The need for an intermediate identifier <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>id_val</tt></span> is eliminated. It is up to the programmer to keep track of which choice is active.</p>
<p class="docText">Unions often (but not 
exclusively) are used to save memory space. That may not seem that 
necessary in these days of gigabytes of RAM and terabytes of storage, 
but not all C++ programs are written for such systems. C++ also is used 
for embedded systems, such as the processors used to control a toaster 
oven, an MP3 player, or a Mars rover. In these applications space may be
 at a premium. Also unions often are used when working with operating 
systems or hardware data structures.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
