<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Enumerations</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Enumerations</h3>
<p class="docText">The C++ <tt>enum</tt> facility provides an alternative to <tt>const</tt> for creating symbolic constants. It also lets you define new types but in a fairly restricted fashion. The syntax for <tt>enum</tt> resembles structure syntax. For example, consider the following statement:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedWidth">enum spectrum {red, orange, yellow, green, blue, violet, indigo, ultraviolet};

					  </pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This statement does two things:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">It makes <tt>spectrum</tt> the name of a new type; <tt>spectrum</tt> is termed an <span class="docEmphasis">enumeration</span>, much as a <tt>struct</tt> variable is called a structure.</p></li><li><p class="docList">It establishes <tt>red</tt>, <tt>orange</tt>, <tt>yellow</tt>, and so on, as symbolic constants for the integer values 0–7. These constants are called <span class="docEmphasis">enumerators</span>.</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">By default, enumerators are 
assigned integer values starting with 0 for the first enumerator, 1 for 
the second enumerator, and so forth. You can override the default by 
explicitly assigning integer values. You’ll see how later in this 
chapter.</p>
<p class="docText">You can use an enumeration name to declare a variable of the enumeration type:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>spectrum band;  // band a variable of type spectrum</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">An enumeration variable has some special properties, which we’ll examine now.</p>
<p class="docText">The only valid values that 
you can assign to an enumeration variable without a type cast are the 
enumerator values used in defining the type. Thus, we have the 
following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>band = blue;       // valid, blue is an enumerator
band = 2000;       // invalid, 2000 not an enumerator</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Thus, a <tt>spectrum</tt> 
variable is limited to just eight possible values. Some compilers issue a
 compiler error if you attempt to assign an invalid value, whereas 
others issue a warning. For maximum portability, you should regard 
assigning a non-<tt>enum</tt> value to an <tt>enum</tt> variable as an error.</p>
<p class="docText">Only the assignment operator is defined for enumerations. In particular, arithmetic operations are not defined:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>band = orange;           // valid
++band;                  // not valid, ++ discussed in Chapter 5
band = orange + red;     // not valid, but a little tricky
...</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">However, some implementations do
 not honor this restriction. That can make it possible to violate the 
type limits. For example, if <tt>band</tt> has the value <tt>ultraviolet</tt>, or <tt>7</tt>, then <tt>++band</tt>, if valid, increments <tt>band</tt> to <tt>8</tt>, which is not a valid value for a <tt>spectrum</tt> type. Again, for maximum portability, you should adopt the stricter limitations.</p>
<p class="docText">Enumerators are of integer type and can be promoted to type <tt>int</tt>, but <tt>int</tt> types are not converted automatically to the enumeration type:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int color = blue;        // valid, spectrum type promoted to int
band = 3;                // invalid, int not converted to spectrum
color = 3 + red;         // valid, red converted to int
...</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Note that in this example, even though <tt>3</tt> corresponds to the enumerator <tt>green</tt>, assigning <tt>3</tt> to <tt>band</tt> is a type error. But assigning <tt>green</tt> to <tt>band</tt> is fine because they are both type <tt>spectrum</tt>. Again, some implementations do not enforce this restriction. In the expression <tt>3 + red</tt>, addition isn’t defined for enumerators. However, <tt>red</tt> is converted to type <tt>int</tt>, and the result is type <tt>int</tt>. Because of the conversion from enumeration to <tt>int</tt>
 in this situation, you can use enumerations in arithmetic expressions 
to combine them with ordinary integers, even though arithmetic isn’t 
defined for enumerations themselves.</p>
<p class="docText">The earlier example</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>band = orange + red;     // not valid, but a little tricky</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">fails for a somewhat involved reason. It is true that the <tt>+</tt>
 operator is not defined for enumerators. But it is also true that 
enumerators are converted to integers when used in arithmetic 
expressions, so the expression <tt>orange + red</tt> gets converted to <tt>1 + 0</tt>, which is a valid expression. But it is of type <tt>int</tt> and hence cannot be assigned to the type <tt>spectrum</tt> variable <tt>band</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">You can assign an <tt>int</tt> value to an <tt>enum</tt>, provided that the value is valid and that you use an explicit type cast:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>band = spectrum(3);         // typecast 3 to type spectrum</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">What if you try to 
type cast an inappropriate value? The result is undefined, meaning that 
the attempt won’t be flagged as an error but that you can’t rely on the 
value of the result:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>band = spectrum(40003);    // undefined</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">(See the section “Value Ranges for Enumerations,” later in this chapter for a discussion of what values are and are not appropriate.)</p>
<p class="docText">As you can see, the 
rules governing enumerations are fairly restrictive. In practice, 
enumerations are used more often as a way of defining related symbolic 
constants than as a means of defining new types. For example, you might 
use an enumeration to define symbolic constants for a <tt>switch</tt> statement. (See Chapter 6,
 “Branching Statements and Logical Operators,” for an example.) If you 
plan to use just the constants and not create variables of the 
enumeration type, you can omit an enumeration type name, as in this 
example:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>enum {red, orange, yellow, green, blue, violet, indigo, ultraviolet};</pre></div><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EBMBG">Setting Enumerator Values</h4>
<p class="docText">You can set enumerator values explicitly by using the assignment operator:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>enum bits{one = 1, two = 2, four = 4, eight = 8};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The assigned values must be integers. You also can define just some of the enumerators explicitly:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>enum bigstep{first, second = 100, third};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In this case, <tt>first</tt> is <tt>0</tt> by default. Subsequent uninitialized enumerators are larger by one than their predecessors. So, <tt>third</tt> would have the value <tt>101</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Finally, you can create more than one enumerator with the same value:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>enum {zero, null = 0, one, numero_uno = 1};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here, both <tt>zero</tt> and <tt>null</tt> are <tt>0</tt>, and both <tt>one</tt> and <tt>numero_uno</tt> are <tt>1</tt>. In earlier versions of C++, you could assign only <tt>int</tt> values (or values that promote to <tt>int</tt>) to enumerators, but that restriction has been removed so that you can use type <tt>long</tt> or even <tt>long long</tt> values.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EHOBG">Value Ranges for Enumerations</h4>
<p class="docText">Originally,
 the only valid values for an enumeration were those named in the 
declaration. However, C++ has expanded the list of valid values that can
 be assigned to an enumeration variable through the use of a type cast. 
Each enumeration has a <span class="docEmphasis">range</span>,
 and you can assign any integer value in the range, even if it’s not an 
enumerator value, by using a type cast to an enumeration variable. For 
example, suppose that <tt>bits</tt> and <tt>myflag</tt> are defined this way:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>enum bits{one = 1, two = 2, four = 4, eight = 8};
bits myflag;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In this case, the following is valid:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>myflag = bits(6);    // valid, because 6 is in bits range</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here <tt>6</tt> is not one of the enumerations, but it lies in the range the enumerations define.</p>
<p class="docText">The range is defined as 
follows. First, to find the upper limit, you take the largest enumerator
 value. Then you find the smallest power of two greater than this 
largest value and subtract one; the result is the upper end of the 
range. (For example, the largest <tt>bigstep</tt>
 value, as previously defined, is 101. The smallest power of two greater
 than this is 128, so the upper end of the range is 127.) Next, to find 
the lower limit, you find the smallest enumerator value. If it is 0 or 
greater, the lower limit for the range is 0. If the smallest enumerator 
is negative, you use the same approach as for finding the upper limit 
but toss in a minus sign. (For example, if the smallest enumerator is 
-6, the next power of two [times a minus sign] is -8, and the lower 
limit is -7.)</p>
<p class="docText">The idea is that the compiler 
can choose how much space to use to hold an enumeration. It might use 1 
byte or less for an enumeration with a small range and 4 bytes for an 
enumeration with type <tt>long</tt> values.</p>
<p class="docText">C++11 extends enumerations with a form called the <span class="docEmphasis">scoped enumeration</span>. Chapter 10 discusses this form briefly in the section “Class Scope.”</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
