<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Array Alternatives</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Array Alternatives</h3>
<p class="docText">Earlier this chapter mentioned the <tt>vector</tt> and <tt>array</tt>
 template classes as alternatives to the built-in array. Let’s take a 
brief look now at how they are used and at some of the benefits of using
 them.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E4QBG">The <tt>vector</tt> Template Class</h4>
<p class="docText">The <tt>vector</tt> template class is similar to the <tt>string</tt> class in that it is a dynamic array. You can set the size of a <tt>vector</tt>
 object during runtime, and you can append new data to the end or insert
 new data in the middle. Basically, it’s an alternative to using <tt>new</tt> to create a dynamic array. Actually, the <tt>vector</tt> class does use <tt>new</tt> and <tt>delete</tt> to manage memory, but it does so automatically.</p>
<p class="docText">At this time we won’t venture
 very deeply into what it means to be a template class. Instead, we’ll 
look at a few basic practical matters. First, to use a <tt>vector</tt> object, you need to include the <tt>vector</tt> header file. Second, the <tt>vector</tt> identifier is part of the <tt>std</tt> namespace, so you can use a <tt>using</tt> directive, a <tt>using</tt> declaration, or <tt>std::vector</tt>. Third, templates use a different syntax to indicate the type of data stored. Fourth, the <tt>vector</tt> class uses a different syntax to indicate the number of elements. Here are some examples:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>#include &lt;vector&gt;
...
using namespace std;
vector&lt;int&gt; vi;        // create a zero-size array of int
int n;
cin &gt;&gt; n;
vector&lt;double&gt; vd(n);  // create an array of n doubles</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">We say that <tt>vi</tt> is an object of type <tt>vector&lt;int&gt;</tt> and that <tt>vd</tt> is an object of type <tt>vector&lt;double&gt;</tt>. Because <tt>vector</tt> objects resize automatically when you insert or add values to them, it’s okay for <tt>vi</tt> to start with 0 size. But for the resizing to work, you would use the various methods that are part of the <tt>vector</tt> package.</p>
<p class="docText">In general, the following declaration creates a <tt>vector</tt> object <tt>vt</tt> that can hold <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>n_elem</tt></span> elements of type <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>typeName</tt></span>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>vector&lt;<span class="docEmphasis">typeName</span>&gt; vt(<span class="docEmphasis">n_elem</span>);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The parameter <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>n_elem</tt></span> can be an integer constant or an integer variable.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E1UBG">The <tt>array</tt> Template Class (C++11)</h4>
<p class="docText">The <tt>vector</tt> 
class has more capabilities than the built-in array type, but this comes
 at a cost of slightly less efficiency. If all you need is a fixed-size 
array, it could be advantageous to use the built-in type. However, that 
has its own costs of lessened convenience and safety. C++11 responded to
 this situation by adding the <tt>array</tt> template class, which is part of the <tt>std</tt>
 namespace. Like the built-in type, an array object has a fixed size and
 uses the stack (or else static memory allocation) instead of the free 
store, so it shares the efficiency of built-in arrays. To this it adds 
convenience and additional safety. To create an <tt>array</tt> object, you need to include the <tt>array</tt> header file. The syntax is a bit different from that for a <tt>vector</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>#include &lt;array&gt;
...
using namespace std;
array&lt;int, 5&gt; ai;   // create array object of 5 ints
array&lt;double, 4&gt; ad = {1.2, 2.1, 3.43. 4.3};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">More general, the following declaration creates an <tt>array</tt> object <tt>arr</tt> with <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>n_elem</tt></span> elements of <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>typeName</tt></span>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>array&lt;<span class="docEmphasis">typeName</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">n_elem</span>&gt; arr;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Unlike the case for vector, <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>n_elem</tt></span> can’t be a variable.</p>
<p class="docText">With C++11, you can use list-initialization with <tt>vector</tt> and <tt>array</tt> objects. However, that was not an option with C++98 <tt>vector</tt> objects.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EEXBG">Comparing Arrays, <tt>Vector</tt> Objects, and <tt>Array</tt> Objects</h4>
<p class="docText">Perhaps the simplest way to understand the similarities and differences between arrays, <tt>vector</tt> objects, and <tt>array</tt> objects is to look at a brief example (Listing 4.24) that uses all three approaches.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EN1BG">Listing 4.24. <tt>choices.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// choices.cpp -- array variations
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;vector&gt;   // STL C++98
#include &lt;array&gt;    // C++11
int main()
{
    using namespace std;
// C, original C++
    double a1[4] = {1.2, 2.4, 3.6, 4.8};
// C++98 STL
    vector&lt;double&gt; a2(4);   // create vector with 4 elements
// no simple way to initialize in C98
    a2[0] = 1.0/3.0;
    a2[1] = 1.0/5.0;
    a2[2] = 1.0/7.0;
    a2[3] = 1.0/9.0;
// C++11 -- create and initialize array object
    array&lt;double, 4&gt; a3 = {3.14, 2.72, 1.62, 1.41};
    array&lt;double, 4&gt; a4;
    a4 = a3;     // valid for array objects of same size
// use array notation
    cout &lt;&lt; "a1[2]: " &lt;&lt; a1[2] &lt;&lt; " at " &lt;&lt; &amp;a1[2] &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "a2[2]: " &lt;&lt; a2[2] &lt;&lt; " at " &lt;&lt; &amp;a2[2] &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "a3[2]: " &lt;&lt; a3[2] &lt;&lt; " at " &lt;&lt; &amp;a3[2] &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "a4[2]: " &lt;&lt; a4[2] &lt;&lt; " at " &lt;&lt; &amp;a4[2] &lt;&lt; endl;
// misdeed
    a1[-2] = 20.2;
    cout &lt;&lt; "a1[-2]: " &lt;&lt; a1[-2] &lt;&lt;" at " &lt;&lt; &amp;a1[-2] &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "a3[2]: " &lt;&lt; a3[2] &lt;&lt; " at " &lt;&lt; &amp;a3[2] &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "a4[2]: " &lt;&lt; a4[2] &lt;&lt; " at " &lt;&lt; &amp;a4[2] &lt;&lt; endl;
    return 0;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here’s some sample output:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>a1[2]: 3.6 at 0x28cce8
a2[2]: 0.142857 at 0xca0328
a3[2]: 1.62 at 0x28ccc8
a4[2]: 1.62 at 0x28cca8
a1[-2]: 20.2 at 0x28ccc8
a3[2]: 20.2 at 0x28ccc8
a4[2]: 1.62 at 0x28cca8</pre></div><br/>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EE2BG">Program Notes</h5>
<p class="docText">First, notice that whether we use a built-in array, a <tt>vector</tt> object, or an <tt>array</tt> object, we can use the standard array notation to access individual members. Second, you can see from the addresses that <tt>array</tt> objects use the same region of memory (the stack, in this case) as the built-in array, whereas the <tt>vector</tt> object is stored in a different region (the free store, or heap). Third, note that you can assign an <tt>array</tt> object to another <tt>array</tt> object. For built-in arrays, you have to copy the data element-by-element.</p>
<p class="docText">Next, and this deserves special attention, note this line:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>a1[-2] = 20.2;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">What does an index of <tt>-2</tt> mean? Recall that this translates to the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>*(a1-2) = 20.2;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Expressing this in words, see where <tt>a1</tt> points, move backward two <tt>double</tt> elements, and put <tt>20.2</tt>
 there. That is, store the information at a location outside of the 
array. C++, like C, does not check for such out-of-range errors. In this
 particular case, that location turned out to be in the <tt>array</tt> object <tt>a3</tt>. Another compiler placed the wayward <tt>20.2</tt> in <tt>a4</tt>, and other compilers might make yet other bad choices. This is an example of the unsafe behavior of built-in arrays.</p>
<p class="docText">Do the <tt>vector</tt> and <tt>array</tt>
 objects protect against this behavior? They can if you let them. That 
is, you still can write unsafe code, such as the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>a2[-2] = .5;    // still allowed
a3[200] = 1.4;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">However, you have alternatives. One is using the <tt>at()</tt> member function. Just as you can use the <tt>getline()</tt> member function with the <tt>cin</tt> object, you can use the <tt>at()</tt> member function with objects of the <tt>vector</tt> or <tt>array</tt> type:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>a2.at(1) = 2.3;  // assign 2.3 to a2[1]</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The difference between using bracket notation and the <tt>at()</tt> member function is that if you use <tt>at(</tt>),
 an invalid index is caught during runtime and the program, by default, 
aborts. This added checking does come at the cost of increased run time,
 which is why C++ gives you the option of using either notation. More 
than that, these classes offer ways of using objects that reduce the 
chances of accidental range errors. For example, the classes have <tt>begin()</tt> and <tt>end()</tt>
 member functions that let you delimit the range without accidentally 
exceeding the bounds. But we’ll save that discussion until Chapter 16.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
