<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Summary</h3>
<p class="docText">Arrays, structures, and 
pointers are three C++ compound types. An array can hold several values,
 all of the same type, in a single data object. By using an index, or 
subscript, you can access the individual elements in an array.</p>
<p class="docText">A structure can hold several values of different types in a single data object, and you can use the membership operator (<tt>.</tt>)
 to access individual members. The first step in using structures is to 
create a structure template that defines what members the structure 
holds. The name, or tag, for this template then becomes a new type 
identifier. You can then declare structure variables of that type.</p>
<p class="docText">A union can hold a single value, but it can be of a variety of types, with the member name indicating which mode is being used.</p>
<p class="docText">Pointers are variables that are 
designed to hold addresses. We say a pointer points to the address it 
holds. The pointer declaration always states to what type of object a 
pointer points. Applying the dereferencing operator (<tt>*</tt>) to a pointer yields the value at the location to which the pointer points.</p>
<p class="docText">A string is a series of characters
 terminated by a null character. A string can be represented by a quoted
 string constant, in which case the null character is implicitly 
understood. You can store a string in an array of <tt>char</tt>, and you can represent a string with a pointer-to-<tt>char</tt> that is initialized to point to the string. The <tt>strlen()</tt> function returns the length of a string, not counting the null character. The <tt>strcpy()</tt> function copies a string from one location to another. When using these functions, you include the <tt>cstring</tt> or the <tt>string.h</tt> header file.</p>
<p class="docText">The C++ <tt>string</tt> class, supported by the <tt>string</tt> header file, offers an alternative, more user-friendly means to deal with strings. In particular, <tt>string</tt> objects are automatically resized to accommodate stored strings, and you can use the assignment operator to copy a string.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>new</tt> operator 
lets you request memory for a data object while a program is running. 
The operator returns the address of the memory it obtains, and you can 
assign that address to a pointer. The only means to access that memory 
is to use the pointer. If the data object is a simple variable, you can 
use the dereferencing operator (<tt>*</tt>) to 
indicate a value. If the data object is an array, you can use the 
pointer as if it were an array name to access the elements. If the data 
object is a structure, you can use the pointer dereferencing operator (<tt>-&gt;</tt>) to access structure members.</p>
<p class="docText">Pointers and arrays are closely connected. If <tt>ar</tt> is an array name, then the expression <tt>ar[i]</tt> is interpreted as <tt>*(ar + i)</tt>,
 with the array name interpreted as the address of the first element of 
the array. Thus, the array name plays the same role as a pointer. In 
turn, you can use a pointer name with array notation to access elements 
in an array allocated by <tt>new</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>new</tt> and <tt>delete</tt>
 operators let you explicitly control when data objects are allocated 
and when they are returned to the memory pool. Automatic variables, 
which are those declared within a function, and static variables, which 
are defined outside a function or with the keyword <tt>static</tt>, are less flexible. An automatic variable comes into being when
 the block containing it (typically a function definition) is entered, 
and it expires when the block is left. A static variable persists for 
the duration of a program.</p>
<p class="docText">The Standard Template Library (STL), added by the C++98 standard, provides a <tt>vector</tt> template class that provides an alternative to do-it-yourself dynamic arrays. C++11 provides an <tt>array</tt> template class that offers an alternative to fixed-sized built-in arrays.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
