<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter Review</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Chapter Review</h3>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1.</b></td><td class="docText">How would you declare each of the following?
<div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>actors</tt> is an array of 30 <tt>char</tt>.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>betsie</tt> is an array of 100 <tt>short</tt>.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>chuck</tt> is an array of 13 <tt>float</tt>.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>dipsea</tt> is an array of 64 <tt>long double</tt>.</p></div></li></ol></div></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2.</b></td><td class="docText">Does Chapter Review Question 1 use the array template class instead of built-in arrays.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3.</b></td><td class="docText">Declare an array of five <tt>int</tt>s and initialize it to the first five odd positive integers.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4.</b></td><td class="docText">Write a statement that assigns the sum of the first and last elements of the array in Question 3 to the variable <tt>even</tt>.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5.</b></td><td class="docText">Write a statement that displays the value of the second element in the <tt>float</tt> array <tt>ideas</tt>.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6.</b></td><td class="docText">Declare an array of <tt>char</tt> and initialize it to the string <tt>"cheeseburger"</tt>.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>7.</b></td><td class="docText">Declare a <tt>string</tt> object and initialize it to the string <tt>"Waldorf Salad"</tt>.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>8.</b></td><td class="docText">Devise
 a structure declaration that describes a fish. The structure should 
include the kind, the weight in whole ounces, and the length in 
fractional inches.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9.</b></td><td class="docText">Declare a variable of the type defined in Question 8 and initialize it.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>10.</b></td><td class="docText">Use <tt>enum</tt> to define a type called <tt>Response</tt> with the possible values <tt>Yes</tt>, <tt>No</tt>, and <tt>Maybe</tt>. <tt>Yes</tt> should be <tt>1</tt>, <tt>No</tt> should be <tt>0</tt>, and <tt>Maybe</tt> should be <tt>2</tt>.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11.</b></td><td class="docText">Suppose <tt>ted</tt> is a <tt>double</tt> variable. Declare a pointer that points to <tt>ted</tt> and use the pointer to display <tt>ted</tt>’s value.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>12.</b></td><td class="docText">Suppose <tt>treacle</tt> is an array of 10 <tt>float</tt>s. Declare a pointer that points to the first element of <tt>treacle</tt> and use the pointer to display the first and last elements of the array.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>13.</b></td><td class="docText">Write a code fragment that asks the user to enter a positive integer and then creates a dynamic array of that many <tt>int</tt>s. Do this by using <tt>new</tt>, then again using a <tt>vector</tt> object.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>14.</b></td><td class="docText">Is the following valid code? If so, what does it print?
<div class="docText"><pre>cout &lt;&lt; (int *) "Home of the jolly bytes";</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>15.</b></td><td class="docText">Write a code fragment that dynamically allocates a structure of the type described in Question 8 and then reads a value for the <tt>kind</tt> member of the structure.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>16.</b></td><td class="docText">Listing 4.6 illustrates a problem created by following numeric input with line-oriented string input. How would replacing this:
<div class="docText"><pre>cin.getline(address,80);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">with this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>cin &gt;&gt; address;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">affect the working of this program?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>17.</b></td><td class="docText">Declare
 a vector object of 10 string objects and an array object of 10 string 
objects. Show the necessary header files and don’t use <tt>using</tt>. Do use a <tt>const</tt> for the number of strings.</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
