<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Programming Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Programming Exercises</h3>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1.</b></td><td class="docText">Write a C++ program that requests and displays information as shown in the following example of output:
<div class="docText"><pre>What is your first name? Betty Sue
What is your last name? Yewe
What letter grade do you deserve? B
What is your age? 22
Name: Yewe, Betty Sue
Grade: C
Age: 22</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Note that the program 
should be able to accept first names that comprise more than one word. 
Also note that the program adjusts the grade downward—that is, up one 
letter. Assume that the user requests an A, a B, or a C so that you 
don’t have to worry about the gap between a D and an F.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2.</b></td><td class="docText">Rewrite Listing 4.4, using the C++ <tt>string</tt> class instead of <tt>char</tt> arrays.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3.</b></td><td class="docText">Write
 a program that asks the user to enter his or her first name and then 
last name, and that then constructs, stores, and displays a third 
string, consisting of the user’s last name followed by a comma, a space,
 and first name. Use <tt>char</tt> arrays and functions from the <tt>cstring</tt> header file. A sample run could look like this:
<div class="docText"><pre>Enter your first name: <span class="docEmphStrong">Flip</span>
Enter your last name: <span class="docEmphStrong">Fleming</span>
Here's the information in a single string: Fleming, Flip</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4.</b></td><td class="docText">Write
 a program that asks the user to enter his or her first name and then 
last name, and that then constructs, stores, and displays a third string
 consisting of the user’s last name followed by a comma, a space, and 
first name. Use <tt>string</tt> objects and methods from the <tt>string</tt> header file. A sample run could look like this:
<div class="docText"><pre>Enter your first name: <span class="docEmphStrong">Flip</span>
Enter your last name: <span class="docEmphStrong">Fleming</span>
Here's the information in a single string: Fleming, Flip</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5.</b></td><td class="docText">The <tt>CandyBar</tt>
 structure contains three members. The first member holds the brand name
 of a candy bar. The second member holds the weight (which may have a 
fractional part) of the candy bar, and the third member holds the number
 of calories (an integer value) in the candy bar. Write a program that 
declares such a structure and creates a <tt>CandyBar</tt> variable called <tt>snack</tt>, initializing its members to <tt>"Mocha Munch"</tt>, <tt>2.3</tt>, and <tt>350</tt>, respectively. The initialization should be part of the declaration for <tt>snack</tt>. Finally, the program should display the contents of the <tt>snack</tt> variable.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6.</b></td><td class="docText">The <tt>CandyBar</tt> structure contains three members, as described in Programming Exercise 5. Write a program that creates an array of three <tt>CandyBar</tt> structures, initializes them to values of your choice, and then displays the contents of each structure.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>7.</b></td><td class="docText">William Wingate runs a pizza-analysis service. For each pizza, he needs to record the following information:
<ul><li><p class="docList">The name of the pizza company, which can consist of more than one word</p></li><li><p class="docList">The diameter of the pizza</p></li><li><p class="docList">The weight of the pizza</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">Devise a structure that can 
hold this information and write a program that uses a structure variable
 of that type. The program should ask the user to enter each of the 
preceding items of information, and then the program should display that
 information. Use <tt>cin</tt> (or its methods) and <tt>cout</tt>.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>8.</b></td><td class="docText">Do Programming Exercise 7 but use <tt>new</tt>
 to allocate a structure instead of declaring a structure variable. Also
 have the program request the pizza diameter before it requests the 
pizza company name.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9.</b></td><td class="docText">Do Programming Exercise 6, but instead of declaring an array of three <tt>CandyBar</tt> structures, use <tt>new</tt> to allocate the array dynamically.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>10.</b></td><td class="docText">Write
 a program that requests the user to enter three times for the 40-yd 
dash (or 40-meter, if you prefer) and then displays the times and the 
average. Use an <tt>array</tt> object to hold the data. (Use a built-in array if <tt>array</tt> is not available.)</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
<p class="docText"> </p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
