<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Loops and Text Input</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Loops and Text Input</h3>
<p class="docText">Now that you’ve seen how loops
 work, let’s look at one of the most common and important tasks assigned
 to loops: reading text character-by-character from a file or from the 
keyboard. For example, you might want to write a program that counts the
 number of characters, lines, and words in the input. Traditionally, 
C++, like C, uses the <tt>while</tt> loop for this
 sort of task. We’ll next investigate how that is done. If you already 
know C, don’t skim through the following sections too fast. Although the
 C++ <tt>while</tt> loop is the same as C’s, 
C++’s I/O facilities are different. This can give the C++ loop a 
somewhat different look from the C loop. In fact, the <tt>cin</tt>
 object supports three distinct modes of single-character input, each 
with a different user interface. Let’s look at how to use these choices 
with <tt>while</tt> loops.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EGGAI">Using Unadorned <tt>cin</tt> for Input</h4>
<p class="docText">If a program is going to use a 
loop to read text input from the keyboard, it has to have some way of 
knowing when to stop. How can it know when to stop? One way is to choose
 some special character, sometimes called a <span class="docEmphasis">sentinel character</span>, to act as a stop sign. For example, Listing 5.16 stops reading input when the program encounters a <tt>#</tt>
 character. The program counts the number of characters it reads and 
then echoes them. That is, it redisplays the characters that have been 
read. (Pressing a keyboard key doesn’t automatically place a character 
onscreen; programs have to do that drudge work by echoing the input 
character. Typically, the operating system handles that task. In this 
case, both the operating system and the test program echo the input.) 
When it is finished, the program reports the total number of characters 
processed. Listing 5.16 shows the program.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EEHAI">Listing 5.16. <tt>textin1.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>// textin1.cpp -- reading chars with a while loop
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
int main()
{
    using namespace std;
    char ch;
    int count = 0;      // use basic input
    cout &lt;&lt; "Enter characters; enter # to quit:\n";
    cin &gt;&gt; ch;          // get a character
    while (ch != '#')   // test the character
    {
        cout &lt;&lt; ch;     // echo the character
        ++count;        // count the character
        cin &gt;&gt; ch;      // get the next character
    }
    cout &lt;&lt; endl &lt;&lt; count &lt;&lt; " characters read\n";
    return 0;
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here’s a sample run of the program in Listing 5.16:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Enter characters; enter # to quit:
<span class="docEmphStrong">see ken run#really fast</span>
seekenrun
9 characters read</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Apparently, Ken runs so fast that he obliterates space itself—or at least the space characters in the input.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E2KAI">Program Notes</h5>
<p class="docText">Note the structure of the program in Listing 5.16.
 The program reads the first input character before it reaches the loop.
 That way, the first character can be tested when the program reaches 
the loop statement. This is important because the first character might 
be <tt>#</tt>. Because <tt>textin1.cpp</tt> uses an entry-condition loop, the program correctly skips the entire loop in that case. And because the variable <tt>count</tt> was previously set to <tt>0</tt>, <tt>count</tt> has the correct value.</p>
<p class="docText">Suppose the first character read is not a <tt>#</tt>.
 In that case, the program enters the loop, displays the character, 
increments the count, and reads the next character. This last step is 
vital. Without it, the loop repeatedly processes the first input 
character forever. With the last step, the program advances to the next 
character.</p>
<p class="docText">Note that the loop
 design follows the guidelines mentioned earlier. The condition that 
terminates the loop is if the last character read is <tt>#</tt>.
 That condition is initialized by reading a character before the loop 
starts. The condition is updated by reading a new character at the end 
of the loop.</p>
<p class="docText">This all sounds reasonable. So why does the program omit the spaces on output? Blame <tt>cin</tt>. When reading type <tt>char</tt> values, just as when reading other basic types, <tt>cin</tt> skips over spaces and newline characters. The spaces in the input are not echoed, so they are not counted.</p>
<p class="docText">To further complicate things, the input to <tt>cin</tt>
 is buffered. That means the characters you type don’t get sent to the 
program until you press Enter. This is why you are able to type 
characters after the <tt>#</tt> when running the program in Listing 5.16.
 After you press Enter, the whole sequence of characters is sent to the 
program, but the program quits processing the input after it reaches the
 <tt>#</tt> character.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EYMAI"><tt>cin.get(char)</tt> to the Rescue</h4>
<p class="docText">Usually, programs that read 
input character-by-character need to examine every character, including 
spaces, tabs, and newlines. The <tt>istream</tt> class (defined in <tt>iostream</tt>), to which <tt>cin</tt> belongs, includes member functions that meet this need. In particular, the member function <tt>cin.get(ch)</tt> reads the next character, even if it is a space, from the input and assigns it to the variable <tt>ch</tt>. By replacing <tt>cin&gt;&gt;ch</tt> with this function call, you can fix Listing 5.16. Listing 5.17 shows the result.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ETOAI">Listing 5.17. <tt>textin2.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>// textin2.cpp -- using cin.get(char)
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
int main()
{
    using namespace std;
    char ch;
    int count = 0;

    cout &lt;&lt; "Enter characters; enter # to quit:\n";
    cin.get(ch);        // use the cin.get(ch) function
    while (ch != '#')
    {
        cout &lt;&lt; ch;
        ++count;
        cin.get(ch);    // use it again
    }
    cout &lt;&lt; endl &lt;&lt; count &lt;&lt; " characters read\n";
    return 0;
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here is a sample run of the program in Listing 5.17:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Enter characters; enter # to quit:
<span class="docEmphStrong">Did you use a #2 pencil?</span>
Did you use a
14 characters read</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Now the program echoes and 
counts every character, including the spaces. Input is still buffered, 
so it is still possible to type more input than what eventually reaches 
the program.</p>
<p class="docText">If you are familiar with C, this program may strike you as terribly wrong. The <tt>cin.get(ch)</tt> call places a value in the <tt>ch</tt>
 variable, which means it alters the value of the variable. In C you 
must pass the address of a variable to a function if you want to change 
the value of that variable. But the call to <tt>cin.get()</tt> in Listing 5.17 passes <tt>ch</tt>, not <tt>&amp;ch</tt>. In C, code like this won’t work. In C++ it can work, provided that the function declares the argument as a <span class="docEmphasis">reference</span>. The reference type is something that C++ added to C. The <tt>iostream</tt> header file declares the argument to <tt>cin.get(ch)</tt> as a reference type, so this function can alter the value of its argument. You’ll learn the details in Chapter 8. Meanwhile, the C mavens among you can relax; ordinarily, argument passing in C++ works just as it does in C. For <tt>cin.get(ch)</tt>, however, it doesn’t.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EXQAI">Which <tt>cin.get()</tt> Should You Use?</h4>
<p class="docText">Listing 4.5 in Chapter 4 uses this code:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>char name[ArSize];
...
cout &lt;&lt; "Enter your name:\n";
cin.get(name, ArSize).get();</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The last line is equivalent to two consecutive function calls:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>cin.get(name, ArSize);
cin.get();</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">One version of <tt>cin.get()</tt> takes two arguments: the array name, which is the address of the string (technically, type <tt>char*</tt>), and <tt>ArSize</tt>, which is an integer of type <tt>int</tt>. (Recall that the name of an array is the address of its first element, so the name of a character array is type <tt>char*</tt>.) Then the program uses <tt>cin.get()</tt> with no arguments. And most recently, we’ve used <tt>cin.get()</tt> this way:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>char ch;
cin.get(ch);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This time <tt>cin.get()</tt> has one argument, and it is type <tt>char</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Once again it is time for those of you familiar with C to get excited or confused. In C if a function takes a pointer-to-<tt>char</tt> and an <tt>int</tt>
 as arguments, you can’t successfully use the same function with a 
single argument of a different type. But you can do so in C++ because 
the language supports an OOP feature called <span class="docEmphasis">function overloading</span>.
 Function overloading allows you to create different functions that have
 the same name, provided that they have different argument lists. If, 
for example, you use <tt>cin.get(name, ArSize)</tt> in C++, the compiler finds the version of <tt>cin.get()</tt> that uses a <tt>char*</tt> and an <tt>int</tt> as arguments. But if you use <tt>cin.get(ch)</tt>, the compiler fetches the version that uses a single type <tt>char</tt> argument. And if the code provides no arguments, the compiler uses the version of <tt>cin.get()</tt> that takes no arguments.</p>
<p class="docText">Function overloading enables 
you to use the same name for related functions that perform the same 
basic task in different ways or for different types. This is another 
topic awaiting you in Chapter 8. Meanwhile, you can get accustomed to function overloading by using the <tt>get()</tt> examples that come with the <tt>istream</tt> class. To distinguish between the different function versions, we’ll include the argument list when referring to them. Thus, <tt>cin.get()</tt> means the version that takes no arguments, and <tt>cin.get(char)</tt> means the version that takes one argument.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EIXAI">The End-of-File Condition</h4>
<p class="docText">As Listing 5.17 shows, using a symbol such as <tt>#</tt>
 to signal the end of input is not always satisfactory because such a 
symbol might be part of legitimate input. The same is true of other 
arbitrarily chosen symbols, such as <tt>@</tt> and <tt>%</tt>. If the input comes from a file, you can employ a much more powerful technique—detecting the end-of-file (EOF). C++ input facilities
 cooperate with the operating system to detect when input reaches the 
end of a file and report that information back to a program.</p>
<p class="docText">At first glance, reading information from files seems to have little to do with <tt>cin</tt>
 and keyboard input, but there are two connections. First, many 
operating systems, including Unix, Linux, and the Windows Command Prompt
 mode, support <span class="docEmphasis">redirection</span>,
 which enables you to substitute a file for keyboard input. For example,
 suppose in Windows you have an executable program called <tt>gofish.exe</tt> and a text file called <tt>fishtale</tt>. In that case, you can give this command line in the command prompt mode:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>gofish &lt;fishtale</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This causes the program to take input from the <tt>fishtale</tt> file instead of from the keyboard. The <tt>&lt;</tt> symbol is the redirection operator for both Unix and the Windows Command Prompt mode.</p>
<p class="docText">Second, many operating 
systems allow you to simulate the EOF condition from the keyboard. In 
Unix you do so by pressing Ctrl+D at the beginning of a line. In the 
Windows Command Prompt mode, you press Ctrl+Z and then press Enter 
anywhere on the line. Some implementations of C++ support similar 
behavior even though the underlying operating system doesn’t. The EOF 
concept for keyboard entry is actually a legacy of command-line 
environments. However, Symantec C++ for the Mac imitates Unix and 
recognizes Ctrl+D as a simulated EOF. Metrowerks Codewarrior recognizes 
Ctrl+Z in the Macintosh and Windows environments. Microsoft Visual C++, 
Borland C++ 5.5, and GNU C++ for the PC recognize Ctrl+Z when it’s the 
first character on a line, but they require a subsequent Enter. In 
short, many PC programming environment recognize Ctrl+Z as a simulated 
EOF, but the exact details (anywhere on a line versus first character on
 a line, Enter key required or not required) vary.</p>
<p class="docText">If your programming environment can test for the EOF, you can use a program similar to Listing 5.17
 with redirected files and you can use it for keyboard input in which 
you simulate the EOF. That sounds useful, so let’s see how it’s done.</p>
<p class="docText">When <tt>cin</tt> detects the EOF, it sets two bits (the <span class="docEmphasis">eofbit</span> and the <span class="docEmphasis">failbit</span>) to <tt>1</tt>. You can use a member function named <tt>eof()</tt> to see whether the eofbit has been set; the call <tt>cin.eof()</tt> returns the <tt>bool</tt> value <tt>true</tt> if the EOF has been detected and <tt>false</tt> otherwise. Similarly, the <tt>fail()</tt> member function returns <tt>true</tt> if either the eofbit or the failbit has been set to <tt>1</tt> and <tt>false</tt> otherwise. Note that the <tt>eof()</tt> and <tt>fail()</tt> methods report the result of the most recent attempt to read; that is, they report on the past rather than look ahead. So a <tt>cin.eof()</tt> or <tt>cin.fail()</tt> test should always follow an attempt to read. The design of Listing 5.18 reflects this fact. It uses <tt>fail()</tt> instead of <tt>eof()</tt> because the former method appears to work with a broader range of implementations.</p>
<div class="docNote"><p class="docNoteTitle">Note</p>
<p class="docText">Some systems do not support simulated EOF from the keyboard. Other systems support it imperfectly. If you have been using <tt>cin.get()</tt>
 to freeze the screen until you can read it, that won’t work here 
because detecting the EOF turns off further attempts to read input. However, you can use a timing loop like that in Listing 5.14 to keep the screen visible for a while. Or you can use <tt>cin.clear(),</tt> as mentioned in Chapters 6 and 17, to reset the input stream.</p>
</div><br/>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EZ3AI">Listing 5.18. <tt>textin3.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>// textin3.cpp -- reading chars to end of file
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
int main()
{
    using namespace std;
    char ch;
    int count = 0;
    cin.get(ch);        // attempt to read a char
    while (cin.fail() == false)  // test for EOF
    {
        cout &lt;&lt; ch;     // echo character
        ++count;
        cin.get(ch);    // attempt to read another char
    }
    cout &lt;&lt; endl &lt;&lt; count &lt;&lt; " characters read\n";
    return 0;
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here is sample output from the program in Listing 5.18:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong">The green bird sings in the winter.&lt;ENTER&gt;</span>
The green bird sings in the winter.
<span class="docEmphStrong">Yes, but the crow flies in the dawn.&lt;ENTER&gt;</span>
Yes, but the crow flies in the dawn.
<span class="docEmphStrong">&lt;CTRL&gt;+&lt;Z&gt;&lt;ENTER&gt;</span>
73 characters read</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Because I ran the program on a
 Windows 7 system, I pressed Ctrl+Z and then Enter to simulate the EOF 
condition. Unix and Linux users would press Ctrl+D instead. Note that in
 Unix and Unix-like systems, including Linux and Cygwin, Ctrl+Z suspends
 execution of the program; the <tt>fg</tt> command lets execution resume.</p>
<p class="docText">By using redirection, you can use the program in Listing 5.18
 to display a text file and report how many characters it has. This 
time, we have a program read, echo, and count characters from a two-line
 file on a Unix system (the <tt>$</tt> is a Unix prompt):</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>$ textin3 &lt; stuff
I am a Unix file. I am proud
to be a Unix file.
48 characters read
$</pre></div><br/>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EV5AI">EOF Ends Input</h5>
<p class="docText">Remember that when a <tt>cin</tt> method detects the EOF, it sets a flag in the <tt>cin</tt> object, indicating the EOF condition. When this flag is set, <tt>cin</tt> does not read anymore input, and further calls to <tt>cin</tt>
 have no effect. For file input, this makes sense because you shouldn’t 
read past the end of a file. For keyboard input, however, you might use a
 simulated EOF to terminate a loop but then want to read more input 
later. The <tt>cin.clear()</tt> method clears the EOF flag and lets input proceed again. Chapter 17,
 “Input, Output, and Files,” discusses this further. Keep in mind, 
however, that in some systems, typing Ctrl+Z effectively terminates both
 input and output beyond the powers of <tt>cin.clear()</tt> to restore them.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ET6AI">Common Idioms for Character Input</h5>
<p class="docText">The following is the essential design of a loop intended to read text a character at a time until EOF:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>cin.get(ch);        // attempt to read a char
while (cin.fail() == false)  // test for EOF
{
    ...             // do stuff
    cin.get(ch);    // attempt to read another char
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">There are some shortcuts you can take with this code. Chapter 6 introduces the <tt>!</tt> operator, which toggles <tt>true</tt> to <tt>false</tt> and vice versa. You can use it to rewrite the <tt>while</tt> test to look like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>while (!cin.fail())    // while input has not failed</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The return value for the <tt>cin.get(char)</tt> method is <tt>cin</tt>, an object. However, the <tt>istream</tt> class provides a function that can convert an <tt>istream</tt> object such as <tt>cin</tt> to a <tt>bool</tt> value; this conversion function is called when <tt>cin</tt> occurs in a location where a <tt>bool</tt> is expected, such as in the test condition of a <tt>while</tt> loop. Furthermore, the <tt>bool</tt> value for the conversion is <tt>true</tt> if the last attempted read was successful and <tt>false</tt> otherwise. This means you can rewrite the <tt>while</tt> test to look like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>while (cin)    // while input is successful</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This is a bit more general than using <tt>!cin.fail()</tt> or <tt>!cin.eof()</tt> because it detects other possible causes of failure, such as disk failure.</p>
<p class="docText">Finally, because the return value of <tt>cin.get(char)</tt> is <tt>cin</tt>, you can condense the loop to this format:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>while (cin.get(ch))  // while input is successful
{
    ...              // do stuff
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here, <tt>cin.get(char)</tt> is
 called once in the test condition instead of twice—once before the loop
 and once at the end of the loop. To evaluate the loop test, the program
 first has to execute the call to <tt>cin.get(ch)</tt>, which, if successful, places a value into <tt>ch</tt>. Then the program obtains the return value from the function call, which is <tt>cin</tt>. Then it applies the <tt>bool</tt> conversion to <tt>cin</tt>, which yields <tt>true</tt> if input worked and <tt>false</tt>
 otherwise. The three guidelines (identifying the termination condition,
 initializing the condition, and updating the condition) are all 
compressed into one loop test condition.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E6FBI">Yet Another Version of <tt>cin.get()</tt></h4>
<p class="docText">Nostalgic C users might yearn for C’s character I/O functions, <tt>getchar()</tt> and <tt>putchar()</tt>. They are available in C++ if you want them. You just use the <tt>stdio.h</tt> header file as you would in C (or use the more current <tt>cstdio</tt>). Or you can use member functions from the <tt>istream</tt> and <tt>ostream</tt> classes that work in much the same way. Let’s look at that approach next.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>cin.get()</tt> member function with no arguments returns the next character from the input. That is, you use it in this way:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>ch = cin.get();</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">(Recall that <tt>cin.get(ch)</tt> returns an object, not the character read.) This function works much the same as C’s <tt>getchar()</tt>, returning the character code as a type <tt>int</tt> value. Similarly, you can use the <tt>cout.put()</tt> function (see Chapter 3, “Dealing with Data”) to display the character:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>cout.put(ch);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">It works much like C’s <tt>putchar()</tt>, except that its argument should be type <tt>char</tt> instead of type <tt>int</tt>.</p>
<div class="docNote"><p class="docNoteTitle">Note</p>
<p class="docText">Originally, the <tt>put()</tt> member had the single prototype <tt>put(char)</tt>. You could pass to it an <tt>int</tt> argument, which would then be type cast to <tt>char</tt>. The Standard also calls for a single prototype. However, some C++ implementations provide three prototypes: <tt>put(char)</tt>, <tt>put(signed char)</tt>, and <tt>put(unsigned char)</tt>. Using <tt>put()</tt> with an <tt>int</tt> argument in these implementations generates an error message because there is more than one choice for converting the <tt>int</tt>. An explicit type cast, such as <tt>cin.put(char(ch))</tt>, works for <tt>int</tt> types.</p>
</div><br/>
<p class="docText">To use <tt>cin.get()</tt>
 successfully, you need to know how it handles the EOF condition. When 
the function reaches the EOF, there are no more characters to be 
returned. Instead, <tt>cin.get()</tt> returns a special value, represented by the symbolic constant <tt>EOF</tt>. This constant is defined in the <tt>iostream</tt> header file. The <tt>EOF</tt> value must be different from any valid character value so that the program won’t confuse <tt>EOF</tt> with a regular character. Typically, <tt>EOF</tt> is defined as the value <tt>-1</tt> because no character has an ASCII code of <tt>-1</tt>, but you don’t need to know the actual value. You can just use <tt>EOF</tt> in a program. For example, the heart of Listing 5.18 looks like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>char ch;
cin.get(ch);
while (cin.fail() == false)  // test for EOF
{
    cout &lt;&lt; ch;
    ++count;
    cin.get(ch);
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">You can use <tt>int ch</tt>, replace <tt>cin.get(char)</tt> with <tt>cin.get()</tt>, replace <tt>cout</tt> with <tt>cout.put()</tt>, and replace the <tt>cin.fail()</tt> test with a test for <tt>EOF</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int ch;      /// for compatibility with EOF value
ch = cin.get();
while (ch != EOF)
{
      cout.put(ch);   // cout.put(char(ch)) for some implementations
      ++count;
      ch = cin.get();
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">If <tt>ch</tt> is a character, the loop displays it. If <tt>ch</tt> is <tt>EOF</tt>, the loop terminates.</p>
<div class="docNote"><p class="docNoteTitle">Tip</p>
<p class="docText">You should realize that <tt>EOF</tt> does not represent a character in the input. Instead, it’s a signal that there are no more characters.</p>
</div><br/>
<p class="docText">There’s a subtle but important point about using <tt>cin.get()</tt> beyond the changes made so far. Because <tt>EOF</tt> represents a value outside the valid character codes, it’s possible that it might not be compatible with the <tt>char</tt> type. For example, on some systems type <tt>char</tt> is unsigned, so a <tt>char</tt> variable could never have the usual <tt>EOF</tt> value of <tt>-1</tt>. For this reason, if you use <tt>cin.get()</tt> (with no argument) and test for <tt>EOF</tt>, you must assign the return value to type <tt>int</tt> instead of to type <tt>char</tt>. Also if you make <tt>ch</tt> type <tt>int</tt> instead of type <tt>char</tt>, you might have to do a type cast to <tt>char</tt> when displaying <tt>ch</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Listing 5.19 incorporates the <tt>cin.get()</tt> approach into a new version of Listing 5.18. It also condenses the code by combining character input with the <tt>while</tt> loop test.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E6NBI">Listing 5.19. <tt>textin4.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>// textin4.cpp -- reading chars with cin.get()
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
int main(void)
{
    using namespace std;
    int ch;                         // should be int, not char
    int count = 0;

    while ((ch = cin.get()) != EOF) // test for end-of-file
    {
        cout.put(char(ch));
        ++count;
    }
    cout &lt;&lt; endl &lt;&lt; count &lt;&lt; " characters read\n";
    return 0;
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<div class="docNote"><p class="docNoteTitle">Note</p>
<p class="docText">Some systems either do not 
support simulated EOF from the keyboard or support it imperfectly, and 
that may prevent the example in Listing 5.19 from running as described. If you have been using <tt>cin.get()</tt>
 to freeze the screen until you can read it, that won’t work here 
because detecting the EOF turns off further attempts to read input. 
However, you can use a timing loop like that in Listing 5.14 to keep the screen visible for a while. Or you can use <tt>cin.clear(),</tt> as described in Chapter 17, to reset the input stream.</p>
</div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here’s a sample run of the program in Listing 5.19:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong">The sullen mackerel sulks in the shadowy shallows.&lt;ENTER&gt;</span>
The sullen mackerel sulks in the shadowy shallows.
<span class="docEmphStrong">Yes, but the blue bird of happiness harbors secrets.&lt;ENTER&gt;</span>
Yes, but the blue bird of happiness harbors secrets.
<span class="docEmphStrong">&lt;CTRL&gt;+&lt;Z&gt;&lt;ENTER&gt;</span>
104 characters read</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Let’s analyze the loop condition:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>while ((ch = cin.get()) != EOF)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The parentheses that enclose the subexpression <tt>ch = cin.get()</tt> cause the program to evaluate that expression first. To do the evaluation, the program first has to call the <tt>cin.get()</tt> function. Next, it assigns the function return value to <tt>ch</tt>.
 Because the value of an assignment statement is the value of the left 
operand, the whole subexpression reduces to the value of <tt>ch</tt>. If this value is <tt>EOF</tt>,
 the loop terminates; otherwise, it continues. The test condition needs 
all the parentheses. Suppose you leave some parentheses out:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>while (ch = cin.get() != EOF)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>!=</tt> operator has higher precedence than <tt>=</tt>, so first the program compares <tt>cin.get()</tt>’s return value to <tt>EOF</tt>. A comparison produces a <tt>false</tt> or <tt>true</tt> result; that <tt>bool</tt> value is converted to <tt>0</tt> or <tt>1</tt>, and that’s the value that gets assigned to <tt>ch</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Using <tt>cin.get(ch)</tt> (with an argument) for input, on the other hand, doesn’t create any type problems. Remember that the <tt>cin.get(char)</tt> function doesn’t assign a special value to <tt>ch</tt> at the EOF. In fact, it doesn’t assign anything to <tt>ch</tt> in that case. <tt>ch</tt> is never called on to hold a non-<tt>char</tt> value. Table 5.3 summarizes the differences between <tt>cin.get(char)</tt> and <tt>cin.get()</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText"></p><p></p><table cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0" frame="hsides" rules="none"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 5.3. <tt>cin.get(ch)</tt> Versus <tt>cin.get()</tt></h5></caption><colgroup align="left" span="3"><col width="200"></col><col width="200"></col><col width="200"></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Property</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top"><tt>cin.get(ch)</tt></th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top"><tt>ch=cin.get()</tt></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Method for conveying input character</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Assign to argument <tt>ch</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Use function return value to assign to <tt>ch</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Function return value for character input</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">A class <tt>istream</tt> object (<tt>true</tt> after <tt>bool</tt> conversion)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Code for character as type <tt>int</tt> value</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Function return value at EOF</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">A class <tt>istream</tt> object (<tt>false</tt> after <tt>bool conversion)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">EOF</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">So which should you use, <tt>cin.get()</tt> or <tt>cin.get(char)</tt>? The form with the character argument is integrated more fully into the object approach because its return value is an <tt>istream</tt>
 object. This means, for example, that you can chain uses. For example, 
the following code means read the next input character into <tt>ch1</tt> and the following input character into <tt>ch2</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>cin.get(ch1).get(ch2);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This works because the function call <tt>cin.get(ch1)</tt> returns the <tt>cin</tt> object, which then acts as the object to which <tt>get(ch2)</tt> is attached.</p>
<p class="docText">Probably the main use for the <tt>get()</tt> form is to let you make quick-and-dirty conversions from the <tt>getchar()</tt> and <tt>putchar()</tt> functions of <tt>stdio.h</tt> to the <tt>cin.get()</tt> and <tt>cout.put()</tt> methods of <tt>iostream</tt>. You just replace one header file with the other and globally replace <tt>getchar()</tt> and <tt>putchar()</tt> with their act-alike method equivalents. (If the old code uses a type <tt>int</tt> variable for input, you have to make further adjustments if your implementation has multiple prototypes for <tt>put()</tt>.)</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
