<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Summary</h3>
<p class="docText">C++ offers three varieties of loops: <tt>for</tt> loops, <tt>while</tt> loops, and <tt>do while</tt> loops. A loop cycles through the same set of instructions repetitively, as long as the loop test condition evaluates to <tt>true</tt> or nonzero and the loop terminates execution when the test condition evaluates to <tt>false</tt> or zero. The <tt>for</tt> loop and the <tt>while</tt>
 loop are entry-condition loops, meaning that they examine the test 
condition before executing the statements in the body of the loop. The <tt>do while</tt>
 loop is an exit-condition loop, meaning that it examines the test 
condition after executing the statements in the body of the loop.</p>
<p class="docText">The syntax for each loop 
calls for the loop body to consist of a single statement. However, that 
statement can be a compound statement, or block, formed by enclosing 
several statements within paired curly braces.</p>
<p class="docText">Relational expressions, which 
compare two values, are often used as loop test conditions. Relational 
expressions are formed by using one of the six relational operators: <tt>&lt;</tt>, <tt>&lt;=</tt>, <tt>==</tt>, <tt>&gt;=</tt>, <tt>&gt;</tt>, or <tt>!=</tt>. Relational expressions evaluate to the type <tt>bool</tt> values <tt>true</tt> and <tt>false</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Many programs read text input or text files character-by-character. The <tt>istream</tt> class provides several ways to do this. If <tt>ch</tt> is a type <tt>char</tt> variable, the following statement reads the next input character into <tt>ch</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>cin &gt;&gt; ch;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">However, it skips over 
spaces, newlines, and tabs. The following member function call reads the
 next input character, regardless of its value, and places it in <tt>ch</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>cin.get(ch);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The member function call <tt>cin.get()</tt> returns the next input character, including spaces, newlines, and tabs, so it can be used as follows:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>ch = cin.get();</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>cin.get(char)</tt> member function call reports encountering the EOF condition by returning a value with the <tt>bool</tt> conversion of <tt>false</tt>, whereas the <tt>cin.get()</tt> member function call reports the EOF by returning the value <tt>EOF</tt>, which is defined in the <tt>iostream</tt> file.</p>
<p class="docText">A nested loop is a loop within a loop. Nested loops provide a natural way to process two-dimensional arrays.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
