<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Programming Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Programming Exercises</h3>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1.</b></td><td class="docText">Write
 a program that requests the user to enter two integers. The program 
should then calculate and report the sum of all the integers between and
 including the two integers. At this point, assume that the smaller 
integer is entered first. For example, if the user enters <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>2</tt></span> and <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>9</tt></span>, the program should report that the sum of all the integers from 2 through 9 is 44.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2.</b></td><td class="docText">Redo Listing 5.4 using a type <tt>array</tt> object instead of a built-in array and type <tt>long double</tt> instead of <tt>long long</tt>. Find the value of 100!</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3.</b></td><td class="docText">Write
 a program that asks the user to type in numbers. After each entry, the 
program should report the cumulative sum of the entries to date. The 
program should terminate when the user enters <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>0</tt></span>.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4.</b></td><td class="docText">Daphne
 invests $100 at 10% simple interest. That is, every year, the 
investment earns 10% of the original investment, or $10 each and every 
year:
<blockquote><p></p><p class="docList">interest = 0.10 × original balance</p><p></p></blockquote>
<p class="docText">At the same time, Cleo 
invests $100 at 5% compound interest. That is, interest is 5% of the 
current balance, including previous additions of interest:</p>
<blockquote><p></p><p class="docList">interest = 0.05 × current balance</p><p></p></blockquote>
<p class="docText">Cleo earns 5% of $100 the first 
year, giving her $105. The next year she earns 5% of $105, or $5.25, and
 so on. Write a program that finds how many years it takes for the value
 of Cleo’s investment to exceed the value of Daphne’s investment and 
then displays the value of both investments at that time.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5.</b></td><td class="docText">You sell the book <span class="docEmphasis">C++ for Fools</span>.
 Write a program that has you enter a year’s worth of monthly sales (in 
terms of number of books, not of money). The program should use a loop 
to prompt you by month, using an array of <tt>char *</tt> (or an array of <tt>string</tt> objects, if you prefer) initialized to the month strings and storing the input data in an array of <tt>int</tt>. Then, the program should find the sum of the array contents and report the total sales for the year.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6.</b></td><td class="docText">Do
 Programming Exercise 5 but use a two-dimensional array to store input 
for 3 years of monthly sales. Report the total sales for each individual
 year and for the combined years.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>7.</b></td><td class="docText">Design a structure called <tt>car</tt> that holds the following information about an automobile: its make, as a string in a character array or in a <tt>string</tt>
 object, and the year it was built, as an integer. Write a program that 
asks the user how many cars to catalog. The program should then use <tt>new</tt> to create a dynamic array of that many <tt>car</tt>
 structures. Next, it should prompt the user to input the make (which 
might consist of more than one word) and year information for each 
structure. Note that this requires some care because it alternates 
reading strings with numeric data (see Chapter 4). Finally, it should display the contents of each structure. A sample run should look something like the following:
<div class="docText"><pre>How many cars do you wish to catalog? <span class="docEmphStrong">2</span>
Car #1:
Please enter the make: <span class="docEmphStrong">Hudson Hornet</span>
Please enter the year made: <span class="docEmphStrong">1952</span>
Car #2:
Please enter the make: <span class="docEmphStrong">Kaiser</span>
Please enter the year made: <span class="docEmphStrong">1951</span>
Here is your collection:
1952 Hudson Hornet
1951 Kaiser</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>8.</b></td><td class="docText">Write a program that uses an array of <tt>char</tt> and a loop to read one word at a time until the word <tt>done</tt> is entered. The program should then report the number of words entered (not counting <tt>done</tt>). A sample run could look like this:
<div class="docText"><pre>Enter words (to stop, type the word done):
<span class="docEmphStrong">anteater birthday category dumpster</span>
<span class="docEmphStrong">envy finagle geometry done for sure</span>
You entered a total of 7 words.</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">You should include the <tt>cstring</tt> header file and use the <tt>strcmp()</tt> function to make the comparison test.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9.</b></td><td class="docText">Write a program that matches the description of the program in Programming Exercise 8, but use a <tt>string</tt> class object instead of an array. Include the <tt>string</tt> header file and use a relational operator to make the comparison test.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>10.</b></td><td class="docText">Write
 a program using nested loops that asks the user to enter a value for 
the number of rows to display. It should then display that many rows of 
asterisks, with one asterisk in the first row, two in the second row, 
and so on. For each row, the asterisks are preceded by the number of 
periods needed to make all the rows display a total number of characters
 equal to the number of rows. A sample run would look like this:
<div class="docText"><pre>Enter number of rows: <span class="docEmphStrong">5</span>
....*
...**
..***
.****
*****</pre></div><br/></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
