<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>6. Branching Statements and Logical Operators</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h2 class="docChapterTitle" id="title-ID0EQOAI">6. Branching Statements and Logical Operators</h2>
<p class="docText">In this chapter you’ll learn about the following:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">The <tt>if</tt> statement</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>if else</tt> statement</p></li><li><p class="docList">Logical operators: <tt>&amp;&amp;</tt>, <tt>||</tt>, and <tt>!</tt></p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>cctype</tt> library of character functions</p></li><li><p class="docList">The conditional operator: <tt>?:</tt></p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>switch</tt> statement</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>continue</tt> and <tt>break</tt> statements</p></li><li><p class="docList">Number-reading loops</p></li><li><p class="docList">Basic file input/output</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">One of the keys to designing intelligent programs is to give them the ability to make decisions. Chapter 5,
 “Loops and Relational Expressions,” shows one kind of decision 
making—looping—in which a program decides whether to continue looping. 
This chapter investigates how C++ lets you use branching statements to 
decide among alternative actions. Which vampire-protection scheme 
(garlic or cross) should the program use? What menu choice has the user 
selected? Did the user enter a zero? C++ provides the <tt>if</tt> and <tt>switch</tt>
 statements to implement decisions, and they are this chapter’s main 
topics. This chapter also looks at the conditional operator, which 
provides another way to make a choice, and the logical operators, which 
let you combine two tests into one. Finally, the chapter takes a first 
look at file input/output.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
