<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Logical Expressions</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Logical Expressions</h3>
<p class="docText">Often you must test for more 
than one condition. For example, for a character to be a lowercase 
letter, its value must be greater than or equal to <tt>'a'</tt> and less than or equal to <tt>'z'</tt>. Or, if you ask a user to respond with a <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>y</tt></span> or an <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>n</tt></span>, you want to accept uppercase (<span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>Y</tt></span> and <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>N</tt></span>)
 as well as lowercase. To meet this kind of need, C++ provides three 
logical operators to combine or modify existing expressions. The 
operators are logical OR, written <tt>||</tt>; logical AND, written <tt>&amp;&amp;</tt>; and logical NOT, written <tt>!</tt>. Let’s examine them now.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E5SAI">The Logical OR Operator: <tt>||</tt></h4>
<p class="docText">In English, the word <span class="docEmphasis">or</span>
 can indicate when one or both of two conditions satisfy a requirement. 
For example, you can go to the MegaMicro company picnic if you <span class="docEmphasis">or</span> your spouse work for MegaMicro, Inc. The C++ equivalent is the logical OR operator, written <tt>||</tt>. This operator combines two expressions into one. If either or both of the original expressions is <tt>true</tt>, or nonzero, the resulting expression has the value <tt>true</tt>. Otherwise, the expression has the value <tt>false</tt>. Here are some examples:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>5 == 5 || 5 == 9   // true because first expression is true
5 &gt; 3 || 5 &gt; 10    // true because first expression is true
5 &gt; 8 || 5 &lt; 10    // true because second expression is true
5 &lt; 8 || 5 &gt; 2     // true because both expressions are true
5 &gt; 8 || 5 &lt; 2     // false because both expressions are false</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Because the <tt>||</tt> has a lower precedence than the relational operators, you don’t need to use parentheses in these expressions. Table 6.1 summarizes how the <tt>||</tt> operator works.</p>
<p></p><table cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0" frame="hsides" rules="none"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 6.1. The <tt>||</tt> Operator</h5></caption><colgroup align="left" span="3"><col width="200"></col><col width="200"></col><col width="200"></col></colgroup><thead></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" colspan="3" valign="top"><span class="docEmphBoldItalic">The Value of</span> <tt>expr1 || expr2</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"> </td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>expr1 == true</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>expr1 == false</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>expr2 == true</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>true</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>true</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>expr2 == false</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>true</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>false</tt></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">C++ provides that the <tt>||</tt> operator is a <span class="docEmphasis">sequence point</span>.
 That is, any value changes indicated on the left side take place before
 the right side is evaluated. (Or in the newer parlance of C++11, the 
subexpression to the left of the operator is sequenced before the 
subexpression to the right.) For example, consider the following 
expression:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>i++ &lt; 6 || i == j</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Suppose <tt>i</tt> originally has the value <tt>10</tt>. By the time the comparison with <tt>j</tt> takes place, <tt>i</tt> has the value <tt>11</tt>.
 Also C++ won’t bother evaluating the expression on the right if the 
expression on the left is true, for it only takes one true expression to
 make the whole logical expression true. (The semicolon and the comma 
operator, recall, are also sequence points.)</p>
<p class="docText">Listing 6.4 uses the <tt>||</tt> operator in an <tt>if</tt>
 statement to check for both uppercase and lowercase versions of a 
character. Also it uses C++’s string concatenation feature (see Chapter 4, “Compound Types”) to spread a single string over three lines.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EU3AI">Listing 6.4. <tt>or.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>// or.cpp -- using the logical OR operator
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
int main()
{
    using namespace std;
    cout &lt;&lt; "This program may reformat your hard disk\n"
            "and destroy all your data.\n"
            "Do you wish to continue? &lt;y/n&gt; ";
    char ch;
    cin &gt;&gt; ch;
    if (ch == 'y' || ch == 'Y')             // y or Y
        cout &lt;&lt; "You were warned!\a\a\n";
    else if (ch == 'n' || ch == 'N')        // n or N
        cout &lt;&lt; "A wise choice ... bye\n";
    else
    cout &lt;&lt; "That wasn't a y or n! Apparently you "
            "can't follow\ninstructions, so "
            "I'll trash your disk anyway.\a\a\a\n";
    return 0;
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">(The program doesn’t really carry out any threats.) Here is a sample run of the program in Listing 6.4:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>This program may reformat your hard disk
and destroy all your data.
Do you wish to continue? &lt;y/n&gt; <span class="docEmphStrong">N</span>
A wise choice ... bye</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The program reads just one character, so only the first character in the response matters. That means the user could have input <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>NO!</tt></span> instead of <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>N</tt></span>. The program would just read the <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>N</tt></span>. But if the program tried to read more input later, it would start at the <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>O</tt></span>.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ELABI">The Logical AND Operator: <tt>&amp;&amp;</tt></h4>
<p class="docText">The logical AND operator, written <tt>&amp;&amp;</tt>, also combines two expressions into one. The resulting expression has the value <tt>true</tt> only if <span class="docEmphasis">both</span> of the original expressions are <tt>true</tt>. Here are some examples:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>5 == 5 &amp;&amp; 4 == 4   // true because both expressions are true
5 == 3 &amp;&amp; 4 == 4   // false because first expression is false
5 &gt; 3 &amp;&amp; 5 &gt; 10    // false because second expression is false
5 &gt; 8 &amp;&amp; 5 &lt; 10    // false because first expression is false
5 &lt; 8 &amp;&amp; 5 &gt; 2     // true because both expressions are true
5 &gt; 8 &amp;&amp; 5 &lt; 2     // false because both expressions are false</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Because the <tt>&amp;&amp;</tt> has a lower precedence than the relational operators, you don’t need to use parentheses in these expressions. Like the <tt>||</tt> operator, the <tt>&amp;&amp;</tt>
 operator acts as a sequence point, so the left side is evaluated, and 
any side effects are carried out before the right side is evaluated. If 
the left side is false, the whole logical expression must be false, so 
C++ doesn’t bother evaluating the right side in that case. Table 6.2 summarizes how the <tt>&amp;&amp;</tt> operator works.</p>
<p class="docText"></p><p></p><table cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0" frame="hsides" rules="none"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 6.2. The <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>&amp;&amp;</tt></span> Operator</h5></caption><colgroup align="left" span="3"><col width="200"></col><col width="200"></col><col width="200"></col></colgroup><thead></thead><tbody><tr><td align="center" class="docTableCell" colspan="3" valign="top"><span class="docEmphBoldItalic">The Value of</span> <tt>expr1 &amp;&amp; expr2</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"> </td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>expr1 == true</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>expr1 == false</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>expr2 == true</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>true</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>false</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>expr2 == false</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>false</tt></td><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>false</tt></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">Listing 6.5 shows how to use <tt>&amp;&amp;</tt> to cope with a common situation, terminating a <tt>while</tt> loop, for two different reasons. In the listing, a <tt>while</tt> loop reads values into an array. One test (<tt>i &lt; ArSize</tt>) terminates the loop when the array is full. The second test (<tt>temp &gt;= 0</tt>) gives the user the option of quitting early by entering a negative number. The program uses the <tt>&amp;&amp;</tt> operator to combine the two tests into a single condition. The program also uses two <tt>if</tt> statements, an <tt>if else</tt> statement, and a <tt>for</tt> loop, so it demonstrates several topics from this chapter and Chapter 5.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EWJBI">Listing 6.5. <tt>and.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// and.cpp -- using the logical AND operator
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
const int ArSize = 6;
int main()
{
    using namespace std;
    float naaq[ArSize];
    cout &lt;&lt; "Enter the NAAQs (New Age Awareness Quotients) "
         &lt;&lt; "of\nyour neighbors. Program terminates "
         &lt;&lt; "when you make\n" &lt;&lt; ArSize &lt;&lt; " entries "
         &lt;&lt; "or enter a negative value.\n";

    int i = 0;
    float temp;
    cout &lt;&lt; "First value: ";
    cin &gt;&gt; temp;
    while (i &lt; ArSize &amp;&amp; temp &gt;= 0) // 2 quitting criteria
    {
        naaq[i] = temp;
        ++i;
        if (i &lt; ArSize)             // room left in the array,
        {
            cout &lt;&lt; "Next value: ";
            cin &gt;&gt; temp;            // so get next value
        }
    }
    if (i == 0)
        cout &lt;&lt; "No data--bye\n";
    else
    {
        cout &lt;&lt; "Enter your NAAQ: ";
        float you;
        cin &gt;&gt; you;
        int count = 0;
        for (int j = 0; j &lt; i; j++)
            if (naaq[j] &gt; you)
                ++count;
        cout &lt;&lt; count;
        cout &lt;&lt; " of your neighbors have greater awareness of\n"
             &lt;&lt; "the New Age than you do.\n";
    }
    return 0;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Note that the program in Listing 6.5 places input into the temporary variable <tt>temp</tt>. Only after it verifies that the input is valid does the program assign the value to the array.</p>
<p class="docText">Here are a couple of sample runs of the program. One terminates after six entries:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Enter the NAAQs (New Age Awareness Quotients) of
your neighbors. Program terminates when you make
6 entries or enter a negative value.
First value: <span class="docEmphStrong">28</span>
Next value: <span class="docEmphStrong">72</span>
Next value: <span class="docEmphStrong">15</span>
Next value: <span class="docEmphStrong">6</span>
Next value: <span class="docEmphStrong">130</span>
Next value: <span class="docEmphStrong">145</span>
Enter your NAAQ: <span class="docEmphStrong">50</span>
3 of your neighbors have greater awareness of
the New Age than you do.</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The second run terminates after a negative value is entered:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Enter the NAAQs (New Age Awareness Quotients) of
your neighbors. Program terminates when you make
6 entries or enter a negative value.
First value: <span class="docEmphStrong">123</span>
Next value: <span class="docEmphStrong">119</span>
Next value: <span class="docEmphStrong">4</span>
Next value: <span class="docEmphStrong">89</span>
Next value: <span class="docEmphStrong">-1</span>
Enter your NAAQ: <span class="docEmphStrong">123.031</span>
0 of your neighbors have greater awareness of
the New Age than you do.</pre></div><br/>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EJMBI">Program Notes</h5>
<p class="docText">The following is the input part of the program in Listing 6.5:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>cin &gt;&gt; temp;
while (i &lt; ArSize &amp;&amp; temp &gt;= 0) // 2 quitting criteria
{
    naaq[i] = temp;
    ++i;
    if (i &lt; ArSize)             // room left in the array,
    {
        cout &lt;&lt; "Next value: ";
        cin &gt;&gt; temp;            // so get next value
    }
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The program begins by reading the first input value into a temporary variable called <tt>temp</tt>. Then the <tt>while</tt> test condition checks whether there is still room left in the array (<tt>i &lt; ArSize</tt>) and whether the input value is non-negative (<tt>temp &gt;= 0</tt>). If it is, the program copies the <tt>temp</tt> value to the array and increases the array index by one. At that point, because array numbering starts at zero, <tt>i</tt> equals the total number of entries to date. That is, if <tt>i</tt> starts out at <tt>0</tt>, the first cycle through the loop assigns a value to <tt>naaq[0]</tt> and then sets <tt>i</tt> to <tt>1</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">The loop terminates when the 
array is filled or when the user enters a negative number. Note that the
 loop reads another value into <tt>temp</tt> only if <tt>i</tt> is less than <tt>ArSize</tt>—that is, only if there is still room left in the array.</p>
<p class="docText">After it gets data, the program uses an <tt>if else</tt>
 statement to comment if no data was entered (that is, if the first 
entry was a negative number) and to process the data if any is present.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EGRBI">Setting Up Ranges with <tt>&amp;&amp;</tt></h4>
<p class="docText">The <tt>&amp;&amp;</tt> operator also lets you set up a series of <tt>if else if else</tt> statements, with each choice corresponding to a particular range of values. Listing 6.6 illustrates the approach. It also shows a useful technique for handling a series of messages. Just as a pointer-to-<tt>char</tt> variable can identify a single string by pointing to its beginning, an array of pointers-to-<tt>char</tt> can identify a series of strings. You simply assign the address of each string to a different array element. Listing 6.6 uses the <tt>qualify</tt> array to hold the addresses of four strings. For example, <tt>qualify[1]</tt> holds the address of the string <tt>"mud tug-of-war\n"</tt>. The program can then use <tt>qualify[1</tt>] as it would any other pointer to a string—for example, with <tt>cout</tt> or with <tt>strlen()</tt> or <tt>strcmp()</tt>. Using the <tt>const</tt> qualifier protects these strings from accidental alterations.</p>
<p class="docText"></p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EYSBI">Listing 6.6. <tt>more_and.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// more_and.cpp -- using the logical AND operator
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
const char * qualify[4] =       // an array of pointers
{                               // to strings
    "10,000-meter race.\n",
    "mud tug-of-war.\n",
    "masters canoe jousting.\n",
    "pie-throwing festival.\n"
};
int main()
{
    using namespace std;
    int age;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Enter your age in years: ";
    cin &gt;&gt; age;
    int index;

    if (age &gt; 17 &amp;&amp; age &lt; 35)
        index = 0;
    else if (age &gt;= 35 &amp;&amp; age &lt; 50)
        index = 1;
    else if (age &gt;= 50 &amp;&amp; age &lt; 65)
        index = 2;
    else
        index = 3;

    cout &lt;&lt; "You qualify for the " &lt;&lt; qualify[index];
    return 0;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here is a sample run of the program in Listing 6.6:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Enter your age in years: <span class="docEmphStrong">87</span>
You qualify for the pie-throwing festival.</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The entered age doesn’t match any of the test ranges, so the program sets <tt>index</tt> to <tt>3</tt> and then prints the corresponding string.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EVUBI">Program Notes</h5>
<p class="docText">In Listing 6.6, the expression <tt>age &gt; 17 &amp;&amp; age &lt; 35</tt> tests for ages between the two values—that is, ages in the range 18–34. The expression <tt>age &gt;= 35 &amp;&amp; age &lt; 50</tt> uses the <tt>&gt;=</tt> operator to include 35 in its range, which is 35–49. If the program used <tt>age &gt; 35 &amp;&amp; age &lt; 50</tt>,
 the value 35 would be missed by all the tests. When you use range 
tests, you should check that the ranges don’t have holes between them 
and that they don’t overlap. Also you need to be sure to set up each range correctly; see the sidebar “Range Tests,” later in this section.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>if else</tt> statement serves to select an array index, which, in turn, identifies a particular string.</p>
<p></p><div class="box">
<h2 class="docSidebarTitle">Range Tests</h2>
<p class="docText">Note that each part of a range test should use the AND operator to join two complete relational expressions:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>if (age &gt; 17 &amp;&amp; age &lt; 35)   // OK</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Don’t borrow from mathematics and use the following notation:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>if (17 &lt; age &lt; 35)          // Don't do this!</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">If you make this mistake, the compiler won’t catch it as an error because it is still valid C++ syntax. The <tt>&lt;</tt> operator associates from left to right, so the previous expression means the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>if ( (17 &lt; age) &lt; 35)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">But <tt>17 &lt; age</tt> is either <tt>true</tt>, or <tt>1</tt>, or else <tt>false</tt>, or <tt>0</tt>. In either case, the expression <tt>17 &lt; age</tt> is less than <tt>35</tt>, so the entire test is always <tt>true</tt>!</p>
</div><p></p><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EE1BI">The Logical NOT Operator: <tt>!</tt></h4>
<p class="docText">The <tt>!</tt> operator negates, or reverses the truth value of, the expression that follows it. That is, if <tt>expression</tt> is <tt>true</tt>, then <tt>!expression</tt> is <tt>false</tt>—and vice versa. More precisely, if <tt>expression</tt> is <tt>true</tt>, or nonzero, then <tt>!expression</tt> is <tt>false</tt>. Incidentally, many people call the exclamation point <span class="docEmphasis">bang</span>, making <tt>!x</tt> “bang-ex” and <tt>!!x</tt> “bang-bang-ex.”</p>
<p class="docText">Usually you can more clearly express a relationship without using the <tt>!</tt> operator:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>if (!(x &gt; 5))                 // if (x &lt;= 5) is clearer</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">But the <tt>!</tt> operator can be useful with functions that return <tt>true</tt>/<tt>false</tt> values or values that can be interpreted that way. For example, <tt>strcmp(s1,s2)</tt> returns a nonzero (<tt>true</tt>) value if the two C-style strings <tt>s1</tt> and <tt>s2</tt> are different from each other and a zero value if they are the same. This implies that <tt>!strcmp(s1,s2)</tt> is <tt>true</tt> if the two strings are equal.</p>
<p class="docText">Listing 6.7 uses the technique of applying the <tt>!</tt> operator to a function return value to screen numeric input for suitability to be assigned to type <tt>int</tt>. The user-defined function <tt>is_int()</tt>, which we’ll discuss further in a moment, returns <tt>true</tt> if its argument is within the range of values that can be assigned to type <tt>int</tt>. The program then uses the test <tt>while(!is_int(num))</tt> to reject values that don’t fit in the range.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E63BI">Listing 6.7. <tt>not.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// not.cpp -- using the not operator
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;climits&gt;
bool is_int(double);
int main()
{
    using namespace std;
    double num;

    cout &lt;&lt; "Yo, dude! Enter an integer value: ";
    cin &gt;&gt; num;
    while (!is_int(num))    // continue while num is not int-able
    {
        cout &lt;&lt; "Out of range -- please try again: ";
        cin &gt;&gt; num;
    }
    int val = int (num);    // type cast
    cout &lt;&lt; "You've entered the integer " &lt;&lt; val &lt;&lt; "\nBye\n";
    return 0;
}

bool is_int(double x)
{
    if (x &lt;= INT_MAX &amp;&amp; x &gt;= INT_MIN)   // use climits values
        return true;
    else
        return false;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here is a sample run of the program in Listing 6.7 on a system with a 32-bit <tt>int</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Yo, dude! Enter an integer value: <span class="docEmphStrong">6234128679</span>
Out of range -- please try again: <span class="docEmphStrong">-8000222333</span>
Out of range -- please try again: <span class="docEmphStrong">99999</span>
You've entered the integer 99999
Bye</pre></div><br/>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EI5BI">Program Notes</h5>
<p class="docText">If you enter a too-large value to a program reading a type <tt>int</tt>, many C++ implementations simply truncate the value to fit, without informing you that data was lost. The program in Listing 6.7 avoids that by first reading the potential <tt>int</tt> as a <tt>double</tt>. The <tt>double</tt> type has more than enough precision to hold a typical <tt>int</tt> value, and its range is much greater. Another choice for holding the input value would be the <tt>long long</tt> type, assuming that it is wider than <tt>int</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">The Boolean function <tt>is_int()</tt> uses the two symbolic constants (<tt>INT_MAX</tt> and <tt>INT_MIN</tt>), defined in the <tt>climits</tt> file (discussed in Chapter 3, “Dealing with Data”), to determine whether its argument is within the proper limits. If so, the program returns a value of <tt>true</tt>; otherwise, it returns <tt>false</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>main()</tt> program uses a <tt>while</tt> loop to reject invalid input until the user gets it right. You could make the program friendlier by displaying the <tt>int</tt> limits when the input is out of range. After the input has been validated, the program assigns it to an <tt>int</tt> variable.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EDHCI">Logical Operator Facts</h4>
<p class="docText">As mentioned earlier in this 
chapter, the C++ logical OR and logical AND operators have a lower 
precedence than relational operators. This means that an expression such
 as this</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>x &gt; 5 &amp;&amp; x &lt; 10</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">is interpreted this way:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>(x &gt; 5) &amp;&amp; (x &lt; 10)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>!</tt> operator, on 
the other hand, has a higher precedence than any of the relational or 
arithmetic operators. Therefore, to negate an expression, you should 
enclose the expression in parentheses, like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>!(x &gt; 5)     // is it false that x is greater than 5
!x &gt; 5       // is !x greater than 5</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Incidentally, the second expression here is always <tt>false</tt> because <tt>!x</tt> can have only the values <tt>true</tt> or <tt>false</tt>, which get converted to <tt>1</tt> or <tt>0</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">The logical AND operator has a higher precedence than the logical OR operator. Thus this expression:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>age &gt; 30 &amp;&amp; age &lt; 45 || weight &gt; 300</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">means the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>(age &gt; 30 &amp;&amp; age &lt; 45) || weight &gt; 300</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">That is, one condition is that <tt>age</tt> be in the range 31–44, and the second condition is that <tt>weight</tt> be greater than 300. The entire expression is <tt>true</tt> if one or the other or both of these conditions are <tt>true</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">You can, of course, use parentheses to tell the program the interpretation you want. For example, suppose you want to use <tt>&amp;&amp;</tt> to combine the condition that <tt>age</tt> be greater than 50 or <tt>weight</tt> be greater than 300 with the condition that <tt>donation</tt> be greater than 1,000. You have to enclose the OR part within parentheses:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>(age &gt; 50 || weight &gt; 300) &amp;&amp; donation &gt; 1000</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Otherwise, the compiler combines the <tt>weight</tt> condition with the <tt>donation</tt> condition instead of with the <tt>age</tt> condition.</p>
<p class="docText">Although the C++ operator 
precedence rules often make it possible to write compound comparisons 
without using parentheses, the simplest course of action is to use 
parentheses to group the tests, whether or not the parentheses are 
needed. It makes the code easier to read, it doesn’t force someone else 
to look up some of the less commonly used precedence rules, and it reduces the chance of making errors because you don’t quite remember the exact rule that applies.</p>
<p class="docText">C++ guarantees that when a 
program evaluates a logical expression, it evaluates it from left to 
right and stops evaluation as soon as it knows what the answer is. 
Suppose, for example, that you have this condition:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>x != 0  &amp;&amp; 1.0 / x &gt; 100.0</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">If the first condition is <tt>false</tt>, then the whole expression must be <tt>false</tt>. That’s because for this expression to be <tt>true</tt>, each individual condition must be <tt>true</tt>. Knowing the first condition is <tt>false</tt>,
 the program doesn’t bother evaluating the second condition. That’s 
fortunate in this example because evaluating the second condition would 
result in dividing by zero, which is not in a computer’s repertoire of 
possible actions.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E1SCI">Alternative Representations</h4>
<p class="docText">Not all keyboards provide all 
the symbols used for the logical operators, so the C++ Standard provides
 alternative representations, as shown in Table 6.3. The identifiers <tt>and</tt>, <tt>or</tt>, and <tt>not</tt>
 are C++ reserved words, meaning that you can’t use them as names for 
variables and so on. They are not considered keywords because they are 
alternative representations of existing language features. Incidentally,
 these are not reserved words in C, but a C program can use them as 
operators, provided that the program includes the <tt>iso646.h</tt> header file. C++ does not require using a header file.</p>
<p></p><table cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0" frame="hsides" rules="none"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 6.3. Logical Operators: Alternative Representations</h5></caption><colgroup align="left" span="2"><col width="200"></col><col width="400"></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Operator</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Alternative Representation</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>&amp;&amp;</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>and</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>||</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>or</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>!</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>not</tt></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
