<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>The cctype Library of Character Functions</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">The <tt>cctype</tt> Library of Character Functions</h3>
<p class="docText">C++ has inherited from C a handy package of character-related functions, prototyped in the <tt>cctype</tt> header file (<tt>ctype.h</tt>,
 in the older style), that simplify such tasks as determining whether a 
character is an uppercase letter or a digit or punctuation. For example,
 the <tt>isalpha(ch)</tt> function returns a nonzero value if <tt>ch</tt> is a letter and a zero value otherwise. Similarly, the <tt>ispunct(ch)</tt> function returns a <tt>true</tt> value only if <tt>ch</tt> is a punctuation character, such as a comma or period. (These functions have return type <tt>int</tt> rather than <tt>bool</tt>, but the usual <tt>bool</tt> conversions allow you to treat them as type <tt>bool</tt>.)</p>
<p class="docText">Using these functions is more 
convenient than using the AND and OR operators. For example, here’s how 
you might use AND and OR to test whether a character <tt>ch</tt> is an alphabetic character:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>if ((ch &gt;= 'a' &amp;&amp; ch &lt;= 'z') || (ch &gt;= 'A' &amp;&amp; ch &lt;= 'Z'))</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Compare that to using <tt>isalpha()</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>if (isalpha(ch))</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Not only is <tt>isalpha()</tt>
 easier to use, it is more general. The AND/OR form assumes that 
character codes for A through Z are in sequence, with no other 
characters having codes in that range. This assumption is true for ASCII
 codes, but it isn’t always true in general.</p>
<p class="docText">Listing 6.8 demonstrates some functions from the <tt>cctype</tt> family. In particular, it uses <tt>isalpha()</tt>, which tests for alphabetic characters; <tt>isdigits()</tt>, which tests for digit characters, such as 3; <tt>isspace()</tt>, which tests for whitespace characters, such as newlines, spaces, and tabs; and <tt>ispunct()</tt>, which tests for punctuation characters. The program also reviews the <tt>if else if</tt> structure and using a <tt>while</tt> loop with <tt>cin.get(char)</tt>.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EMZAI">Listing 6.8. <tt>cctypes.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// cctypes.cpp -- using the ctype.h library
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;cctype&gt;              // prototypes for character functions
int main()
{
    using namespace std;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Enter text for analysis, and type @"
            " to terminate input.\n";
    char ch;
    int whitespace = 0;
    int digits = 0;
    int chars = 0;
    int punct = 0;
    int others = 0;

    cin.get(ch);                // get first character
    while (ch != '@')            // test for sentinel
    {
        if(isalpha(ch))         // is it an alphabetic character?
            chars++;
        else if(isspace(ch))    // is it a whitespace character?
            whitespace++;
        else if(isdigit(ch))    // is it a digit?
            digits++;
        else if(ispunct(ch))    // is it punctuation?
            punct++;
        else
            others++;
        cin.get(ch);            // get next character
    }
    cout &lt;&lt; chars &lt;&lt; " letters, "
         &lt;&lt; whitespace &lt;&lt; " whitespace, "
         &lt;&lt; digits &lt;&lt; " digits, "
         &lt;&lt; punct &lt;&lt; " punctuations, "
         &lt;&lt; others &lt;&lt; " others.\n";
    return 0;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here is a sample run of the program in Listing 6.8 (note that the whitespace count includes newlines):</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Enter text for analysis, and type @ to terminate input.
<span class="docEmphStrong">AdrenalVision International producer Adrienne Vismonger</span>
<span class="docEmphStrong">announced production of their new 3-D film, a remake of</span>
<span class="docEmphStrong">"My Dinner with Andre," scheduled for 2013. "Wait until</span>
<span class="docEmphStrong">you see the the new scene with an enraged Collossipede!"@</span>
177 letters, 33 whitespace, 5 digits, 9 punctuations, 0 others.</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Table 6.4 summarizes the functions available in the <tt>cctype</tt> package. Some systems may lack some of these functions or have additional ones.</p>
<p></p><table cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0" frame="hsides" rules="none"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 6.4. The <tt>cctype</tt> Character Functions</h5></caption><colgroup align="left" span="2"><col width="200"></col><col width="400"></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Function Name</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Return Value</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>isalnum()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">This function returns <tt>true</tt> if the argument is alphanumeric (that is, a letter or a digit).</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>isalpha()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">This function returns <tt>true</tt> if the argument is alphabetic.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>isblank()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">This function returns <tt>true</tt> if the argument is a space or a horizontal tab.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>iscntrl()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">This function returns <tt>true</tt> if the argument is a control character.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>isdigit()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">This function returns <tt>true</tt> if the argument is a decimal digit (0–9).</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>isgraph()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">This function returns <tt>true</tt> if the argument is any printing character other than a space.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>islower()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">This function returns <tt>true</tt> if the argument is a lowercase letter.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>isprint()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">This function returns <tt>true</tt> if the argument is any printing character, including a space.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>ispunct()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">This function returns <tt>true</tt> if the argument is a punctuation character.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>isspace()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">This function returns <tt>true</tt>
 if the argument is a standard whitespace character (that is, a space, 
formfeed, newline, carriage return, horizontal tab, vertical tab).</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>isupper()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">This function returns <tt>true</tt> if the argument is an uppercase letter.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>isxdigit()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">This function returns <tt>true</tt> if the argument is a hexadecimal digit character (that is, 0–9, a–f, or A–F).</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>tolower()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">If the argument is an uppercase character, <tt>tolower()</tt> returns the lowercase version of that character; otherwise, it returns the argument unaltered.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>toupper()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">If the argument is a lowercase character, <tt>toupper()</tt> returns the uppercase version of that character; otherwise, it returns the argument unaltered.</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
