<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>The ?: Operator</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">The <tt>?:</tt> Operator</h3>
<p class="docText">C++ has an operator that can often be used instead of the <tt>if else</tt> statement. This operator is called the <span class="docEmphasis">conditional operator</span>, written <tt>?:</tt>, and, for you trivia buffs, it is the only C++ operator that requires three operands. The general form looks like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphasis">expression1</span> ? <span class="docEmphasis">expression2</span> : <span class="docEmphasis">expression3</span></pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">If <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>expression1</tt></span> is <tt>true</tt>, then the value of the whole conditional expression is the value of <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>expression2</tt></span>. Otherwise, the value of the whole expression is the value of <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>expression3</tt></span>. Here are two examples that show how the operator works:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>5 &gt; 3 ? 10 : 12  // 5 &gt; 3 is true, so expression value is 10
3 == 9? 25 : 18  // 3 == 9 is false, so expression value is 18</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">We can paraphrase the first 
example this way: If 5 is greater than 3, the expression evaluates to 
10; otherwise, it evaluates to 12. In real programming situations, of 
course, the expressions would involve variables.</p>
<p class="docText">Listing 6.9 uses the conditional operator to determine the larger of two values.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EF3AI">Listing 6.9. <tt>condit.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>// condit.cpp -- using the conditional operator
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
int main()
{
    using namespace std;
    int a, b;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Enter two integers: ";
    cin &gt;&gt; a &gt;&gt; b;
    cout &lt;&lt; "The larger of " &lt;&lt; a &lt;&lt; " and " &lt;&lt; b;
    int c = a &gt; b ? a : b;   // c = a if a &gt; b, else c = b
    cout &lt;&lt; " is " &lt;&lt; c &lt;&lt; endl;
    return 0;
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here is a sample run of the program in Listing 6.9:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Enter two integers: <span class="docEmphStrong">25 28</span>
The larger of 25 and 28 is 28</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The key part of the program is this statement:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int c = a &gt; b ? a : b;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">It produces the same result as the following statements:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int c;
if (a &gt; b)
    c = a;
else
    c = b;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Compared to the <tt>if else</tt>
 sequence, the conditional operator is more concise but, at first 
glance, less obvious. One difference between the two approaches is that 
the conditional operator produces an expression and hence a single value
 that can be assigned or be incorporated into a larger expression, as 
the program in Listing 6.9 does when it assigns the value of the conditional expression to the variable <tt>c</tt>.
 The conditional operator’s concise form, unusual syntax, and overall 
weird appearance make it a great favorite among programmers who 
appreciate those qualities. One favorite trick for the reprehensible 
goal of concealing the purpose of code is to nest conditional 
expressions within one another, as the following mild example shows:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>const char x[2] [20] = {"Jason ","at your service\n"};
const char * y = "Quillstone ";

for (int i = 0; i &lt; 3; i++)
    cout &lt;&lt; ((i &lt; 2)? !i ? x [i] : y : x[1]);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This is merely an obscure (but, by no means maximally obscure) way to print the three strings in the following order:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Jason Quillstone at your service</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In terms of readability, the conditional operator is best suited for simple relationships and simple expression values:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>x = (x &gt; y) ? x : y;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">If the code becomes more involved, it can probably be expressed more clearly as an <tt>if else</tt> statement.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
