<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Number-Reading Loops</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Number-Reading Loops</h3>
<p class="docText">Say
 you’re preparing a program to read a series of numbers into an array. 
You want to give the user the option to terminate input before filling 
the array. One way to do this is utilize how <tt>cin</tt> behaves. Consider the following code:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int n;
cin &gt;&gt; n;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">What happens if the user responds by entering a word instead of a number? Four things occur in such a mismatch:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">The value of <tt>n</tt> is left unchanged.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The mismatched input is left in the input queue.</p></li><li><p class="docList">An error flag is set in the <tt>cin</tt> object.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The call to the <tt>cin</tt> method, if converted to type <tt>bool</tt>, returns <tt>false</tt>.</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">The fact that the method returns <tt>false</tt>
 means that you can use non-numeric input to terminate a number-reading 
loop. The fact that non-numeric input sets an error flag means that you 
have to reset the flag before the program can read more input. The <tt>clear()</tt> method, which also resets the end-of-file (EOF) condition (see Chapter 5), resets the bad input flag. (Either bad input or the EOF can cause <tt>cin</tt> to return <tt>false</tt>. Chapter 17,
 “Input, Output, and Files,” discusses how to distinguish between the 
two cases.) Let’s look at a couple examples that illustrate these 
techniques.</p>
<p class="docText">Say you want to write a 
program that calculates the average weight of your day’s catch of fish. 
There’s a five-fish limit, so a five-element array can hold all the 
data, but it’s possible that you could catch fewer fish. Listing 6.13 uses a loop that terminates if the array is full or if you enter non-numeric input.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EQABI">Listing 6.13. <tt>cinfish.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// cinfish.cpp -- non-numeric input terminates loop
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
const int Max = 5;
int main()
{
    using namespace std;
// get data
    double fish[Max];
    cout &lt;&lt; "Please enter the weights of your fish.\n";
    cout &lt;&lt; "You may enter up to " &lt;&lt; Max
            &lt;&lt; " fish &lt;q to terminate&gt;.\n";
    cout &lt;&lt; "fish #1: ";
    int i = 0;
    while (i &lt; Max &amp;&amp; cin &gt;&gt; fish[i]) {
        if (++i &lt; Max)
            cout &lt;&lt; "fish #" &lt;&lt; i+1 &lt;&lt; ": ";
    }
// calculate average
    double total = 0.0;
    for (int j = 0; j &lt; i; j++)
        total += fish[j];
// report results
    if (i == 0)
        cout &lt;&lt; "No fish\n";
    else
        cout &lt;&lt; total / i &lt;&lt; " = average weight of "
            &lt;&lt; i &lt;&lt; " fish\n";
    cout &lt;&lt; "Done.\n";
    return 0;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<div class="docNote"><p class="docNoteTitle">Note</p>
<p class="docText">As mentioned earlier, some 
execution environments require additional code to keep the window open 
so that you can see the output. In this example, because the input <tt>'q'</tt> turns off further input, the treatment is more elaborate:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>if (!cin)  // input terminated by non-numeric response
{
    cin.clear();  // reset input
    cin.get();    // read q
}
cin.get();        // read end of line after last input
cin.get();        // wait for user to press &lt;Enter&gt;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">You also could use code similar to this in Listing 6.13 if you wanted the program to accept more input after exiting the loop.</p>
<p class="docText">Listing 6.14 further illustrates using the <tt>cin</tt> return value and resetting <tt>cin</tt>.</p>
</div><br/>
<p class="docText">The expression <tt>cin &gt;&gt; fish[i]</tt> in Listing 6.13 is really a <tt>cin</tt> method function call, and the function returns <tt>cin</tt>. If <tt>cin</tt> is part of a test condition, it’s converted to type <tt>bool</tt>. The conversion value is <tt>true</tt> if input succeeds and <tt>false</tt> otherwise. A <tt>false</tt> value for the expression terminates the loop. By the way, here’s a sample run of the program:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Please enter the weights of your fish.
You may enter up to 5 fish &lt;q to terminate&gt;.
fish #1: <span class="docEmphStrong">30</span>
fish #2: <span class="docEmphStrong">35</span>
fish #3: <span class="docEmphStrong">25</span>
fish #4: <span class="docEmphStrong">40</span>
fish #5: <span class="docEmphStrong">q</span>
32.5 = average weight of 4 fish
Done.</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Note the following line of code:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>while (i &lt; Max &amp;&amp; cin &gt;&gt; fish[i]) {</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Recall that C++ doesn’t evaluate the right side of a logical AND expression if the left side is <tt>false</tt>. In such a case, evaluating the right side means using <tt>cin</tt> to place input into the array. If <tt>i</tt> does equal <tt>Max</tt>, the loop terminates without trying to read a value into a location past the end of the array.</p>
<p class="docText">The preceding example 
doesn’t attempt to read any input after non-numeric input. Let’s look at
 a case that does. Suppose you are required to submit exactly five golf 
scores to a C++ program to establish your average. If a user enters 
non-numeric input, the program should object, insisting on numeric 
input. As you’ve seen, you can use the value of a <tt>cin</tt>
 input expression to test for non-numeric input. Suppose the program 
finds that the user enters the wrong stuff. It needs to take three 
steps:</p>

<table border="0" class="docText"><tbody><tr><td valign="top" width="25"><div class="docText"><b>1. </b></div></td><td><div class="docText">Reset <tt>cin</tt> to accept new input.<br/><br/></div></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="25"><div class="docText"><b>2. </b></div></td><td><div class="docText">Get rid of the bad input.<br/><br/></div></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="25"><div class="docText"><b>3. </b></div></td><td><div class="docText">Prompt the user to try again.<br/><br/></div></td></tr></tbody></table>
<p class="docText">Note that the program has to reset <tt>cin</tt> before getting rid of the bad input. Listing 6.14 shows how these tasks can be accomplished.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EHGBI">Listing 6.14. <tt>cingolf.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// cingolf.cpp -- non-numeric input skipped
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
const int Max = 5;
int main()
{
    using namespace std;
// get data
    int golf[Max];
    cout &lt;&lt; "Please enter your golf scores.\n";
    cout &lt;&lt; "You must enter " &lt;&lt; Max &lt;&lt; " rounds.\n";
    int i;
    for (i = 0; i &lt; Max; i++)
    {
        cout &lt;&lt; "round #" &lt;&lt; i+1 &lt;&lt; ": ";
        while (!(cin &gt;&gt; golf[i])) {
            cin.clear();     // reset input
            while (cin.get() != '\n')
                continue;    // get rid of bad input
            cout &lt;&lt; "Please enter a number: ";
        }
    }
// calculate average
    double total = 0.0;
    for (i = 0; i &lt; Max; i++)
        total += golf[i];
// report results
    cout &lt;&lt; total / Max &lt;&lt; " = average score "
            &lt;&lt; Max &lt;&lt; " rounds\n";
    return 0;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here is a sample run of the program in Listing 6.14:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Please enter your golf scores.
You must enter 5 rounds.
round #1: <span class="docEmphStrong">88</span>
round #2: <span class="docEmphStrong">87</span>
round #3: <span class="docEmphStrong">must i?</span>
Please enter a number: <span class="docEmphStrong">103</span>
round #4: <span class="docEmphStrong">94</span>
round #5: <span class="docEmphStrong">86</span>
91.6 = average score 5 rounds</pre></div><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EXHBI">Program Notes</h4>
<p class="docText">The heart of the error-handling code in Listing 6.14 is the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>while (!(cin &gt;&gt; golf[i])) {
    cin.clear();     // reset input
    while (cin.get() != '\n')
        continue; // get rid of bad input
    cout &lt;&lt; "Please enter a number: ";
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">If the user enters <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>88</tt></span>, the <tt>cin</tt> expression is <tt>true</tt>, and a value is placed in the array. Furthermore, because <tt>cin</tt> is <tt>true</tt>, the expression <tt>!(cin &gt;&gt; golf[i])</tt> is <tt>false</tt>, and this inner loop terminates. But if the user enters <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>must i?</tt></span>, the <tt>cin</tt> expression is <tt>false</tt>, nothing is placed into the array, the expression <tt>!(cin &gt;&gt; golf[i])</tt> is <tt>true</tt>, and the program enters the inner <tt>while</tt> loop. The first statement in the loop uses the <tt>clear()</tt> method to reset input. If you omit this statement, the program refuses to read any more input. Next, the program uses <tt>cin.get()</tt> in a <tt>while</tt>
 loop to read the remaining input through the end of the line. This gets
 rid of the bad input, along with anything else on the line. Another 
approach is to read to the next whitespace, which gets rid of bad input 
one word at a time instead of one line at a time. Finally, the program 
tells the user to enter a number.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
