<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Simple File Input/Output</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Simple File Input/Output</h3>
<p class="docText">Sometimes
 keyboard input is not the best choice. For example, suppose you’ve 
written a program to analyze stocks, and you’ve downloaded a file of 
1,000 stock prices. It would be far more convenient to have the program 
read the file directly than to hand-enter all the values. Similarly, it 
can be convenient to have a program write output to a file so that you 
have a permanent record of the results.</p>
<p class="docText">Fortunately, C++ makes it 
simple to transfer the skills you’ve acquired for keyboard input and 
display output (collectively termed <span class="docEmphasis">console I/O</span>) to file input and output (<span class="docEmphasis">file I/O</span>). Chapter 17 explores these topics more extensively, but we’ll look at simple text file I/O now.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EBABI">Text I/O and Text Files</h4>
<p class="docText">Let’s re-examine the concept of text <span class="docEmphasis">I/O</span>. When you use <tt>cin</tt>
 for input, the program views input as a series of bytes, with each byte
 being interpreted as a character code. No matter what the destination 
data type, the input begins as character data—that is, text data. The <tt>cin</tt>
 object then has the responsibility of translating text to other types. 
To see how this works, let’s examine how different code handles the same
 line of input.</p>
<p class="docText">Suppose you have the following sample line of input:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong">38.5 19.2</span></pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Let’s see how this line of input is handled by <tt>cin</tt> when used with different data types. First, let’s try type <tt>char</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>char ch;
cin &gt;&gt; ch;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The first character in the input line is assigned to <tt>ch</tt>. In this case, the first character is the digit <tt>3</tt>, and the character code (in binary) for this digit is stored in <tt>ch</tt>. The input and the destination are both characters, so no translation is needed. (Note that it’s not the numeric value <tt>3</tt> that is stored; rather, it is the character code for the digit 3.) After the input statement, the digit character <tt>8</tt> is the next character in the input queue and will be the next character examined by the next input operation.</p>
<p class="docText">Next, let’s try the <tt>int</tt> type with the same input:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int n;
cin &gt;&gt; n;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In this case, <tt>cin</tt> reads up to the first non-digit character. That is, it reads the <tt>3</tt> digit and the <tt>8</tt> digit, leaving the period as the next character in the input queue. Then <tt>cin</tt> computes that these two characters correspond to the numeric value <tt>38</tt>, and the binary code for <tt>38</tt> is copied to <tt>n</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Next, let’s try the <tt>double</tt> type:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>double x;
cin &gt;&gt; x;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In this case, <tt>cin</tt> reads up to the first character that’s not part of a floating-point number. That is, it reads the <tt>3</tt> digit, the <tt>8</tt> digit, the period character, and the <tt>5</tt> digit, leaving the space as the next character in the input queue. Then <tt>cin</tt> computes that these four characters correspond to the numeric value <tt>38.5</tt>, and the binary code (floating-point format) for 38.5 is copied to <tt>x</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Next, let’s try the <tt>char</tt> array type:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>char word[50];
cin &gt;&gt; word;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In this case, <tt>cin</tt> reads up to the whitespace character. That is, it reads the <tt>3</tt> digit, the <tt>8</tt> digit, the period character, and the <tt>5</tt> digit, leaving the space as the next character in the input queue. Then <tt>cin</tt> stores the character code for these four characters in the array <tt>word</tt> and adds a terminating null character. No translation is needed.</p>
<p class="docText">Finally, let’s try an input variant for the <tt>char</tt> array type:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>char word[50];
cin.geline(word,50);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In this case, <tt>cin</tt> 
reads up through the newline character (the sample input line had fewer 
than 50 characters). All the characters through the final <tt>2</tt> digit are stored in the array <tt>word</tt>,
 and a null character is added. The newline character is discarded, and 
the next character in the input queue will be the first character on the
 next line. No translation is needed.</p>
<p class="docText">On output, the opposite 
translations take place. That is, integers are converted to sequences of
 digit characters, and floating-point numbers are converted to sequences
 of digits and other characters (for example, 284.53 or -1.587E+06). 
Character data requires no translation.</p>
<p class="docText">The main point to this is 
that all the input starts out as text. Therefore, the file equivalent to
 console input is a text file—that is, a file in which each byte stores a
 character code. Not all files are text files. For example, databases 
and spreadsheets store numeric data in numeric forms—that is, in binary 
integer or binary floating-point form. Also, word processing files may 
contain text information, but they also contain non-text data to 
describe formatting, fonts, printers, and the like.</p>
<p class="docText">The file I/O discussed in this
 chapter parallels console I/O and thus should be used with text files. 
To create a text file for input, you use a text editor, such as Notepad 
for Windows, or vi or emacs for Unix/Linux. You can use a word 
processor, as long as you save the file in text format. The code editors
 that are part of IDEs also produce text files; indeed, the source code 
files are examples of text files. Similarly, you can use text editors to
 look at files created with text output.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E6GBI">Writing to a Text File</h4>
<p class="docText">For file output, C++ uses analogs to <tt>cout</tt>. So to prepare for file output, let’s review some basic facts about using <tt>cout</tt> for console output:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">You must include the <tt>iostream</tt> header file.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>iostream</tt> header file defines an <tt>ostream</tt> class for handling output.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>iostream</tt> header file declares an <tt>ostream</tt> variable, or object, called <tt>cout</tt>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">You must account for the <tt>std</tt> namespace; for example, you can use the <tt>using</tt> directive or the <tt>std::</tt> prefix for elements such as <tt>cout</tt> and <tt>endl</tt>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">You can use <tt>cout</tt> with the <tt>&lt;&lt;</tt> operator to read a variety of data types.</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">File output parallels this very closely:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">You must include the <tt>fstream</tt> header file.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>fstream</tt> header file defines an <tt>ofstream</tt> class for handling output.</p></li><li><p class="docList">You need to declare one or more <tt>ofstream</tt> variables, or objects, which you can name as you please, as long as you respect the usual naming conventions.</p></li><li><p class="docList">You must account for the <tt>std</tt> namespace; for example, you can use the <tt>using</tt> directive or the <tt>std::</tt> prefix for elements such as <tt>ofstream</tt>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">You need to associate a specific <tt>ofstream</tt> object with a specific file; one way to do so is to use the <tt>open()</tt> method.</p></li><li><p class="docList">When you’re finished with a file, you should use the <tt>close()</tt> method to close the file.</p></li><li><p class="docList">You can use an <tt>ofstream</tt> object with the <tt>&lt;&lt;</tt> operator to output a variety of data types.</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">Note that although the <tt>iostream</tt> header file provides a predefined <tt>ostream</tt> object called <tt>cout</tt>, you have to declare your own <tt>ofstream</tt> object, choosing a name for it and associating it with a file. Here’s how you declare such objects:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>ofstream outFile;           // outFile an ofstream object
ofstream fout;              // fout an ofstream object</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here’s how you can associate the objects with particular files:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>outFile.open("fish.txt");   // outFile used to write to the fish.txt file
char filename[50];
cin &gt;&gt; filename;            // user specifies a name
fout.open(filename);        // fout used to read specified file</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Note that the <tt>open()</tt> method requires a C-style string as its argument. This can be a literal string or a string stored in an array.</p>
<p class="docText">Here’s how you can use these objects:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>double wt = 125.8;
outFile &lt;&lt; wt;         // write a number to fish.txt
char line[81] = "Objects are closer than they appear.";
fout &lt;&lt; line &lt;&lt; endl;   // write a line of text</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The important point is that after you’ve declared an <tt>ofstream</tt> object and associated it with a file, you use it exactly as you would use <tt>cout</tt>. All the operations and methods available to <tt>cout</tt>, such as <tt>&lt;&lt;</tt>, <tt>endl</tt>, and <tt>setf()</tt>, are also available to <tt>ofstream</tt> objects, such as <tt>outFile</tt> and <tt>fout</tt> in the preceding examples.</p>
<p class="docText">In short, these are the main steps for using file output:</p>

<table border="0" class="docText"><tbody><tr><td valign="top" width="25"><div class="docText"><b>1. </b></div></td><td><div class="docText">Include the <tt>fstream</tt> header file.<br/><br/></div></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="25"><div class="docText"><b>2. </b></div></td><td><div class="docText">Create an <tt>ofstream</tt> object.<br/><br/></div></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="25"><div class="docText"><b>3. </b></div></td><td><div class="docText">Associate the <tt>ofstream</tt> object with a file.<br/><br/></div></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="25"><div class="docText"><b>4. </b></div></td><td><div class="docText">Use the <tt>ofstream</tt> object in the same manner you would use <tt>cout</tt>.<br/><br/></div></td></tr></tbody></table>
<p class="docText">The program in Listing 6.15
 demonstrates this approach. It solicits information from the user, 
sends output to the display, and then sends the same output to a file. 
You can use a text editor to examine the output file.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EKRBI">Listing 6.15. <tt>outfile.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// outfile.cpp -- writing to a file
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;fstream&gt;                  // for file I/O

int main()
{
    using namespace std;

    char automobile[50];
    int year;
    double a_price;
    double d_price;

    ofstream outFile;               // create object for output
    outFile.open("carinfo.txt");    // associate with a file

    cout &lt;&lt; "Enter the make and model of automobile: ";
    cin.getline(automobile, 50);
    cout &lt;&lt; "Enter the model year: ";
    cin &gt;&gt; year;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Enter the original asking price: ";
    cin &gt;&gt; a_price;
    d_price = 0.913 * a_price;

// display information on screen with cout

    cout &lt;&lt; fixed;
    cout.precision(2);
    cout.setf(ios_base::showpoint);
    cout &lt;&lt; "Make and model: " &lt;&lt; automobile &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Year: " &lt;&lt; year &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Was asking $" &lt;&lt; a_price &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Now asking $" &lt;&lt; d_price &lt;&lt; endl;

// now do exact same things using outFile instead of cout

    outFile &lt;&lt; fixed;
    outFile.precision(2);
    outFile.setf(ios_base::showpoint);
    outFile &lt;&lt; "Make and model: " &lt;&lt; automobile &lt;&lt; endl;
    outFile &lt;&lt; "Year: " &lt;&lt; year &lt;&lt; endl;
    outFile &lt;&lt; "Was asking $" &lt;&lt; a_price &lt;&lt; endl;
    outFile &lt;&lt; "Now asking $" &lt;&lt; d_price &lt;&lt; endl;

    outFile.close();                // done with file
    return 0;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Note that the final section of the program in Listing 6.15 duplicates the <tt>cout</tt> section, with <tt>cout</tt> replaced by <tt>outFile</tt>. Here is a sample run of this program:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Enter the make and model of automobile: Flitz Perky
Enter the model year: 2009
Enter the original asking price: 13500
Make and model: Flitz Perky
Year: 2009
Was asking $13500.00
Now asking $12325.50</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The screen output comes from using <tt>cout</tt>. If you check the directory or folder that contains the executable program, you should find a new file called <tt>carinfo.txt</tt>. (Or it may be in some other folder, depending on how the compiler is configured.) It contains the output generated by using <tt>outFile</tt>. If you open it with a text editor, you should find the following contents:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Make and model: Flitz Perky
Year: 2009
Was asking $13500.00
Now asking $12325.50</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">As you can see, <tt>outFile</tt> sends precisely the same sequence of characters to the <tt>carinfo.txt</tt> file that <tt>cout</tt> sends to the display.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EPTBI">Program Notes</h5>
<p class="docText">After the program in Listing 6.15 declares an <tt>ofstream</tt> object, you can use the <tt>open()</tt> method to associate the object with a particular file:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>ofstream outFile;               // create object for output
outFile.open("carinfo.txt");    // associate with a file</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">When the program is done using a file, it should close the connection:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>outFile.close();</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Notice that the <tt>close()</tt> method doesn’t require a filename. That’s because <tt>outFile</tt>
 has already been associated with a particular file. If you forget to 
close a file, the program will close it automatically if the program 
terminates normally.</p>
<p class="docText">Notice that <tt>outFile</tt> can use the same methods that <tt>cout</tt> does. Not only can it use the <tt>&lt;&lt;</tt> operator, but it can use the various formatting methods, such as <tt>setf()</tt> and <tt>precision()</tt>.
 These methods affect only the object that invokes the method. For 
example, you can provide different values for different objects:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>cout.precision(2);       // use a precision of 2 for the display
outFile.precision(4);    // use a precision of 4 for file output</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The main point you should remember is that after you set up an <tt>ofstream</tt> object such as <tt>outFile</tt>, you use it in precisely the same matter as you use <tt>cout</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Let’s go back to the <tt>open()</tt> method:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>outFile.open("carinfo.txt");</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In this case, the file <tt>carinfo.txt</tt> does not exist before the program runs. In this circumstance, the <tt>open()</tt> method creates a brand new file by that name. When the file <tt>carinfo.txt</tt> exists, what happens if you run the program again? By default, <tt>open()</tt> first truncates the file; that is, it trims <tt>carinfo.txt</tt> to zero length, discarding the current contents. The contents are then replaced with the new output. Chapter 17 reveals how to override this default behavior.</p>
<div class="docNote"><p class="docNoteTitle">Caution</p>
<p class="docText">When you open an existing file for output, by default it is truncated to a length of zero bytes, so the contents are lost.</p>
</div><br/>
<p class="docText">It is possible that an attempt 
to open a file for output might fail. For example, a file having the 
requested name might already exist and have restricted access. 
Therefore, a careful programmer would check to see if the attempt 
succeeded. You’ll learn the technique for this in the next example.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ECZBI">Reading from a Text File</h4>
<p class="docText">Next, let’s examine text 
file input. It’s based on console input, which has many elements. So 
let’s begin with a summary those elements:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">You must include the <tt>iostream</tt> header file.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>iostream</tt> header file defines an <tt>istream</tt> class for handling input.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>iostream</tt> header file declares an <tt>istream</tt> variable, or object, called <tt>cin</tt>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">You must account for the <tt>std</tt> namespace; for example, you can use the <tt>using</tt> directive or the <tt>std::</tt> prefix for elements such as <tt>cin</tt>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">You can use <tt>cin</tt> with the <tt>&gt;&gt;</tt> operator to read a variety of data types.</p></li><li><p class="docList">You can use <tt>cin</tt> with the <tt>get()</tt> method to read individual characters and with the <tt>getline()</tt> method to read a line of characters at a time.</p></li><li><p class="docList">You can use <tt>cin</tt> with methods such as <tt>eof()</tt> and <tt>fail()</tt> to monitor the success of an input attempt.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The object <tt>cin</tt> itself, when used as a test condition, is converted to the Boolean value <tt>true</tt> if the last read attempt succeeded and to <tt>false</tt> otherwise.</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">File input parallels this very closely:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">You must include the <tt>fstream</tt> header file.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>fstream</tt> header file defines an <tt>ifstream</tt> class for handling input.</p></li><li><p class="docList">You need to declare one or more <tt>ifstream</tt> variables, or objects, which you can name as you please, as long as you respect the usual naming conventions.</p></li><li><p class="docList">You must account for the <tt>std</tt> namespace; for example, you can use the <tt>using</tt> directive or the <tt>std::</tt> prefix for elements such as <tt>ifstream</tt>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">You need to associate a specific <tt>ifstream</tt> object with a specific file; one way to do so is to use the <tt>open()</tt> method.</p></li><li><p class="docList">When you’re finished with a file, you should use the <tt>close()</tt> method to close the file.</p></li><li><p class="docList">You can use an <tt>ifstream</tt> object with the <tt>&gt;&gt;</tt> operator to read a variety of data types.</p></li><li><p class="docList">You can use an <tt>ifstream</tt> object with the <tt>get()</tt> method to read individual characters and with the <tt>getline()</tt> method to read a line of characters at a time.</p></li><li><p class="docList">You can use an <tt>ifstream</tt> object with methods such as <tt>eof()</tt> and <tt>fail()</tt> to monitor the success of an input attempt.</p></li><li><p class="docList">An <tt>ifstream</tt> object itself, when used as a test condition, is converted to the Boolean value <tt>true</tt> if the last read attempt succeeded and to <tt>false</tt> otherwise.</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">Note that although the <tt>iostream</tt> header file provides a predefined <tt>istream</tt> object called <tt>cin</tt>, you have to declare your own <tt>ifstream</tt> object, choosing a name for it and associating it with a file. Here’s how you declare such objects:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>ifstream inFile;             // inFile an ifstream object
ifstream fin;                // fin an ifstream object</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here’s how you can associate them with particular files:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>inFile.open("bowling.txt");  // inFile used to read bowling.txt file
char filename[50];
cin &gt;&gt; filename;             // user specifies a name
fin.open(filename);          // fin used to read specified file</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Note that the <tt>open()</tt> method requires a C-style string as its argument. This can be a literal string or a string stored in an array.</p>
<p class="docText">Here’s how you can use these objects:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>double wt;
inFile &gt;&gt; wt;         // read a number from bowling.txt
char line[81];
fin.getline(line, 81); // read a line of text</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The important point is that after you’ve declared an <tt>ifstream</tt> object and associated it with a file, you can use it exactly as you would use <tt>cin</tt>. All the operations and methods available to <tt>cin</tt> are also available to <tt>ifstream</tt> objects, such as <tt>inFile</tt> and <tt>fin</tt> in the preceding examples.</p>
<p class="docText">What happens if you attempt to open a non-existent file for input? This error causes subsequent attempts to use the <tt>ifstream</tt> object for input to fail. The preferred way to check whether a file was opened successfully is to use the <tt>is_open()</tt> method. You can use code like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>inFile.open("bowling.txt");
if (!inFile.is_open())
{
    exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>is_open()</tt> method returns <tt>true</tt> if the file was opened successfully, so the expression <tt>!inFile.is_open()</tt> is <tt>true</tt> if the attempt fails. The <tt>exit()</tt> function is prototyped in the <tt>cstdlib</tt> header file, which also defines <tt>EXIT_FAILURE</tt> as an argument value used to communicate with the operating system. The <tt>exit()</tt> function terminates the program.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>is_open()</tt> method is relatively new to C++. If your compiler doesn’t support it, you can use the older <tt>good()</tt> method instead. As Chapter 17 discusses, <tt>good()</tt> doesn’t check quite as extensively as <tt>is_open()</tt> for possible problems.</p>
<p class="docText">The program in Listing 6.16
 opens a file specified by the user, reads numbers from the file, and 
reports the number of values, their sum, and their average. It’s 
important that you design the input loop correctly, and the following “Program Notes” section discusses this in more detail. Notice that this program benefits greatly from using <tt>if</tt> statements.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EZDCI">Listing 6.16. <tt>sumafile.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// sumafile.cpp -- functions with an array argument
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;fstream&gt;          // file I/O support
#include &lt;cstdlib&gt;          // support for exit()
const int SIZE = 60;
int main()
{
    using namespace std;
    char filename[SIZE];
    ifstream inFile;        // object for handling file input

    cout &lt;&lt; "Enter name of data file: ";
    cin.getline(filename, SIZE);
    inFile.open(filename);  // associate inFile with a file
    if (!inFile.is_open())  // failed to open file
    {
        cout &lt;&lt; "Could not open the file " &lt;&lt; filename &lt;&lt; endl;
        cout &lt;&lt; "Program terminating.\n";
        exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
    }
    double value;
    double sum = 0.0;
    int count = 0;          // number of items read

    inFile &gt;&gt; value;        // get first value
    while (inFile.good())   // while input good and not at EOF
    {
        ++count;            // one more item read
        sum += value;       // calculate running total
        inFile &gt;&gt; value;    // get next value
    }
    if (inFile.eof())
        cout &lt;&lt; "End of file reached.\n";
    else if (inFile.fail())
        cout &lt;&lt; "Input terminated by data mismatch.\n";
    else
        cout &lt;&lt; "Input terminated for unknown reason.\n";
    if (count == 0)
        cout &lt;&lt; "No data processed.\n";
    else
    {
        cout &lt;&lt; "Items read: " &lt;&lt; count &lt;&lt; endl;
        cout &lt;&lt; "Sum: " &lt;&lt; sum &lt;&lt; endl;
        cout &lt;&lt; "Average: " &lt;&lt; sum / count &lt;&lt; endl;
    }
    inFile.close();         // finished with the file
    return 0;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">To use the program in Listing 6.16,
 you first have to create a text file that contains numbers. You can use
 a text editor, such as the text editor you use to write source code, to
 create this file. Let’s assume that the file is called <tt>scores.txt</tt> and has the following contents:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>18 19 18.5 13.5 14
16 19.5 20 18 12 18.5
17.5</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The
 program has to be able to find the file. Typically, unless your input 
includes a pathname with the file, the program will look in the same 
folder or directory that contains the executable file.</p>
<div class="docNote"><p class="docNoteTitle">Caution</p>
<p class="docText">A Windows text file 
uses the carriage return character followed by a linefeed character to 
terminate a line of text. (The usual C++ text mode translates this 
combination to newline character when reading a file and reverses the 
translation when writing to a file.) Some text editors, such as the 
Metrowerks CodeWarrior IDE editor, don’t automatically add a this 
combination to the final line. Therefore, if you use such an editor, you
 need to press the Enter key after typing the final text and before 
exiting the file.</p>
</div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here’s a sample run of the program in Listing 6.16:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Enter name of data file: <span class="docEmphStrong">scores.txt</span>
End of file reached.
Items read: 12
Sum: 204.5
Average: 17.0417</pre></div><br/>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ERGCI">Program Notes</h5>
<p class="docText">Instead of hard-coding a filename, the program in Listing 6.16 stores a user-supplied name in the character array <tt>filename</tt>. Then the array is used as an argument to <tt>open()</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>inFile.open(filename);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">As discussed earlier in 
this chapter, it’s vital to test whether the attempt to open the file 
succeeded. Here are a few of the things that might go wrong: The file 
might not exist, the file might be located in another directory or file 
folder, access might be denied, and the user might mistype the name or 
omit a file extension. Many a beginner has spent a long time trying to 
figure what’s wrong with a file-reading loop when the real problem was 
that the program didn’t open the file. Testing for file-opening failure 
can save you such misspent effort.</p>
<p class="docText">You need to pay close 
attention to the proper design of a file-reading loop. There are several
 things to test for when reading from a file. First, the program should 
not try to read past the EOF. The <tt>eof()</tt> method returns <tt>true</tt> if the most recent attempt to read data ran into the EOF. Second, the program might encounter a type mismatch. For instance, Listing 6.16 expects a file containing only numbers. The <tt>fail()</tt> method returns <tt>true</tt> if the most recent read attempt encountered a type mismatch. (This method also returns <tt>true</tt>
 if the EOF is encountered.) Finally, something unexpected may go 
wrong—for example, a corrupted file or a hardware failure. The <tt>bad()</tt> method returns <tt>true</tt>
 if the most recent read attempt encountered such a problem. Rather than
 test for these conditions individually, it’s simpler to use the <tt>good()</tt> method, which returns <tt>true</tt> if nothing when wrong:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>while (inFile.good())   // while input good and not at EOF
{
    ...
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Then, if you like, you can use the other methods to determine exactly why the loop terminated:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>if (inFile.eof())
    cout &lt;&lt; "End of file reached.\n";
else if (inFile.fail())
    cout &lt;&lt; "Input terminated by data mismatch.\n";
else
    cout &lt;&lt; "Input terminated for unknown reason.\n";</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This code comes immediately after the loop so that it investigates why the loop terminated. Because <tt>eof()</tt> tests just for the EOF and <tt>fail()</tt> tests for both the EOF and type mismatch, this code tests for the EOF first. That way, if execution reaches the <tt>else if</tt> test, the EOF has already been excluded, so a <tt>true</tt> value for <tt>fail()</tt> unambiguously identifies type mismatch as the cause of loop termination.</p>
<p class="docText">It’s particularly important that you understand that <tt>good()</tt> reports on the most recent attempt to read input. That means there should be an attempt to read input <span class="docEmphasis">immediately</span>
 before applying the test. A standard way of doing that is to have one 
input statement immediately before the loop, just before the first 
execution of the loop test, and a second input statement at the end of 
the loop, just before subsequent executions of the loop test:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>// standard file-reading loop design
inFile &gt;&gt; value;        // get first value
while (inFile.good())   // while input good and not at EOF
{
    // loop body goes here
    inFile &gt;&gt; value;    // get next value
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">You can condense this somewhat by using the fact that the following expression evaluates to <tt>inFile</tt> and that <tt>inFile</tt>, when placed in a context in which a <tt>bool</tt> value is expected, evaluates to <tt>inFile.good()</tt>—that is, to <tt>true</tt> or <tt>false</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>inFile &gt;&gt; value</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Thus, you can replace the two 
input statements with a single input statement used as a loop test. That
 is, you can replace the preceding loop structure with this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>// abbreviated file-reading loop design
// omit pre-loop input
while (inFile &gt;&gt; value)   // read and test for success
{
    // loop body goes here
    // omit end-of-loop input
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This design still follows the precept of attempting to read before testing because to evaluate the expression <tt>inFile &gt;&gt; value</tt>, the program first has to attempt to read a number into <tt>value</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Now you know the rudiments of file I/O.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
