<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Summary</h3>
<p class="docText">Programs and programming 
become more interesting when you introduce statements that guide the 
program through alternative actions. (Whether this also makes the 
programmer more interesting is a point you may wish to investigate.) C++
 provides the <tt>if</tt> statement, the <tt>if else</tt> statement, and the <tt>switch</tt> statement as means for managing choices. The C++ <tt>if</tt>
 statement lets a program execute a statement or statement block 
conditionally. That is, the program executes the statement or block if a
 particular condition is met. The C++ <tt>if else</tt> statement lets a program select from two choices which statement or statement block to execute. You can append additional <tt>if else</tt> statements to such a statement to present a series of choices. The C++ <tt>switch</tt> statement directs the program to a particular case in a list of choices.</p>
<p class="docText">C++ also provides operators to help in decision making. Chapter 5 discusses the relational expressions, which compare two values. The <tt>if</tt> and <tt>if else</tt> statements typically use relational expressions as test conditions. By using C++’s logical operators (<tt>&amp;&amp;</tt>, <tt>||</tt>, and <tt>!</tt>), you can combine or modify relational expressions to construct more elaborate tests. The conditional operator (<tt>?:</tt>) provides a compact way to choose from two values.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>cctype</tt> library of character functions provides a convenient and powerful set of tools for analyzing character input.</p>
<p class="docText">Loops and selection statements are useful tools for file I/O, which closely parallels console I/O. After you declare <tt>ifstream</tt> and <tt>ofstream</tt> objects and associate them with files, you can use these objects in the same manner you use <tt>cin</tt> and <tt>cout</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">With C++’s loops and 
decision-making statements, you have the tools for writing interesting, 
intelligent, and powerful programs. But we’ve only begun to investigate 
the real powers of C++. Next, we’ll look at functions.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
