<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter Review</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Chapter Review</h3>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1.</b></td><td class="docText">Consider the following two code fragments for counting spaces and newlines:
<div class="docText"><pre>// Version 1
while (cin.get(ch))    // quit on eof
{
      if (ch == ' ')
             spaces++;
      if (ch == '\n')
            newlines++;
}

// Version 2
while (cin.get(ch))    // quit on eof
{
      if (ch == ' ')
            spaces++;
      else if (ch == '\n')
            newlines++;
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">What advantages, if any, does the second form have over the first?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2.</b></td><td class="docText">In Listing 6.2, what is the effect of replacing <tt>++ch</tt> with <tt>ch+1</tt>?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3.</b></td><td class="docText">Carefully consider the following program:
<div class="docText"><pre>#include &lt;iostream&gt;
using namespace std;
int main()
{
    char ch;
    int ct1, ct2;

    ct1 = ct2 = 0;
    while ((ch = cin.get()) != '$')
    {
        cout &lt;&lt; ch;
        ct1++;
        if (ch = '$')
            ct2++;
        cout &lt;&lt; ch;
    }
    cout &lt;&lt;"ct1 = " &lt;&lt; ct1 &lt;&lt; ", ct2 = " &lt;&lt; ct2 &lt;&lt; "\n";
    return 0;
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Suppose you provide the following input, pressing the Enter key at the end of each line:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong">Hi!</span>
<span class="docEmphStrong">Send $10 or $20 now!</span></pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">What is the output? (Recall that input is buffered.)</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4.</b></td><td class="docText">Construct logical expressions to represent the following conditions:
<div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>weight</tt> is greater than or equal to 115 but less than 125.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>ch</tt> is <tt>q</tt> or <tt>Q</tt>.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>x</tt> is even but is not <tt>26</tt>.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>x</tt> is even but is not a multiple of <tt>26</tt>.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>donation</tt> is in the range 1,000–2,000 or <tt>guest</tt> is <tt>1</tt>.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>ch</tt>
 is a lowercase letter or an uppercase letter. (Assume, as is true for 
ASCII, that lowercase letters are coded sequentially and that uppercase 
letters are coded sequentially but that there is a gap in the code 
between uppercase and lowercase.)</p></div></li></ol></div></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5.</b></td><td class="docText">In English, the statement “I will not not speak” means the same as “I will speak.” In C++, is <tt>!!x</tt> the same as <tt>x</tt>?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6.</b></td><td class="docText">Construct a conditional expression that is equal to the absolute value of a variable. That is, if a variable <tt>x</tt> is positive, the value of the expression is just <tt>x</tt>, but if <tt>x</tt> is negative, the value of the expression is <tt>-x</tt>, which is positive.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>7.</b></td><td class="docText">Rewrite the following fragment using <tt>switch</tt>:
<div class="docText"><pre>if (ch == 'A')
    a_grade++;
else if (ch == 'B')
    b_grade++;
else if (ch == 'C')
    c_grade++;
else if (ch == 'D')
    d_grade++;
else
    f_grade++;</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>8.</b></td><td class="docText">In Listing 6.10, what advantage would there be in using character labels, such as <tt>a</tt> and <tt>c</tt>, instead of numbers for the menu choices and switch cases? (Hint: Think about what happens if the user types <tt>q</tt> in either case and what happens if the user types <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>5</tt></span> in either case.)</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9.</b></td><td class="docText">Consider the following code fragment:
<div class="docText"><pre>int line = 0;
char ch;
while (cin.get(ch))
{
    if (ch == 'Q')
           break;
    if (ch != '\n')
           continue;
    line++;
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Rewrite this code without using <tt>break</tt> or <tt>continue</tt>.</p></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
