<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Programming Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Programming Exercises</h3>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1.</b></td><td class="docText">Write a program that reads keyboard input to the <tt>@</tt>
 symbol and that echoes the input except for digits, converting each 
uppercase character to lowercase, and vice versa. (Don’t forget the <tt>cctype</tt> family.)</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2.</b></td><td class="docText">Write a program that reads up to 10 donation values into an array of <tt>double</tt>. (Or, if you prefer, use an <tt>array</tt>
 template object.) The program should terminate input on non-numeric 
input. It should report the average of the numbers and also report how 
many numbers in the array are larger than the average.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3.</b></td><td class="docText">Write
 a precursor to a menu-driven program. The program should display a menu
 offering four choices, each labeled with a letter. If the user responds
 with a letter other than one of the four valid choices, the program 
should prompt the user to enter a valid response until the user 
complies. Then the program should use a switch to select a simple action
 based on the user’s selection. A program run could look something like 
this:
<div class="docText"><pre>Please enter one of the following choices:
c) carnivore           p) pianist
t) tree                g) game
f
Please enter a c, p, t, or g: <span class="docEmphStrong">q</span>
Please enter a c, p, t, or g: <span class="docEmphStrong">t</span>
A maple is a tree.</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4.</b></td><td class="docText">When
 you join the Benevolent Order of Programmers, you can be known at BOP 
meetings by your real name, your job title, or your secret BOP name. 
Write a program that can list members by real name, by job title, by 
secret name, or by a member’s preference. Base the program on the 
following structure:
<div class="docText"><pre>// Benevolent Order of Programmers name structure
struct bop {
    char fullname[strsize]; // real name
    char title[strsize];    // job title
    char bopname[strsize];  // secret BOP name
    int preference;         // 0 = fullname, 1 = title, 2 = bopname
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In the program, create a small 
array of such structures and initialize it to suitable values. Have the 
program run a loop that lets the user select from different 
alternatives:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>a. display by name     b. display by title
c. display by bopname  d. display by preference
q. quit</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Note that “display by 
preference” does not mean display the preference member; it means 
display the member corresponding to the preference number. For instance,
 if preference is <tt>1</tt>, choice <tt>d</tt> would display the programmer’s job title. A sample run may look something like the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Benevolent Order of Programmers Report
a. display by name     b. display by title
c. display by bopname  d. display by preference
q. quit
Enter your choice: <span class="docEmphStrong">a</span>
Wimp Macho
Raki Rhodes
Celia Laiter
Hoppy Hipman
Pat Hand
Next choice: <span class="docEmphStrong">d</span>
Wimp Macho
Junior Programmer
MIPS
Analyst Trainee
LOOPY
Next choice: <span class="docEmphStrong">q</span>
Bye!</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5.</b></td><td class="docText">The Kingdom of Neutronia, where the unit of currency is the tvarp, has the following income tax code:
<blockquote><p></p><p class="docList">First 5,000 tvarps: 0% tax</p><p></p><p></p><p class="docList">Next 10,000 tvarps: 10% tax</p><p></p><p></p><p class="docList">Next 20,000 tvarps: 15% tax</p><p></p><p></p><p class="docList">Tvarps after 35,000: 20% tax</p><p></p></blockquote>
<p class="docText">For example, someone 
earning 38,000 tvarps would owe 5,000 × 0.00 + 10,000 × 0.10 + 20,000 × 
0.15 + 3,000 × 0.20, or 4,600 tvarps. Write a program that uses a loop 
to solicit incomes and to report tax owed. The loop should terminate 
when the user enters a negative number or non-numeric input.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6.</b></td><td class="docText">Put
 together a program that keeps track of monetary contributions to the 
Society for the Preservation of Rightful Influence. It should ask the 
user to enter the number of contributors and then solicit the user to 
enter the name and contribution of each contributor. The information 
should be stored in a dynamically allocated array of structures. Each 
structure should have two members: a character array (or else a <tt>string</tt> object) to store the name and a <tt>double</tt>
 member to hold the amount of the contribution. After reading all the 
data, the program should display the names and amounts donated for all 
donors who contributed $10,000 or more. This list should be headed by 
the label Grand Patrons. After that, the program should list the 
remaining donors. That list should be headed Patrons. If there are no 
donors in one of the categories, the program should print the word 
“none.” Aside from displaying two categories, the program need do no 
sorting.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>7.</b></td><td class="docText">Write a program that reads input a word at a time until a lone <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>q</tt></span>
 is entered. The program should then report the number of words that 
began with vowels, the number that began with consonants, and the number
 that fit neither of those categories. One approach is to use <tt>isalpha()</tt> to discriminate between words beginning with letters and those that don’t and then use an <tt>if</tt> or <tt>switch</tt> statement to further identify those passing the <tt>isalpha()</tt> test that begin with vowels. A sample run might look like this:
<div class="docText"><pre>Enter words (q to quit):
<span class="docEmphStrong">The 12 awesome oxen ambled</span>
<span class="docEmphStrong">quietly across 15 meters of lawn. q</span>
5 words beginning with vowels
4 words beginning with consonants
2 others</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>8.</b></td><td class="docText">Write
 a program that opens a text file, reads it character-by-character to 
the end of the file, and reports the number of characters in the file.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9.</b></td><td class="docText">Do
 Programming Exercise 6 but modify it to get information from a file. 
The first item in the file should be the number of contributors, and the
 rest of the file should consist of pairs of lines, with the first line 
of each pair being a contributor’s name and the second line being a 
contribution. That is, the file should look like this:
<div class="docText"><pre>4
Sam Stone
2000
Freida Flass
100500
Tammy Tubbs
5000
Rich Raptor
55000</pre></div><br/></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
<p class="docText"> </p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
