<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>7. Functions: C++’s Programming Modules</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h2 class="docChapterTitle" id="title-ID0EEGBI">7. Functions: C++’s Programming Modules</h2>
<p class="docText">In this chapter you’ll learn about the following:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">Function basics</p></li><li><p class="docList">Function prototypes</p></li><li><p class="docList">Passing function arguments by value</p></li><li><p class="docList">Designing functions to process arrays</p></li><li><p class="docList">Using <tt>const</tt> pointer parameters</p></li><li><p class="docList">Designing functions to process text strings</p></li><li><p class="docList">Designing functions to process structures</p></li><li><p class="docList">Designing functions to process objects of the <tt>string</tt> class</p></li><li><p class="docList">Functions that call themselves (recursion)</p></li><li><p class="docList">Pointers to functions</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">Fun is where you find it. Look
 closely, and you can find it in functions. C++ comes with a large 
library of useful functions (the standard ANSI C library plus several 
C++ classes), but real programming pleasure comes with writing your own 
functions. (On the other hand, real programming productivity can come 
with learning more about what you can do with the STL and the BOOST C++ 
libraries.) This chapter and Chapter 8,
 “Adventures in Functions,” examine how to define functions, convey 
information to them, and retrieve information from them. After reviewing
 how functions work, this chapter concentrates on how to use functions 
in conjunction with arrays, strings, and structures. Finally, it touches
 on recursion and pointers to functions. If you’ve paid your C dues, 
you’ll find much of this chapter familiar. But don’t be lulled into a 
false sense of expertise. C++ has made several additions to what C 
functions can do, and Chapter 8 deals primarily with those. Meanwhile, let’s attend to the fundamentals.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
