<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Functions and Two-Dimensional Arrays</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Functions and Two-Dimensional Arrays</h3>
<p class="docText">To
 write a function that has a two-dimensional array as an argument, you 
need to remember that the name of an array is treated as its address, so
 the corresponding formal parameter is a pointer, just as for 
one-dimensional arrays. The tricky part is declaring the pointer 
correctly. Suppose, for example, that you start with this code:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int data[3][4] = {{1,2,3,4}, {9,8,7,6}, {2,4,6,8}};
int total = sum(data, 3);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">What should the prototype for <tt>sum()</tt> look like? And why does the function pass the number of rows (<tt>3</tt>) as an argument and not also the number of columns (<tt>4</tt>)?</p>
<p class="docText">Well, <tt>data</tt> is the name of an array with three elements. The first element is, itself, an array of four <tt>int</tt> values. Thus, the type of <tt>data</tt> is pointer-to-array-of-four-<tt>int</tt>, so an appropriate prototype would be this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int sum(int (*ar2)[4], int size);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The parentheses are needed because the following declaration would declare an array of four pointers-to-<tt>int</tt> instead of a single pointer-to-array-of-four-<tt>int</tt>, and a function parameter cannot be an array:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int *ar2[4]</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here’s an alternative format that means exactly the same thing as this first prototype, but, perhaps, is easier to read:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int sum(int ar2[][4], int size);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Either prototype states that <tt>ar2</tt> is a pointer, not an array. Also note that the pointer type specifically says it points to an array of four <tt>int</tt>s.
 Thus, the pointer type specifies the number of columns, which is why 
the number of columns is not passed as a separate function argument.</p>
<p class="docText">Because the pointer type specifies the number of columns, the <tt>sum()</tt> function only works with arrays with four columns. But the number of rows is specified by the variable size, so <tt>sum()</tt> can work with a varying number of rows:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int a[100][4];
int b[6][4];
...
int total1 = sum(a, 100);    // sum all of a
int total2 = sum(b, 6);      // sum all of b
int total3 = sum(a, 10);     // sum first 10 rows of a
int total4 = sum(a+10, 20);  // sum next 20 rows of a</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Given that the parameter <tt>ar2</tt> is a pointer to an array, how do you use it in the function definition? The simplest way is to use <tt>ar2</tt> as if it were the name of a two-dimensional array. Here’s a possible function definition:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int sum(int ar2[][4], int size)
{
    int total = 0;
    for (int r = 0; r &lt; size; r++)
        for (int c = 0; c &lt; 4; c++)
            total += ar2[r][c];
    return total;
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Again, note that the number of rows is whatever is passed to the <tt>size</tt> parameter, but the number of columns is fixed at four, both in the parameter declaration for <tt>ar2</tt> and in the inner <tt>for</tt> loop.</p>
<p class="docText">Here’s why you can use array notation. Because <tt>ar2</tt> points to the first element (element 0) of an array whose elements are array-of-four-<tt>int</tt>, the expression <tt>ar2 + r</tt> points to element number <tt>r</tt>. Therefore <tt>ar2[r]</tt> is element number <tt>r</tt>. That element is itself an array-of-four-<tt>int</tt>, so <tt>ar2[r]</tt> is the name of that array-of-four-<tt>int</tt>. Applying a subscript to an array name gives an array element, so <tt>ar2[r][c]</tt> is an element of the array-of-four-<tt>int</tt>, hence is a single <tt>int</tt> value. The pointer <tt>ar2</tt> has to be dereferenced twice to get to the data. The simplest way is to use brackets twice, as in <tt>ar2[r][c]</tt>. But it is possible, if ungainly, to use the <tt>*</tt> operator twice:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>ar2[r][c] == *(*(ar2 + r) + c)  // same thing</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">To understand this, you can work out the meaning of the subexpressions from the inside out:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedWidth">ar2              // pointer to first row of an array of 4 int
ar2 + r          // pointer to row r (an array of 4 int)
*(ar2 + r)       // row r (an array of 4 int, hence the name of an array,
                 // thus a pointer to the first int in the row, i.e., ar2[r]

*(ar2 +r) + c    // pointer int number c in row r, i.e., ar2[r] + c
*(*(ar2 + r) + c // value of int number c in row r, i.e. ar2[r][c]

					  </pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Incidentally, the code for <tt>sum()</tt> doesn’t use <tt>const</tt> in declaring the parameter <tt>ar2</tt> because that technique is for pointers to fundamental types, and <tt>ar2</tt> is a pointer to a pointer.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
