<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Functions and C-Style Strings</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Functions and C-Style Strings</h3>
<p class="docText">Recall that a C-style 
string consists of a series of characters terminated by the null 
character. Much of what you’ve learned about designing array functions 
applies to string functions, too. For example, passing a string as an 
argument means passing an address, and you can use <tt>const</tt> to protect a string argument from being altered. But there are a few special twists to strings that we’ll unravel now.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E6UBI">Functions with C-Style String Arguments</h4>
<p class="docText">Suppose you want to pass a string as an argument to a function. You have three choices for representing a string:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">An array of <tt>char</tt></p></li><li><p class="docList">A quoted string constant (also called a <span class="docEmphasis">string literal</span>)</p></li><li><p class="docList">A pointer-to-<tt>char</tt> set to the address of a string</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">All three choices, however, are type pointer-to-<tt>char</tt> (more concisely, type <tt>char *</tt>), so you can use all three as arguments to string-processing functions:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>char ghost[15] = "galloping";
char * str = "galumphing";
int n1 = strlen(ghost);          // ghost is &amp;ghost[0]
int n2 = strlen(str);            // pointer to char
int n3 = strlen("gamboling");    // address of string</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Informally, you can say that 
you’re passing a string as an argument, but you’re really passing the 
address of the first character in the string. This implies that a string
 function prototype should use type <tt>char *</tt> as the type for the formal parameter representing a string.</p>
<p class="docText">One
 important difference between a C-style string and a regular array is 
that the string has a built-in terminating character. (Recall that a <tt>char</tt>
 array containing characters but no null character is just an array and 
not a string.) That means you don’t have to pass the size of the string 
as an argument. Instead, the function can use a loop to examine each 
character in the string in turn until the loop reaches the terminating 
null character. Listing 7.9
 illustrates that approach with a function that counts the number of 
times a given character appears in a string. Because the program doesn’t
 need to deal with negative values, it uses <tt>unsigned int</tt> as the type for counting.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E5XBI">Listing 7.9. <tt>strgfun.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// strgfun.cpp -- functions with a string argument
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
unsigned int c_in_str(const char * str, char ch);
int main()
{
    using namespace std;
    char mmm[15] = "minimum";    // string in an array
// some systems require preceding char with static to
// enable array initialization

    char *wail = "ululate";    // wail points to string

    unsigned int ms = c_in_str(mmm, 'm');
    unsigned int us = c_in_str(wail, 'u');
    cout &lt;&lt; ms &lt;&lt; " m characters in " &lt;&lt; mmm &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; us &lt;&lt; " u characters in " &lt;&lt; wail &lt;&lt; endl;
    return 0;
}

// this function counts the number of ch characters
// in the string str
unsigned int c_in_str(const char * str, char ch)
{
    unsigned int count = 0;

    while (*str)        // quit when *str is '\0'
    {
        if (*str == ch)
            count++;
        str++;        // move pointer to next char
    }
    return count;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here’s the output of the program in Listing 7.9:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>3 m characters in minimum
2 u characters in ululate</pre></div><br/>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EG2BI">Program Notes</h5>
<p class="docText">Because the <tt>c_int_str()</tt> function in Listing 7.9 shouldn’t alter the original string, it uses the <tt>const</tt> modifier when it declares the formal parameter <tt>str</tt>.
 Then if you mistakenly let the function alter part of the string, the 
compiler catches your error. Of course, you can use array notation 
instead to declare <tt>str</tt> in the function header:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>unsigned int c_in_str(const char str[], char ch) // also okay</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">However, using pointer 
notation reminds you that the argument doesn’t have to be the name of an
 array but can be some other form of pointer.</p>
<p class="docText">The function itself demonstrates a standard way to process the characters in a string:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>while (*str)
{
    statements
    str++;
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Initially, <tt>str</tt> points to the first character in the string, so <tt>*str</tt> represents the first character itself. For example, immediately after the first function call, <tt>*str</tt> has the value <tt>m</tt>, the first character in <tt>minimum</tt>. As long as the character is not the null character (<tt>\0</tt>), <tt>*str</tt> is nonzero, so the loop continues. At the end of each loop, the expression <tt>str++</tt> increments the pointer by 1 byte so that it points to the next character in the string. Eventually, <tt>str</tt> points to the terminating null character, making <tt>*str</tt> equal to <tt>0</tt>,
 which is the numeric code for the null character. That condition 
terminates the loop. (Why are string-processing functions ruthless? 
Because they stop at nothing.)</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EL4BI">Functions That Return C-Style Strings</h4>
<p class="docText">Now suppose you want to 
write a function that returns a string. Well, a function can’t do that. 
But it can return the address of a string, and that’s more efficient. Listing 7.10, for example, defines a function called <tt>buildstr()</tt> that returns a pointer. This function takes two arguments: a character and a number. Using <tt>new</tt>,
 the function creates a string whose length equals the number, and then 
it initializes each element to the character. Then it returns a pointer 
to the new string.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EB5BI">Listing 7.10. <tt>strgback.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// strgback.cpp -- a function that returns a pointer to char
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
char * buildstr(char c, int n);     // prototype
int main()
{
    using namespace std;
    int times;
    char ch;

    cout &lt;&lt; "Enter a character: ";
    cin &gt;&gt; ch;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Enter an integer: ";
    cin &gt;&gt; times;
    char *ps = buildstr(ch, times);
    cout &lt;&lt; ps &lt;&lt; endl;
    delete [] ps;                   // free memory
    ps = buildstr('+', 20);         // reuse pointer
    cout &lt;&lt; ps &lt;&lt; "-DONE-" &lt;&lt; ps &lt;&lt; endl;
    delete [] ps;                   // free memory
    return 0;
}

// builds string made of n c characters
char * buildstr(char c, int n)
{
    char * pstr = new char[n + 1];
    pstr[n] = '\0';         // terminate string
    while (n-- &gt; 0)
        pstr[n] = c;        // fill rest of string
    return pstr;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here’s a sample run of the program in Listing 7.10:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Enter a character: <span class="docEmphStrong">V</span>
Enter an integer: <span class="docEmphStrong">46</span>
VVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVVV
++++++++++++++++++++-DONE-++++++++++++++++++++</pre></div><br/>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EF6BI">Program Notes</h5>
<p class="docText">To create a string of <tt>n</tt> visible characters, you need storage for <tt>n + 1</tt> characters in order to have space for the null character. So the function in Listing 7.10 asks for <tt>n + 1</tt>
 bytes to hold the string. Next, it sets the final byte to the null 
character. Then it fills in the rest of the array from back to front. In
 Listing 7.10, the following loop cycles <tt>n</tt> times as <tt>n</tt> decreases to <tt>0</tt>, filling <tt>n</tt> elements:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>while (n-- &gt; 0)
    pstr[n] = c;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">At the start of the final cycle, <tt>n</tt> has the value <tt>1</tt>. Because <tt>n--</tt> means use the value and then decrement it, the <tt>while</tt> loop test condition compares <tt>1</tt> to <tt>0</tt>, finds the test to be <tt>true</tt>, and continues. But after making the test, the function decrements <tt>n</tt> to <tt>0</tt>, so <tt>pstr[0]</tt> is the last element set to <tt>c</tt>.
 The reason for filling the string from back to front instead of front 
to back is to avoid using an additional variable. Using the other order 
would involve something like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int i = 0;
while (i &lt; n)
    pstr[i++] = c;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Note that the variable <tt>pstr</tt> is local to the <tt>buildstr</tt> function, so when that function terminates, the memory used for <tt>pstr</tt> (but not for the string) is freed. But because the function returns the value of <tt>pstr</tt>, the program is able to access the new string through the <tt>ps</tt> pointer in <tt>main()</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">The program in Listing 7.10 uses <tt>delete</tt> to free memory used for the string after the string is no longer needed. Then it reuses <tt>ps</tt>
 to point to the new block of memory obtained for the next string and 
frees that memory. The disadvantage to this kind of design (having a 
function return a pointer to memory allocated by <tt>new</tt>) is that it makes it the programmer’s responsibility to remember to use <tt>delete</tt>. In Chapter 12,
 “Classes and Dynamic Memory Allocation,” you’ll see how C++ classes, by
 using constructors and destructors, can take care of these details for 
you.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
