<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Functions and array Objects</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Functions and <tt>array</tt> Objects</h3>
<p class="docText">Class
 objects in C++ are based on structures, so some of the same programming
 considerations that apply to structures also apply to classes. For 
example, you can pass an object by value to a function, in which case 
the function acts on a copy of the original object. Alternatively, you 
can pass a pointer to an object, which allows the function to act on the
 original object. Let’s look at an example using the C++11 <tt>array</tt> template class.</p>
<p class="docText">Suppose we have an <tt>array</tt> object intended to hold expense figures for each of the four seasons of the year:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>std::array&lt;double, 4&gt; expenses;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">(Recall that using the <tt>array</tt> class requires the <tt>array</tt> header file and that the name <tt>array</tt> is part of the <tt>std</tt> namespace.) If we want a function to display the contents of <tt>expenses</tt>, we can pass <tt>expenses</tt> by value:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>show(expenses);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">But if we want a function that modifies the <tt>expenses</tt> object, we need to pass the address of the object to the function:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>fill(&amp;expenses);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">(The next chapter discusses an alternative approach, using references.) This is the same approach that Listing 7.13 used for structures.</p>
<p class="docText">How can we declare these two functions? The type of <tt>expenses</tt> is <tt>array&lt;double, 4&gt;</tt>, so that’s what must appear in the prototypes:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>void show(std::array&lt;double, 4&gt; da);   // da an object
void fill(std::array&lt;double, 4&gt; * pa); // pa a pointer to an object</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">These considerations form the core of the sample program. The program adds a few more features. First, it replaces <tt>4</tt> with a symbolic constant:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>const int Seasons = 4;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Second, it adds a <tt>const array</tt> object containing four <tt>string</tt> objects representing the four seasons:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>const std::array&lt;std::string, Seasons&gt; Snames =
    {"Spring", "Summer", "Fall", "Winter"};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Note that the <tt>array</tt> template is not limited to holding the basic data types; it can use class types too. Listing 7.15 presents the program in full.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EZACI">Listing 7.15. <tt>arrobj.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">//arrobj.cpp -- functions with array objects (C++11)
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;array&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;
// constant data
const int Seasons = 4;
const std::array&lt;std::string, Seasons&gt; Snames =
    {"Spring", "Summer", "Fall", "Winter"};

// function to modify array object
void fill(std::array&lt;double, Seasons&gt; * pa);
// function that uses array object without modifying it
void show(std::array&lt;double, Seasons&gt; da);

int main()
{
    std::array&lt;double, Seasons&gt; expenses;
    fill(&amp;expenses);
    show(expenses);
    return 0;
}

void fill(std::array&lt;double, Seasons&gt; * pa)
{
    using namespace std;
    for (int i = 0; i &lt; Seasons; i++)
    {
        cout &lt;&lt; "Enter " &lt;&lt; Snames[i] &lt;&lt; " expenses: ";
        cin &gt;&gt; (*pa)[i];
    }
}

void show(std::array&lt;double, Seasons&gt; da)
{
    using namespace std;
    double total = 0.0;
    cout &lt;&lt; "\nEXPENSES\n";
    for (int i = 0; i &lt; Seasons; i++)
    {
        cout &lt;&lt; Snames[i] &lt;&lt; ": $" &lt;&lt; da[i] &lt;&lt; endl;
        total += da[i];
    }
    cout &lt;&lt; "Total Expenses: $" &lt;&lt; total &lt;&lt; endl;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here’s a sample run:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Enter Spring expenses: <span class="docEmphStrong">212</span>
Enter Summer expenses: <span class="docEmphStrong">256</span>
Enter Fall expenses: <span class="docEmphStrong">208</span>
Enter Winter expenses: <span class="docEmphStrong">244</span>

EXPENSES
Spring: $212
Summer: $256
Fall: $208
Winter: $244
Total: $920</pre></div><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E4BCI">Program Notes</h4>
<p class="docText">Because the <tt>const array</tt> object <tt>Snames</tt> is declared above all the functions, it can be used in any of the following function definitions. Like the <tt>const Seasons</tt>, <tt>Snames</tt> is shared by the whole source code file. The program doesn’t have a <tt>using</tt> directive, so <tt>array</tt> and <tt>string</tt> have to be used with the <tt>str::</tt> qualifier. To keep the program short and focused on how functions can use objects, the <tt>fill()</tt> function doesn’t check for valid input.</p>
<p class="docText">Both <tt>fill()</tt> and <tt>show()</tt> have drawbacks. For <tt>show()</tt>, the problem is that <tt>expenses</tt> holds four <tt>double</tt> values and it’s inefficient to create a new object of that size and to copy the <tt>expenses</tt>
 values into it. The problem gets worse if we modify the program to 
handle expenses on a monthly basis or daily basis and expand <tt>expenses</tt> accordingly.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>fill()</tt> function 
avoids this inefficiency problem by using a pointer so that the function
 acts on the original object. But this comes at the cost of notation 
that makes the programming look more complicated:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>fill(&amp;expenses);    // don't forget the &amp;
...
cin &gt;&gt; (*pa)[i];</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In the last statement, <tt>pa</tt> is a pointer to an <tt>array&lt;double, 4&gt;</tt> object, so <tt>*pa</tt> is the object, and <tt>(*pa)[i]</tt>
 is an element in the object. The parentheses are required because of 
operator precedence. The logic is straightforward, but results enhance 
opportunities for making errors.</p>
<p class="docText">Using references, as discussed in Chapter 8, helps solve both the efficiency and the notational problems.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
