<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recursion</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recursion</h3>
<p class="docText">And now for something 
completely different. A C++ function has the interesting characteristic 
that it can call itself. (Unlike C, however, C++ does not let <tt>main()</tt> call itself.) This ability is termed <span class="docEmphasis">recursion</span>.
 Recursion is an important tool in certain types of programming, such as
 artificial intelligence, but we’ll just take a superficial look 
(artificial shallowness) at how it works.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EF4BI">Recursion with a Single Recursive Call</h4>
<p class="docText">If
 a recursive function calls itself, then the newly called function calls
 itself, and so on, ad infinitum unless the code includes something to 
terminate the chain of calls. The usual method is to make the recursive 
call part of an <tt>if</tt> statement. For example, a type <tt>void</tt> recursive function called <tt>recurs()</tt> can have a form like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>void <span class="docEmphasis">recurs</span>(<span class="docEmphasis">argumentlist</span>)
{
      <span class="docEmphasis">statements1</span>
      if (<span class="docEmphasis">test</span>)
            recurs(<span class="docEmphasis">arguments</span>)
      <span class="docEmphasis">statements2</span>
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">With luck or foresight, <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>test</tt></span> eventually becomes <tt>false</tt>, and the chain of calls is broken.</p>
<p class="docText">Recursive calls produce an intriguing chain of events. As long as the <tt>if</tt> statement remains <tt>true</tt>, each call to <tt>recurs()</tt> executes <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>statements1</tt></span> and then invokes a new incarnation of <tt>recurs()</tt> without reaching <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>statements2</tt></span>. When the <tt>if</tt> statement becomes <tt>false</tt>, the current call then proceeds to <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>statements2</tt></span>. Then when the current call terminates, program control returns to the previous version of <tt>recurs()</tt> that called it. Then, that version of <tt>recurs()</tt> completes executing its <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>statements2</tt></span> section and terminates, returning control to the prior call, and so on. Thus, if <tt>recurs()</tt> undergoes five recursive calls, first the <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>statements1</tt></span> section is executed five times in the order in which the functions were called, and then the <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>statements2</tt></span>
 section is executed five times in the opposite order from the order in 
which the functions were called. After going into five levels of 
recursion, the program then has to back out through the same five 
levels. Listing 7.16 illustrates this behavior.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EQBCI">Listing 7.16. <tt>recur.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>// recur.cpp -- using recursion
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
void countdown(int n);

int main()
{
    countdown(4);           // call the recursive function
    return 0;
}

void countdown(int n)
{
    using namespace std;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Counting down ... " &lt;&lt; n &lt;&lt; endl;
    if (n &gt; 0)
        countdown(n-1);     // function calls itself
    cout &lt;&lt; n &lt;&lt; ": Kaboom!\n";
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here’s the annotated output of the program in Listing 7.16:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Counting down ... 4    &lt;level 1; adding levels of recursion
Counting down ... 3    &lt;level 2
Counting down ... 2    &lt;level 3
Counting down ... 1    &lt;level 4
Counting down ... 0    &lt;level 5; final recursive call
0: Kaboom!             &lt;level 5; beginning to back out
1: Kaboom!             &lt;level 4
2: Kaboom!             &lt;level 3
3: Kaboom!             &lt;level 2
4: Kaboom!             &lt;level 1</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Note that each recursive 
call creates its own set of variables, so by the time the program 
reaches the fifth call, it has five separate variables called <tt>n</tt>, each with a different value. You can verify this for yourself by modifying Listing 7.16 so that it displays the address of <tt>n</tt> as well as its value:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>cout &lt;&lt; "Counting down ... " &lt;&lt; n &lt;&lt; " (n at " &lt;&lt; &amp;n &lt;&lt; ")" &lt;&lt; endl;
...
cout &lt;&lt; n &lt;&lt; ": Kaboom!"; &lt;&lt; "         (n at " &lt;&lt; &amp;n &lt;&lt; ")" &lt;&lt; endl;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Doing so produces output like the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Counting down ... 4 (n at 0012FE0C)
Counting down ... 3 (n at 0012FD34)
Counting down ... 2 (n at 0012FC5C)
Counting down ... 1 (n at 0012FB84)
Counting down ... 0 (n at 0012FAAC)
0: Kaboom!          (n at 0012FAAC)
1: Kaboom!          (n at 0012FB84)
2: Kaboom!          (n at 0012FC5C)
3: Kaboom!          (n at 0012FD34)
4: Kaboom!          (n at 0012FE0C)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Note how the <tt>n</tt> having the value <tt>4</tt> is stored at one location (memory address 0012FE0C in this example), the <tt>n</tt> having the value <tt>3</tt> is stored at a second location (memory address 0012FD34), and so on. Also note how the address of <tt>n</tt>
 for a particular level during the “Counting down” stage is the same as 
its address for the same level during the “Kaboom!” stage.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E5ECI">Recursion with Multiple Recursive Calls</h4>
<p class="docText">Recursion is particularly 
useful for situations that call for repeatedly subdividing a task into 
two smaller, similar tasks. For example, consider this approach to 
drawing a ruler. Mark
 the two ends, locate the midpoint, and mark it. Then apply this same 
procedure to the left half of the ruler and then to the right half. If 
you want more subdivisions, apply the same procedure to each of the 
current subdivisions. This recursive approach is sometimes called the <span class="docEmphasis">divide-and-conquer strategy</span>. Listing 7.17 illustrates this approach, with the recursive function <tt>subdivide()</tt>. It uses a string initially filled with spaces except for a <tt>|</tt> character at each end. The main program uses a loop to call the <tt>subdivide()</tt>
 function six times, each time increasing the number of recursion levels
 and printing the resulting string. Thus, each line of output represents
 an additional level of recursion. To remind you that it’s an option, 
the program uses the <tt>std::</tt> qualifier instead of a <tt>using</tt> directive.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EEHCI">Listing 7.17. <tt>ruler.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// ruler.cpp -- using recursion to subdivide a ruler
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
const int Len = 66;
const int Divs = 6;
void subdivide(char ar[], int low, int high, int level);
int main()
{
    char ruler[Len];
    int i;
    for (i = 1; i &lt; Len - 2; i++)
        ruler[i] = ' ';
    ruler[Len - 1] = '\0';
    int max = Len - 2;
    int min = 0;
    ruler[min] = ruler[max] = '|';
    std::cout &lt;&lt; ruler &lt;&lt; std::endl;
    for (i = 1; i &lt;= Divs; i++)
    {
        subdivide(ruler,min,max, i);
        std::cout &lt;&lt; ruler &lt;&lt; std::endl;
        for (int j = 1; j &lt; Len - 2; j++)
            ruler[j] = ' ';  // reset to blank ruler
    }

    return 0;
}

void subdivide(char ar[], int low, int high, int level)
{
    if (level == 0)
        return;
    int mid = (high + low) / 2;
    ar[mid] = '|';
    subdivide(ar, low, mid, level - 1);
    subdivide(ar, mid, high, level - 1);
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here is the output of the program in Listing 7.17:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>|                                                               |
|                               |                               |
|               |               |               |               |
|       |       |       |       |       |       |       |       |
|   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |   |
| | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | |
|||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||||</pre></div><br/>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EZICI">Program Notes</h5>
<p class="docText">The <tt>subdivide()</tt> function in Listing 7.17 uses the variable <tt>level</tt> to control the recursion level. When the function calls itself, it reduces <tt>level</tt> by one, and the function with a <tt>level</tt> of <tt>0</tt> terminates. Note that <tt>subdivide()</tt>
 calls itself twice, once for the left subdivision and once for the 
right subdivision. The original midpoint becomes the right end for one 
call and the left end for the other call. Notice that the number of 
calls grows geometrically. That is, one call generates two, which 
generate four calls, which generate eight, and so on. That’s why the 
level 6 call is able to fill in 64 elements (2<sup>6</sup>
 = 64). This continued doubling of the number of function calls (and 
hence of the number of variables stored) make this form of recursion a 
poor choice if many levels of recursion are required. But it is an 
elegant and simple choice if the necessary levels of recursion are few.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
