<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Summary</h3>
<p class="docText">Functions are the C++ 
programming modules. To use a function, you need to provide a definition
 and a prototype, and you have to use a function call. The function 
definition is the code that implements what the function does. The 
function prototype describes the function interface: how many and what 
kinds of values to pass to the function and what sort of return type, if
 any, to get from it. The function call causes the program to pass the 
function arguments to the function and to transfer program execution to 
the function code.</p>
<p class="docText">By default, C++ functions 
pass arguments by value. This means that the formal parameters in the 
function definition are new variables that are initialized to the values
 provided by the function call. Thus, C++ functions protect the 
integrity of the original data by working with copies.</p>
<p class="docText">C++ treats an array name 
argument as the address of the first element of the array. Technically, 
this is still passing by value because the pointer is a copy of the 
original address, but the function uses the pointer to access the 
contents of the original array. When you declare formal parameters for a
 function (and only then), the following two declarations are 
equivalent:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphasis">typeName</span> arr[];
<span class="docEmphasis">typeName</span> * arr;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Both of these mean that <tt>arr</tt> is a pointer to <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>typeName</tt></span>. When you write the function code, however, you can use <tt>arr</tt> as if it were an array name in order to access elements: <tt>arr[i]</tt>.
 Even when passing pointers, you can preserve the integrity of the 
original data by declaring the formal argument to be a pointer to a <tt>const</tt> type. Because passing the address
 of an array conveys no information about the size of the array, you 
normally pass the array size as a separate argument. Alternatively, you 
can pass pointers to the beginning of the array and to one position past
 the end to indicate a range, as do the algorithms in the STL.</p>
<p class="docText">C++ provides three ways to 
represent C-style strings: by using a character array, a string 
constant, or a pointer to a string. All are type <tt>char*</tt> (pointer-to-<tt>char</tt>), so they are passed to a function as a type <tt>char*</tt> argument. C++ uses the null character (<tt>\0</tt>) to terminate strings, and string functions test for the null character to determine the end of any string they are processing.</p>
<p class="docText">C++ also provides the <tt>string</tt> class to represent strings. A function can accept <tt>string</tt> objects as arguments and use a <tt>string</tt> object as a return value. The <tt>string</tt> class <tt>size()</tt> method can be used to determine the length of a stored string.</p>
<p class="docText">C++ treats structures the same
 as basic types, meaning that you can pass them by value and use them as
 function return types. However, if a structure is large, it might be 
more efficient to pass a pointer to the structure and let the function 
work with the original data. These same considerations apply to class 
objects.</p>
<p class="docText">A C++ function can be recursive; that is, the code for a particular function can include a call of itself.</p>
<p class="docText">The name of a C++ function acts 
as the address of the function. By using a function argument that is a 
pointer to a function, you can pass to a function the name of a second 
function that you want the first function to evoke.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
