<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter Review</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Chapter Review</h3>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1.</b></td><td class="docText">What are the three steps in using a function?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2.</b></td><td class="docText">Construct function prototypes that match the following descriptions:
<div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>igor()</tt> takes no arguments and has no return value.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>tofu(</tt>) takes an <tt>int</tt> argument and returns a <tt>float</tt>.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>mpg()</tt> takes two type <tt>double</tt> arguments and returns a <tt>double</tt>.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>summation()</tt> takes the name of a <tt>long</tt> array and an array size as values and returns a <tt>long</tt> value.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>doctor()</tt> takes a string argument (the string is not to be modified) and returns a <tt>double</tt> value.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>ofcourse()</tt> takes a <tt>boss</tt> structure as an argument and returns nothing.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>plot()</tt> takes a pointer to a <tt>map</tt> structure as an argument and returns a string.</p></div></li></ol></div></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3.</b></td><td class="docText">Write a function that takes three arguments: the name of an <tt>int</tt> array, the array size, and an <tt>int</tt> value. Have the function set each element of the array to the <tt>int</tt> value.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4.</b></td><td class="docText">Write
 a function that takes three arguments: a pointer to the first element 
of a range in an array, a pointer to the element following the end of a 
range in an array, and an <tt>int</tt> value. Have the function set each element of the array to the <tt>int</tt> value.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5.</b></td><td class="docText">Write a function that takes a <tt>double</tt>
 array name and an array size as arguments and returns the largest value
 in that array. Note that this function shouldn’t alter the contents of 
the array.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6.</b></td><td class="docText">Why don’t you use the <tt>const</tt> qualifier for function arguments that are one of the fundamental types?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>7.</b></td><td class="docText">What are the three forms a C-style string can take in a C++ program?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>8.</b></td><td class="docText">Write a function that has this prototype:
<div class="docText"><pre>int replace(char * str, char c1, char c2);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Have the function replace every occurrence of <tt>c1</tt> in the string <tt>str</tt> with <tt>c2</tt>, and have the function return the number of replacements it makes.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9.</b></td><td class="docText">What does the expression <tt>*"pizza"</tt> mean? What about <tt>"taco"[2]</tt>?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>10.</b></td><td class="docText">C++ enables you to pass a structure by value, and it lets you pass the address of a structure. If <tt>glitz</tt>
 is a structure variable, how would you pass it by value? How would you 
pass its address? What are the trade-offs of the two approaches?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11.</b></td><td class="docText">The function <tt>judge()</tt> has a type <tt>int</tt>
 return value. As an argument, it takes the address of a function. The 
function whose address is passed, in turn, takes a pointer to a <tt>const char</tt> as an argument and returns an <tt>int</tt>. Write the function prototype.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>12.</b></td><td class="docText">Suppose we have the following structure declaration:
<div class="docText"><pre>struct applicant {
    char name[30];
    int credit_ratings[3];
};</pre></div><br/>
<div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Write a function that takes an <tt>applicant</tt> structure as an argument and displays its contents.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Write a function that takes the address of an <tt>applicant</tt> structure as an argument and displays the contents of the pointed-to structure.</p></div></li></ol></div></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>13.</b></td><td class="docText">Suppose the functions <tt>f1()</tt> and <tt>f2()</tt> have the following prototypes:
<div class="docText"><pre>void f1(applicant * a);
const char * f2(const applicant * a1, const applicant * a2);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Declare <tt>p1</tt> as a pointer that points to <tt>f1</tt> and <tt>p2</tt> as a pointer to <tt>f2</tt>. Declare <tt>ap</tt> as an array of five pointers of the same type as <tt>p1</tt>, and declare <tt>pa</tt> as a pointer to an array of ten pointers of the same type as <tt>p2</tt>. Use <tt>typedef</tt> as an aid.</p></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
