<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Default Arguments</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Default Arguments</h3>
<p class="docText">Let’s look at another topic from C++’s bag of new tricks: the default argument. A <span class="docEmphasis">default argument</span>
 is a value that’s used automatically if you omit the corresponding 
actual argument from a function call. For example, if you set up <tt>void wow(int n)</tt> so that <tt>n</tt> has a default value of <tt>1</tt>, the function call <tt>wow()</tt> is the same as <tt>wow(1)</tt>. This gives you flexibility in how you use a function. Suppose you have a function called <tt>left()</tt> that returns the first <tt>n</tt> characters of a string, with the string and <tt>n</tt>
 as arguments. More precisely, the function returns a pointer to a new 
string consisting of the selected portion of the original string. For 
example, the call <tt>left("theory", 3)</tt> constructs a new string <tt>"the"</tt> and returns a pointer to it. Now suppose you establish a default value of <tt>1</tt> for the second argument. The call <tt>left("theory", 3)</tt> would work as before, with your choice of <tt>3</tt> overriding the default. But the call <tt>left("theory")</tt><a name="second argument"></a>, instead of being an error, would assume a second argument of <tt>1</tt> and return a pointer to the string <tt>"t"</tt>.
 This kind of default is helpful if your program often needs to extract a
 one-character string but occasionally needs to extract longer strings.</p>
<p class="docText">How
 do you establish a default value? You must use the function prototype. 
Because the compiler looks at the prototype to see how many arguments a 
function uses, the function prototype also has to alert the program to 
the possibility of default arguments. The method is to assign a value to
 the argument in the prototype. For example, here’s the prototype 
fitting this description of <tt>left()</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>char * left(const char * str, int n = 1);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">You want the function to return a new string, so its type is <tt>char*</tt>, or pointer-to-<tt>char</tt>. You want to leave the original string unaltered, so you use the <tt>const</tt> qualifier for the first argument. You want <tt>n</tt> to have a default value of <tt>1</tt>, so you assign that value to <tt>n</tt>. A default argument value is an initialization value. Thus, the preceding prototype initializes <tt>n</tt> to the value <tt>1</tt>. If you leave <tt>n</tt> alone, it has the value <tt>1</tt>, but if you pass an argument, the new value overwrites the <tt>1</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">When you use a function with 
an argument list, you must add defaults from right to left. That is, you
 can’t provide a default value for a particular argument unless you also
 provide defaults for all the arguments to its right:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int harpo(int n, int m = 4, int j = 5);         // VALID
int chico(int n, int m = 6, int j);             // INVALID
int groucho(int k = 1, int m = 2, int n = 3);   // VALID</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">For example, the <tt>harpo()</tt> prototype permits calls with one, two, or three arguments:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>beeps = harpo(2);       // same as harpo(2,4,5)
beeps = harpo(1,8);     // same as harpo(1,8,5)
beeps = harpo (8,7,6);  // no default arguments used</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The actual arguments 
are assigned to the corresponding formal arguments from left to right; 
you can’t skip over arguments. Thus, the following isn’t allowed:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>beeps = harpo(3, ,8);   // invalid, doesn't set m to 4</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Default arguments aren’t a
 major programming breakthrough; rather, they are a convenience. When 
you begin working with class design, you’ll find that they can reduce 
the number of constructors, methods, and method overloads you have to 
define.</p>
<p class="docText">Listing 8.9
 puts default arguments to use. Note that only the prototype indicates 
the default. The function definition is the same as it would be without 
default arguments.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EZXCI">Listing 8.9. <tt>left.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// left.cpp -- string function with a default argument
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
const int ArSize = 80;
char * left(const char * str, int n = 1);
int main()
{
    using namespace std;
    char sample[ArSize];
    cout &lt;&lt; "Enter a string:\n";
    cin.get(sample,ArSize);
    char *ps = left(sample, 4);
    cout &lt;&lt; ps &lt;&lt; endl;
    delete [] ps;       // free old string
    ps = left(sample);
    cout &lt;&lt; ps &lt;&lt; endl;
    delete [] ps;       // free new string
    return 0;
}

// This function returns a pointer to a new string
// consisting of the first n characters in the str string.
char * left(const char * str, int n)
{
    if(n &lt; 0)
        n = 0;
    char * p = new char[n+1];
    int i;
    for (i = 0; i &lt; n &amp;&amp; str[i]; i++)
        p[i] = str[i];  // copy characters
    while (i &lt;= n)
        p[i++] = '\0';  // set rest of string to '\0'
    return p;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here’s a sample run of the program in Listing 8.9:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Enter a string:
<span class="docEmphStrong">forthcoming</span>
fort
f</pre></div><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E1YCI">Program Notes</h4>
<p class="docText">The program in Listing 8.9 uses <tt>new</tt>
 to create a new string for holding the selected characters. One awkward
 possibility is that an uncooperative user may request a negative number
 of characters. In that case, the function sets the character count to <tt>0</tt>
 and eventually returns the null string. Another awkward possibility is 
that an irresponsible user may request more characters than the string 
contains. The function protects against this by using a combined test:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>i &lt; n &amp;&amp; str[i]</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>i &lt; n</tt> test stops the loop after <tt>n</tt> characters have been copied. The second part of the test, the expression <tt>str[i]</tt>, is the code for the character about to be copied. If the loop reaches the null character, the code is <tt>0</tt>, and the loop terminates. The final <tt>while</tt> loop terminates the string with the null character and then sets the rest of the allocated space, if any, to null characters.</p>
<p class="docText">Another approach for setting the size of the new string is to set <tt>n</tt> to the smaller of the passed value and the string length:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int len = strlen(str);
n = (n &lt; len) ? n : len;    // the lesser of n and len
char * p = new char[n+1];</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This ensures that <tt>new</tt> doesn’t allocate more space than what’s needed to hold the string. That can be useful if you make a call such as <tt>left("Hi!", 32767)</tt>. The first approach copies the <tt>"Hi!"</tt> into an array of 32767 characters, setting all but the first 3 characters to the null character. The second approach copies <tt>"Hi!"</tt> into an array of 4 characters. But by adding another function call (<tt>strlen()</tt>), it increases the program size, slows the process, and requires that you remember to include the <tt>cstring</tt> (or <tt>string.h</tt>)
 header file. C programmers have tended to opt for faster running, more 
compact code and leave a greater burden on the programmer to use 
functions correctly. However, the C++ tradition places greater weight on
 reliability. After all, a slower program that works correctly is better
 than a fast program that works incorrectly. If the time taken to call <tt>strlen()</tt> turns out to be a problem, you can let <tt>left()</tt> determine the lesser of <tt>n</tt> and the string length directly. For example, the following loop quits when <tt>m</tt> reaches <tt>n</tt> or the end of the string, whichever comes first:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int m = 0;
while (m &lt;= n &amp;&amp; str[m] != '\0')
      m++;
char * p = new char[m+1]:
// use m instead of n in rest of code</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Remember, the expression <tt>str[m] != '\0'</tt> evaluates to <tt>true</tt> when <tt>str[m]</tt> is not the null character and to <tt>false</tt> when it is the null character. Because nonzero values are converted to <tt>true</tt> in an <tt>&amp;&amp;</tt> expression and zero is converted to <tt>false</tt>, the <tt>while</tt> test also can be written this way:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>while (m&lt;=n &amp;&amp; str[m])</pre></div><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
