<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Function Overloading</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Function Overloading</h3>
<p class="docText">Function 
polymorphism is a neat C++ addition to C’s capabilities. Whereas default
 arguments let you call the same function by using varying numbers of 
arguments, <span class="docEmphasis">function polymorphism</span>, also called <span class="docEmphasis">function overloading</span>, lets you use multiple functions sharing the same name. The word <span class="docEmphasis">polymorphism</span> means having many forms, so <span class="docEmphasis">function polymorphism</span> lets a function have many forms. Similarly, the expression <span class="docEmphasis">function overloading</span>
 means you can attach more than one function to the same name, thus 
overloading the name. Both expressions boil down to the same thing, but 
we’ll usually use the expression <span class="docEmphasis">function overloading</span>—it
 sounds harder working. You can use function overloading to design a 
family of functions that do essentially the same thing but using 
different argument lists.</p>
<p class="docText">Overloaded
 functions are analogous to verbs having more than one meaning. For 
example, Miss Piggy can root at the ball park for the home team, and she
 can root in soil for truffles. The context (one hopes) tells you which 
meaning of <span class="docEmphasis">root</span> is intended in each case. Similarly, C++ uses the context to decide which version of an overloaded function is intended.</p>
<p class="docText">The key to function overloading is a function’s argument list, also called the <span class="docEmphasis">function signature</span>.
 If two functions use the same number and types of arguments in the same
 order, they have the same signature; the variable names don’t matter. 
C++ enables you to define two functions by the same name, provided that 
the functions have different signatures. The signature can differ in the
 number of arguments or in the type of arguments, or both. For example, 
you can define a set of <tt>print()</tt> functions with the following prototypes:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>void print(const char * str, int width);  // #1
void print(double d, int width);          // #2
void print(long l, int width);            // #3
void print(int i, int width);             // #4
void print(const char *str);              // #5</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">When you then use a <tt>print()</tt> function, the compiler matches your use to the prototype that has the same signature:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>print("Pancakes", 15);         // use #1
print("Syrup");                // use #5
print(1999.0, 10);             // use #2
print(1999, 12);               // use #4
print(1999L, 15);              // use #3</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">For example, <tt>print("Pancakes", 15)</tt> uses a string and an integer as arguments, and it matches Prototype #1.</p>
<p class="docText">When you use overloaded 
functions, you need to be sure you use the proper argument types in the 
function call. For example, consider the following statements:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>unsigned int year = 3210;
print(year, 6);           // ambiguous call</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Which prototype does the <tt>print()</tt>
 call match here? It doesn’t match any of them! A lack of a matching 
prototype doesn’t automatically rule out using one of the functions 
because C++ will try to use standard type conversions to force a match. 
If, say, the <span class="docEmphasis">only</span> <tt>print()</tt> prototype were #2, the function call <tt>print(year, 6)</tt> would convert the <tt>year</tt> value to type <tt>double</tt>.
 But in the earlier code there are three prototypes that take a number 
as the first argument, providing three different choices for converting <tt>year</tt>. Faced with this ambiguous situation, C++ rejects the function call as an error.</p>
<p class="docText">Some signatures that appear 
to be different from each other nonetheless can’t coexist. For example, 
consider these two prototypes:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>double cube(double x);
double cube(double &amp; x);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">You
 might think this is a place you could use function overloading because 
the function signatures appear to be different. But consider things from
 the compiler’s standpoint. Suppose you have code like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>cout &lt;&lt; cube(x);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>x</tt> argument matches both the <tt>double x</tt> prototype and the <tt>double &amp;x</tt>
 prototype. The compiler has no way of knowing which function to use. 
Therefore, to avoid such confusion, when it checks function signatures, 
the compiler considers a reference to a type and the type itself to be 
the same signature.</p>
<p class="docText">The function-matching process does discriminate between <tt>const</tt> and non-<tt>const</tt> variables. Consider the following prototypes:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>void dribble(char * bits);          // overloaded
void dribble (const char *cbits);   // overloaded
void dabble(char * bits);           // not overloaded
void drivel(const char * bits);     // not overloaded</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here’s what various function calls would match:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>const char p1[20] = "How's the weather?";
char p2[20] = "How's business?";
dribble(p1);      // dribble(const char *);
dribble(p2);      // dribble(char *);
dabble(p1);       // no match
dabble(p2);       // dabble(char *);
drivel(p1);       // drivel(const char *);
drivel(p2);       // drivel(const char *);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>dribble()</tt> function has two prototypes—one for <tt>const</tt> pointers and one for regular pointers—and the compiler selects one or the other, depending on whether the actual argument is <tt>const</tt>. The <tt>dabble()</tt> function only matches a call with a non-<tt>const</tt> argument, but the <tt>drivel()</tt> function matches calls with either <tt>const</tt> or non-<tt>const</tt> arguments. The reason for this difference in behavior between <tt>drivel()</tt> and <tt>dabble()</tt> is that it’s valid to assign a non-<tt>const</tt> value to a <tt>const</tt> variable, but not vice versa.</p>
<p class="docText">Keep in mind that the 
signature, not the function type, enables function overloading. For 
example, the following two declarations are incompatible:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>long gronk(int n, float m);      // same signatures,
double gronk(int n, float m);    // hence not allowed</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Therefore, C++ doesn’t permit you to overload <tt>gronk()</tt> in this fashion. You can have different return types, but only if the signatures are also different:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>long gronk(int n, float m);        // different signatures,
double gronk(float n, float m);    // hence allowed</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">After we discuss templates later in this chapter, we’ll further discuss function matching.</p>
<p class="docText"></p><p></p><div class="box">
<h2 class="docSidebarTitle">Overloading Reference Parameters</h2>
<p class="docText">Class
 designs and the STL often use reference parameters, and it’s useful to 
know how overloading works with different reference types. Consider the 
following three prototypes:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>void sink(double &amp; r1);       // matches modifiable lvalue
void sank(const double &amp; r2); // matches modifiable or const lvalue, rvalue
void sunk(double &amp;&amp; r3);      // matches rvalue</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The lvalue reference parameter <tt>r1</tt> matches a modifiable lvalue argument, such as a <tt>double</tt> variable. The <tt>const</tt> lvalue reference parameter <tt>r2</tt> matches a modifiable lvalue argument, a <tt>const</tt> lvalue argument, and an rvalue argument, such as the sum of two <tt>double</tt> values. Finally, the rvalue reference <tt>r3</tt> matches an rvalue. Note how <tt>r2</tt> can match the same sort of arguments that <tt>r1</tt> and <tt>r3</tt>
 match. This raises the question of what happens when you overload a 
function on these three types of parameters. The answer is that the more
 exact match is made:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>void staff(double &amp; rs);         // matches modifiable lvalue
voit staff(const double &amp; rcs);  // matches rvalue, const lvalue
void stove(double &amp; r1);         // matches modifiable lvalue
void stove(const double &amp; r2);   // matches const lvalue
void stove(double &amp;&amp; r3);        // matches rvalue</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This allows you to customize the behavior of a function based on the lvalue, <tt>const</tt>, or rvalue nature of the argument:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>double x = 55.5;
const double y = 32.0;
stove(x);             // calls stove(double &amp;)
stove(y);             // calls stove(const double &amp;)
stove(x+y);           // calls stove(double &amp;&amp;)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">If, say, you omit the <tt>stove(double &amp;&amp;)</tt> function, then <tt>stove(x+y)</tt> will call the <tt>stove(const double &amp;)</tt> function instead.</p>
</div><p></p><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EPADI">An Overloading Example</h4>
<p class="docText">In this chapter we’ve already developed a <tt>left()</tt> function that returns a pointer to the first <tt>n</tt> characters in a string. Let’s add a second <tt>left()</tt> function, one that returns the first <tt>n</tt>
 digits in an integer. You can use it, for example, to examine the first
 three digits of a U.S. postal zip code stored as an integer, which is 
useful if you want to sort for urban areas.</p>
<p class="docText">The integer function is a 
bit more difficult to program than the string version because you don’t 
have the benefit of each digit being stored in its own array element. 
One approach is to first compute the number of digits in the number. 
Dividing a number by 10 lops off one digit, so you can use division to 
count digits. More precisely, you can do so with a loop, like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>unsigned digits = 1;
while (n /= 10)
    digits++;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This loop counts how many times you can remove a digit from <tt>n</tt> until none are left. Recall that <tt>n /= 10</tt> is short for <tt>n = n / 10</tt>. If <tt>n</tt> is <tt>8</tt>, for example, the test condition assigns to <tt>n</tt> the value <tt>8 / 10</tt>, or <tt>0</tt>, because it’s integer division. That terminates the loop, and <tt>digits</tt> remains at <tt>1</tt>. But if <tt>n</tt> is <tt>238</tt>, the first loop test sets <tt>n</tt> to <tt>238 / 10</tt>, or <tt>23</tt>. That’s nonzero, so the loop increases <tt>digits</tt> to <tt>2</tt>. The next cycle sets <tt>n</tt> to <tt>23 / 10</tt>, or <tt>2</tt>. Again, that’s nonzero, so <tt>digits</tt> grows to <tt>3</tt>. The next cycle sets <tt>n</tt> to <tt>2 / 10</tt>, or <tt>0</tt>, and the loop quits, leaving <tt>digits</tt> set to the correct value, <tt>3</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Now suppose you know that 
the number has five digits, and you want to return the first three 
digits. You can get that value by dividing the number by 10 and then 
dividing the answer by 10 again. Each division by 10 lops one more digit
 off the right end. To calculate the number of digits to lop, you just 
subtract the number of digits to be shown from the total number of 
digits. For example, to show four digits of a nine-digit number, you lop
 off the last five digits. You can code this approach as follows:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>ct = digits - ct;
while (ct--)
    num /= 10;
return num;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Listing 8.10 incorporates this code into a new <tt>left()</tt>
 function. The function includes some additional code to handle special 
cases, such as asking for zero digits or asking for more digits than the
 number possesses. Because the signature of the new <tt>left()</tt> differs from that of the old <tt>left()</tt>, you can use both functions in the same program.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EREDI">Listing 8.10. <tt>leftover.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// leftover.cpp -- overloading the left() function
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
unsigned long left(unsigned long num, unsigned ct);
char * left(const char * str, int n = 1);

int main()
{
     using namespace std;
    char * trip = "Hawaii!!";   // test value
    unsigned long n = 12345678; // test value
    int i;
    char * temp;

    for (i = 1; i &lt; 10; i++)
    {
        cout &lt;&lt; left(n, i) &lt;&lt; endl;
        temp = left(trip,i);
        cout &lt;&lt; temp &lt;&lt; endl;
        delete [] temp; // point to temporary storage
    }
    return 0;

}

// This function returns the first ct digits of the number num.
unsigned long left(unsigned long num, unsigned ct)
{
    unsigned digits = 1;
    unsigned long n = num;

    if (ct == 0 || num == 0)
        return 0;       // return 0 if no digits
    while (n /= 10)
        digits++;
    if (digits &gt; ct)
    {
    ct = digits - ct;
    while (ct--)
        num /= 10;
    return num;         // return left ct digits
    }
    else                // if ct &gt;= number of digits
        return num;     // return the whole number
}

// This function returns a pointer to a new string
// consisting of the first n characters in the str string.
char * left(const char * str, int n)
{
    if(n &lt; 0)
        n = 0;
    char * p = new char[n+1];
    int i;
    for (i = 0; i &lt; n &amp;&amp; str[i]; i++)
        p[i] = str[i];  // copy characters
    while (i &lt;= n)
        p[i++] = '\0';  // set rest of string to '\0'
    return p;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here’s the output of the program in Listing 8.10:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>1
H
12
Ha
123
Haw
1234
Hawa
12345
Hawai
123456
Hawaii
1234567
Hawaii!
12345678
Hawaii!!
12345678
Hawaii!!</pre></div><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EPFDI">When to Use Function Overloading</h4>
<p class="docText">You
 might find function overloading fascinating, but you shouldn’t overuse 
it. You should reserve function overloading for functions that perform 
basically the same task but with different forms of data. Also you might
 want to check whether you can accomplish the same end by using default 
arguments. For example, you could replace the single, string-oriented <tt>left()</tt> function with two overloaded functions:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>char * left(const char * str, unsigned n);   // two arguments
char * left(const char * str);               // one argument</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">But using the single function
 with a default argument is simpler. There’s just one function to write 
instead of two, and the program requires memory for just one function 
instead of two. If you decide to modify the function, you have to edit 
only one. However, if you require different types of arguments, default 
arguments are of no avail, so in that case, you should use function 
overloading.</p>
<p></p><div class="box">
<h2 class="docSidebarTitle">What Is Name Decoration?</h2>
<p class="docText">How does C++ keep track of 
which overloaded function is which? It assigns a secret identity to each
 of these functions. When you use the editor of your C++ development 
tool to write and compile programs, your C++ compiler performs a bit of 
magic on your behalf—known as <span class="docEmphasis">name decoration</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">name mangling</span>—through
 which each function name is encrypted, based on the formal parameter 
types specified in the function’s prototype. Consider the following 
undecorated function prototype:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>long MyFunctionFoo(int, float);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This format is fine for us humans; we know that the function accepts two arguments of type <tt>int</tt> and <tt>float</tt>, and it returns a value of type <tt>long</tt>.
 For its own use, the compiler documents this interface by transforming 
the name into an internal representation with a more unsightly 
appearance, perhaps something like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>?MyFunctionFoo@@YAXH</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The apparent 
gibberish decorating the original name (or mangling it, depending on 
your attitude) encodes the number and types of parameters. A different 
function signature would result in a different set of symbols being 
added, and different compilers would use different conventions for their
 efforts at decorating.</p>
</div><p></p><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
