<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Function Templates</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Function Templates</h3>
<p class="docText">Contemporary C++ compilers implement one of the newer C++ additions: function templates. A <span class="docEmphasis">function template</span>
 is a generic function description; that is, it defines a function in 
terms of a generic type for which a specific type, such as <tt>int</tt> or <tt>double</tt>,
 can be substituted. By passing a type as a parameter to a template, you
 cause the compiler to generate a function for that particular type. 
Because templates let you program in terms of a generic type instead of a
 specific type, the process is sometimes termed <span class="docEmphasis">generic programming</span>. Because types are represented by parameters, the template feature is sometimes referred to as <span class="docEmphasis">parameterized types</span>. Let’s see why such a feature is useful and how it works.</p>
<p class="docText">Earlier Listing 8.4 defined a function that swapped two <tt>int</tt> values. Suppose you want to swap two <tt>double</tt> values instead. One approach is to duplicate the original code but replace each <tt>int</tt> with <tt>double</tt>. If you need to swap two <tt>char</tt>
 values, you can use the same technique again. Still, it’s wasteful of 
your valuable time to have to make these petty changes, and there’s 
always the possibility of making an error. If you make the changes by 
hand, you might overlook an <tt>int</tt>. If you do a global search-and-replace to substitute, say, <tt>double</tt> for <tt>int</tt>, you might do something such as converting</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int x;
short interval;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">to the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>double x;            // intended change of type
short doubleerval;   // unintended change of variable name</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">C++’s function template capability automates the process, saving you time and providing greater reliability.</p>
<p class="docText">Function templates enable 
you to define a function in terms of some arbitrary type. For example, 
you can set up a swapping template like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template &lt;typename AnyType&gt;
void Swap(AnyType &amp;a, AnyType &amp;b)
{
    AnyType temp;
    temp = a;
    a = b;
    b = temp;
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The first line specifies that you are setting up a template and that you’re naming the arbitrary type <tt>AnyType</tt>. The keywords <tt>template</tt> and <tt>typename</tt> are obligatory, except that you can use the keyword <tt>class</tt> instead of <tt>typename</tt>. Also you must use the angle brackets. The type name (<tt>AnyType</tt>, in this example) is your choice, as long as you follow the usual C++ naming rules; many programmers use simple names such as <tt>T</tt>, which, one must admit, is simple indeed. The rest of the code describes the algorithm for swapping two values of type <tt>AnyType</tt>.
 The template does not create any functions. Instead, it provides the 
compiler with directions about how to define a function. If you want a 
function to swap <tt>int</tt>s, then the compiler creates a function following the template pattern, substituting <tt>int</tt> for <tt>AnyType</tt>. Similarly, if you need a function to swap <tt>double</tt>s, the compiler follows the template, substituting the <tt>double</tt> type for <tt>AnyType</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Before the C++98 Standard added the keyword <tt>typename</tt> to the language, C++ used the keyword <tt>class</tt> in this particular context. That is, you can write the template definition this way:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template &lt;class AnyType&gt;
void Swap(AnyType &amp;a, AnyType &amp;b)
{
    AnyType temp;
    temp = a;
    a = b;
    b = temp;
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>typename</tt> keyword makes it a bit more obvious that the parameter <tt>AnyType</tt> represents a type; however, large libraries of code have already been developed by using the older keyword <tt>class</tt>.
 The C++ Standard treats the two keywords identically when they are used
 in this context. This book uses both forms so that you will be familiar
 with them when encountering them elsewhere.</p>
<div class="docNote"><p class="docNoteTitle">Tip</p>
<p class="docText">You should use templates 
if you need functions that apply the same algorithm to a variety of 
types. If you aren’t concerned with backward compatibility and can put 
up with the effort of typing a longer word, you can use the keyword <tt>typename</tt> rather than <tt>class</tt> when you declare type parameters.</p>
</div><br/>
<p class="docText">To let the compiler know that you need a particular form of swap function, you just use a function called <tt>Swap()</tt> in your program. The compiler checks the argument types you use and then generates the corresponding function. Listing 8.11
 shows how this works. The program layout follows the usual pattern for 
ordinary functions, with a template function prototype near the top of 
the file and the template function definition following <tt>main()</tt>. The example follows the more usual practice of using <tt>T</tt> instead of <tt>AnyType</tt> as the type parameter.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EV5CI">Listing 8.11. <tt>funtemp.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// funtemp.cpp -- using a function template
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
// function template prototype
template &lt;typename T&gt;  // or class T
void Swap(T &amp;a, T &amp;b);

int main()
{
    using namespace std;
    int i = 10;
    int j = 20;
    cout &lt;&lt; "i, j = " &lt;&lt; i &lt;&lt; ", " &lt;&lt; j &lt;&lt; ".\n";
    cout &lt;&lt; "Using compiler-generated int swapper:\n";
    Swap(i,j);  // generates void Swap(int &amp;, int &amp;)
    cout &lt;&lt; "Now i, j = " &lt;&lt; i &lt;&lt; ", " &lt;&lt; j &lt;&lt; ".\n";

    double x = 24.5;
    double y = 81.7;
    cout &lt;&lt; "x, y = " &lt;&lt; x &lt;&lt; ", " &lt;&lt; y &lt;&lt; ".\n";
    cout &lt;&lt; "Using compiler-generated double swapper:\n";
    Swap(x,y);  // generates void Swap(double &amp;, double &amp;)
    cout &lt;&lt; "Now x, y = " &lt;&lt; x &lt;&lt; ", " &lt;&lt; y &lt;&lt; ".\n";
    // cin.get();
    return 0;
}

// function template definition
template &lt;typename T&gt;  // or class T
void Swap(T &amp;a, T &amp;b)
{
    T temp;   // temp a variable of type T
    temp = a;
    a = b;
    b = temp;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The first <tt>Swap()</tt> function in Listing 8.11 has two <tt>int</tt> arguments, so the compiler generates an <tt>int</tt> version of the function. That is, it replaces each use of <tt>T</tt> with <tt>int</tt>, producing a definition that looks like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>void Swap(int &amp;a, int &amp;b)
{
    int temp;
    temp = a;
    a = b;
    b = temp;
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">You don’t see this code, but the compiler generates and then uses it in the program. The second <tt>Swap()</tt> function has two <tt>double</tt> arguments, so the compiler generates a <tt>double</tt> version. That is, it replaces <tt>T</tt> with <tt>double</tt>, generating this code:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>void Swap(double &amp;a, double &amp;b)
{
    double temp;
    temp = a;
    a = b;
    b = temp;
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here’s the output of the program in Listing 8.11, which shows that the process has worked:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>i, j = 10, 20.
Using compiler-generated int swapper:
Now i, j = 20, 10.
x, y = 24.5, 81.7.
Using compiler-generated double swapper:
Now x, y = 81.7, 24.5.</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Note that function templates don’t make executable programs any shorter. In Listing 8.11,
 you still wind up with two separate function definitions, just as you 
would if you defined each function manually. And the final code doesn’t 
contain any templates; it just contains the actual functions generated 
for the program. The benefits of templates are that they make generating
 multiple function definitions simpler and more reliable.</p>
<p class="docText">More typically, templates are placed in a header file that is then included in the file using them. Chapter 9 discusses header files.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EHEDI">Overloaded Templates</h4>
<p class="docText">You use templates when you need functions that apply the same algorithm to a variety of types, as in Listing 8.11.
 It might be, however, that not all types would use the same algorithm. 
To handle this possibility, you can overload template definitions, just 
as you overload regular function definitions. As with ordinary 
overloading, overloaded templates need distinct function signatures. For
 example, Listing 8.12 adds a new swapping template—one for swapping elements of two arrays. The original template has the signature <tt>(T &amp;, T &amp;)</tt>, whereas the new template has the signature <tt>(T [], T [], int)</tt>. Note that the final parameter in this case happens to be a specific type (<tt>int</tt>) rather than a generic type. Not all template arguments have to be template parameter types.</p>
<p class="docText">When, in <tt>twotemps.cpp</tt>, the compiler encounters the first use of <tt>Swap()</tt>, it notices that it has two <tt>int</tt> arguments and matches <tt>Swap()</tt> to the original template. The second use, however, has two <tt>int</tt> arrays and an <tt>int</tt> value as arguments, and this matches the new template.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ETFDI">Listing 8.12. <tt>twotemps.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// twotemps.cpp -- using overloaded template functions
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
template &lt;typename T&gt;     // original template
void Swap(T &amp;a, T &amp;b);

template &lt;typename T&gt;     // new template
void Swap(T *a, T *b, int n);

void Show(int a[]);
const int Lim = 8;
int main()
{
    using namespace std;
    int i = 10, j = 20;
    cout &lt;&lt; "i, j = " &lt;&lt; i &lt;&lt; ", " &lt;&lt; j &lt;&lt; ".\n";
    cout &lt;&lt; "Using compiler-generated int swapper:\n";
    Swap(i,j);              // matches original template
    cout &lt;&lt; "Now i, j = " &lt;&lt; i &lt;&lt; ", " &lt;&lt; j &lt;&lt; ".\n";

    int d1[Lim] = {0,7,0,4,1,7,7,6};
    int d2[Lim] = {0,7,2,0,1,9,6,9};
    cout &lt;&lt; "Original arrays:\n";
    Show(d1);
    Show(d2);
    Swap(d1,d2,Lim);        // matches new template
    cout &lt;&lt; "Swapped arrays:\n";
    Show(d1);
    Show(d2);
    // cin.get();
    return 0;
}

template &lt;typename T&gt;
void Swap(T &amp;a, T &amp;b)
{
    T temp;
    temp = a;
    a = b;
    b = temp;
}

template &lt;typename T&gt;
void Swap(T a[], T b[], int n)
{
    T temp;
    for (int i = 0; i &lt; n; i++)
    {
        temp = a[i];
        a[i] = b[i];
        b[i] = temp;
    }
}

void Show(int a[])
{
    using namespace std;
    cout &lt;&lt; a[0] &lt;&lt; a[1] &lt;&lt; "/";
    cout &lt;&lt; a[2] &lt;&lt; a[3] &lt;&lt; "/";
    for (int i = 4; i &lt; Lim; i++)
        cout &lt;&lt; a[i];
    cout &lt;&lt; endl;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here is the output of the program in Listing 8.12:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>i, j = 10, 20.
Using compiler-generated int swapper:
Now i, j = 20, 10.
Original arrays:
07/04/1776
07/20/1969
Swapped arrays:
07/20/1969
07/04/1776</pre></div><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ERGDI">Template Limitations</h4>
<p class="docText">Suppose you have a template function:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template &lt;class T&gt;     // or template &lt;typename T&gt;
void f(T a, T b)
{...}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Often the code makes 
assumptions about what operations are possible for the type. For 
instance, the following statement assumes that assignment is defined, 
and this would not be true if type <tt>T</tt> is a built-in array type:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>a = b;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Similarly, the following assumes <tt>&gt;</tt> is defined, which is not true if <tt>T</tt> is an ordinary structure:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>if (a &gt; b)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Also the <tt>&gt;</tt> 
operator is defined for array names, but because array names are 
addresses, it compares the addresses of the arrays, which may not be 
what you have in mind. And the following assumes the multiplication 
operator is defined for type <tt>T</tt>, which is not the case if <tt>T</tt> is an array, a pointer, or a structure:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>T c = a*b;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In short, it’s easy to 
write a template function that cannot handle certain types. On the other
 hand, sometimes a generalization makes sense, even if ordinary C++ 
syntax doesn’t allow for it. For example, it could make sense to add 
structures containing position coordinates, even though the <tt>+</tt> operator isn’t defined for structures. One approach is that C++ allows one to overload the <tt>+</tt> operator so that it can be used with a particular form of structure or class. Chapter 11 discusses this facility. A template that requires using the <tt>+</tt> operator then could handle a structure that had an overloaded <tt>+</tt> operator. Another approach is to provide specialized template definitions for particular types. Let’s look at that next.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EWLDI">Explicit Specializations</h4>
<p class="docText">Suppose you define a structure like the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>struct job
{
      char name[40];
      double salary;
      int floor;
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Also suppose you want to be 
able to swap the contents of two such structures. The original template 
uses the following code to effect a swap:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>temp = a;
a = b;
b = temp;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Because C++ allows you to assign one structure to another, this works fine, even if type <tt>T</tt> is a <tt>job</tt> structure. But suppose you only want to swap the <tt>salary</tt> and <tt>floor</tt> members, keeping the <tt>name</tt> members unchanged. This requires different code, but the arguments to <tt>Swap()</tt> would be the same as for the first case (references to two <tt>job</tt> structures), so you can’t use template overloading to supply the alternative code.</p>
<p class="docText">However, you can supply a specialized function definition, called an <span class="docEmphasis">explicit specialization</span>,
 with the required code. If the compiler finds a specialized definition 
that exactly matches a function call, it uses that definition without 
looking for templates.</p>
<p class="docText">The specialization 
mechanism has changed with the evolution of C++. We’ll look at the 
current form as mandated by the C++ Standard.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EINDI">Third-Generation Specialization (ISO/ANSI C++ Standard)</h5>
<p class="docText">After some youthful experimentation with other approaches, the C++98 Standard settled on this approach:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">For a given 
function name, you can have a non template function, a template 
function, and an explicit specialization template function, along with 
overloaded versions of all of these.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The prototype and definition for an explicit specialization should be preceded by <tt>template &lt;&gt;</tt> and should mention the specialized type by name.</p></li><li><p class="docList">A specialization overrides the regular template, and a non template function overrides both.</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">Here’s how prototypes for swapping type <tt>job</tt> structures would look for these three forms:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>// non template function prototype
void Swap(job &amp;, job &amp;);

// template prototype
template &lt;typename T&gt;
void Swap(T &amp;, T &amp;);

// explicit specialization for the job type
template &lt;&gt; void Swap&lt;job&gt;(job &amp;, job &amp;);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">As mentioned previously, 
if more than one of these prototypes is present, the compiler chooses 
the non template version over explicit specializations and template 
versions, and it chooses an explicit specialization over a version 
generated from a template. For example, in the following code, the first
 call to <tt>Swap()</tt> uses the general template, and the second call uses the explicit specialization, based on the <tt>job</tt> type:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>...
template &lt;class T&gt;          // template
void Swap(T &amp;, T &amp;);

// explicit specialization for the job type
template &lt;&gt; void Swap&lt;job&gt;(job &amp;, job &amp;);
int main()
{
    double u, v;
    ...
    Swap(u,v);  // use template
    job a, b;
    ...
    Swap(a,b);  // use void Swap&lt;job&gt;(job &amp;, job &amp;)
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>&lt;job&gt;</tt> in <tt>Swap&lt;job&gt;</tt> is optional because the function argument types indicate that this is a specialization for <tt>job</tt>. Thus, the prototype can also be written this way:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template &lt;&gt; void Swap(job &amp;, job &amp;);   // simpler form</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In case you have to work with 
an older compiler, we’ll come back to pre-C++ Standard usage soon, but 
first, let’s see how explicit specializations are supposed to work.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ELQDI">An Example of Explicit Specialization</h5>
<p class="docText">Listing 8.13 illustrates how explicit specialization works.</p>
<p class="docText"></p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E5QDI">Listing 8.13. <tt>twoswap.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// twoswap.cpp -- specialization overrides a template
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
template &lt;typename T&gt;
void Swap(T &amp;a, T &amp;b);

struct job
{
    char name[40];
    double salary;
    int floor;
};

// explicit specialization
template &lt;&gt; void Swap&lt;job&gt;(job &amp;j1, job &amp;j2);
void Show(job &amp;j);

int main()
{
    using namespace std;
    cout.precision(2);
    cout.setf(ios::fixed, ios::floatfield);
    int i = 10, j = 20;
    cout &lt;&lt; "i, j = " &lt;&lt; i &lt;&lt; ", " &lt;&lt; j &lt;&lt; ".\n";
    cout &lt;&lt; "Using compiler-generated int swapper:\n";
    Swap(i,j);    // generates void Swap(int &amp;, int &amp;)
    cout &lt;&lt; "Now i, j = " &lt;&lt; i &lt;&lt; ", " &lt;&lt; j &lt;&lt; ".\n";

    job sue = {"Susan Yaffee", 73000.60, 7};
    job sidney = {"Sidney Taffee", 78060.72, 9};
    cout &lt;&lt; "Before job swapping:\n";
    Show(sue);
    Show(sidney);
    Swap(sue, sidney); // uses void Swap(job &amp;, job &amp;)
    cout &lt;&lt; "After job swapping:\n";
    Show(sue);
    Show(sidney);
    // cin.get();
    return 0;
}

template &lt;typename T&gt;
void Swap(T &amp;a, T &amp;b)    // general version
{
    T temp;
    temp = a;
    a = b;
    b = temp;
}

// swaps just the salary and floor fields of a job structure

template &lt;&gt; void Swap&lt;job&gt;(job &amp;j1, job &amp;j2)  // specialization
{
    double t1;
    int t2;
    t1 = j1.salary;
    j1.salary = j2.salary;
    j2.salary = t1;
    t2 = j1.floor;
    j1.floor = j2.floor;
    j2.floor = t2;
}

void Show(job &amp;j)
{
    using namespace std;
    cout &lt;&lt; j.name &lt;&lt; ": $" &lt;&lt; j.salary
         &lt;&lt; " on floor " &lt;&lt; j.floor &lt;&lt; endl;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here’s the output of the program in Listing 8.13:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>i, j = 10, 20.
Using compiler-generated int swapper:
Now i, j = 20, 10.
Before job swapping:
Susan Yaffee: $73000.60 on floor 7
Sidney Taffee: $78060.72 on floor 9
After job swapping:
Susan Yaffee: $78060.72 on floor 9
Sidney Taffee: $73000.60 on floor 7</pre></div><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EYVDI">Instantiations and Specializations</h4>
<p class="docText">To extend your understanding of templates, let’s investigate the terms <span class="docEmphasis">instantiation</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">specialization</span>.
 Keep in mind that including a function template in your code does not 
in itself generate a function definition. It’s merely a plan for 
generating a function definition. When the compiler uses the template to
 generate a function definition for a particular type, the result is 
termed an <span class="docEmphasis">instantiation</span> of the template. For example, in Listing 8.13, the function call <tt>Swap(i,j)</tt> causes the compiler to generate an instantiation of <tt>Swap()</tt>, using <tt>int</tt> as the type. The template <span class="docEmphasis">is not</span> a function definition, but the specific instantiation using <tt>int</tt> <span class="docEmphasis">is</span> a function definition. This type of instantiation is termed <span class="docEmphasis">implicit instantiation</span> because the compiler deduces the necessity for making the definition by noting that the program uses a <tt>Swap()</tt> function with <tt>int</tt> parameters.</p>
<p class="docText">Originally, using implicit
 instantiation was the only way the compiler generated function 
definitions from templates, but now C++ allows for <span class="docEmphasis">explicit instantiation</span>. That means you can instruct the compiler to create a particular instantiation—for example, <tt>Swap&lt;int&gt;()</tt>—directly. The syntax is to declare the particular variety you want, using the <tt>&lt;&gt;</tt> notation to indicate the type and prefixing the declaration with the keyword <tt>template</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template void Swap&lt;int&gt;(int, int);  // explicit instantiation</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">A compiler that implements this feature will, upon seeing this declaration, use the <tt>Swap()</tt> template to generate an instantiation, using the <tt>int</tt> type. That is, this declaration means “Use the <tt>Swap()</tt> template to generate a function definition for the <tt>int</tt>
 type.” Contrast the explicit instantiation with the explicit 
specialization, which uses one or the other of these equivalent 
declarations:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template &lt;&gt; void Swap&lt;int&gt;(int &amp;, int &amp;);  // explicit specialization
template &lt;&gt; void Swap(int &amp;, int &amp;);       // explicit specialization</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The difference is that these last two declarations mean “Don’t use the <tt>Swap()</tt>
 template to generate a function definition. Instead, use a separate, 
specialized function definition explicitly defined for the <tt>int</tt> type.” These prototypes have to be coupled with their own function definitions. The explicit specialization declaration has <tt>&lt;&gt;</tt> after the keyword template, whereas the explicit instantiation omits the <tt>&lt;&gt;</tt>.</p>
<div class="docNote"><p class="docNoteTitle">Caution</p>
<p class="docText">It is an error to try to use 
both an explicit instantiation and an explicit specialization for the 
same type(s) in the same file, or, more generally, the same translation 
unit.</p>
</div><br/>
<p class="docText">Explicit instantiations also can be created by using the function in a program. For instance, consider the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template &lt;class T&gt;
T Add(T a, T b)    // pass by value
{
    return a + b;
}
...
int m = 6;
double x = 10.2;
cout &lt;&lt; Add&lt;double&gt;(x, m) &lt;&lt; endl;  // explicit instantiation</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The template would fail to match the function call <tt>Add(x, m)</tt> because the template expects both function arguments to be of the same type. But using <tt>Add&lt;double&gt;(x, m)</tt> forces the type <tt>double</tt> instantiation, and the argument <tt>m</tt> is type cast to type <tt>double</tt> to match the second parameter of the <tt>Add&lt;double&gt;(double, double)</tt> function.</p>
<p class="docText">What if you do something similar with <tt>Swap()</tt>?</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int m = 5;
double x  = 14.3;
Swap&lt;double&gt;(m, x);  // almost works</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This generates an explicit instantiation for type <tt>double</tt>. Unfortunately, in this case, the code won’t work because the first formal parameter, being type <tt>double &amp;</tt>, can’t refer to the type <tt>int</tt> variable <tt>m</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Implicit instantiations, explicit instantiations, and explicit specializations collectively are termed <span class="docEmphasis">specializations</span>.
 What they all have in common is that they represent a function 
definition that uses specific types rather than one that is a generic 
description.</p>
<p class="docText">The addition of the explicit instantiation led to the new syntax of using <tt>template</tt> and <tt>template &lt;&gt;</tt>
 prefixes in declarations to distinguish between the explicit 
instantiation and the explicit specialization. As in many other cases, 
the cost of doing more is more syntax rules. The following fragment 
summarizes these concepts:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedWidth">...
template &lt;class T&gt;
void Swap (T &amp;, T &amp;);  // template prototype

template &lt;&gt; void Swap&lt;job&gt;(job &amp;, job &amp;);   // explicit specialization for job
int main(void)
{
  template void Swap&lt;char&gt;(char &amp;, char &amp;); // explicit instantiation for char
  short a, b;
  ...
  Swap(a,b);    // implicit template instantiation for short
  job n, m;
  ...
  Swap(n, m);   // use explicit specialization for job
  char g, h;
  ...
  Swap(g, h);  // use explicit template instantiation for char
  ...
}

					  </pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">When the compiler reaches the explicit instantiation for <tt>char</tt>, it uses the template definition to generate a <tt>char</tt> version of <tt>Swap()</tt>. For the remaining uses of <tt>Swap()</tt>,
 the compiler matches a template to the actual arguments used in the 
function call. For example, when the compiler reaches the function call <tt>Swap(a,b)</tt>, it generates a <tt>short</tt> version of <tt>Swap()</tt> because the two arguments are type <tt>short</tt>. When the compiler reaches <tt>Swap(n,m)</tt>, it uses the separate definition (the explicit specialization) provided for the <tt>job</tt> type. When the compiler reaches <tt>Swap(g,h)</tt>, it uses the template specialization it already generated when it processed the explicit instantiation.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ET2DI">Which Function Version Does the Compiler Pick?</h4>
<p class="docText">What
 with function overloading, function templates, and function template 
overloading, C++ needs, and has, a well-defined strategy for deciding 
which function definition to use for a function call, particularly when 
there are multiple arguments. The process is called <span class="docEmphasis">overload resolution</span>. Detailing the complete strategy would take a small chapter, so let’s take just a broad look at how the process works:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Phase 1—</span>
 Assemble a list of candidate functions. These are functions and 
template functions that have the same names as the called functions.</p></li><li><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Phase 2—</span>
 From the candidate functions, assemble a list of viable functions. 
These are functions with the correct number of arguments and for which 
there is an implicit conversion sequence, which includes the case of an 
exact match for each type of actual argument to the type of the 
corresponding formal argument. For example, a function call with a type <tt>float</tt> argument could have that value converted to a <tt>double</tt> to match a type <tt>double</tt> formal parameter, and a template could generate an instantiation for <tt>float</tt>.</p></li><li><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Phase 3—</span> Determine whether there is a best viable function. If so, you use that function. Otherwise, the function call is an error.</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">Consider a case with just one function argument—for example, the following call:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>may('B');    // actual argument is type char</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">First, the compiler rounds up the suspects, which are functions and function templates that have the name <tt>may()</tt>.
 Then, it finds those that can be called with one argument. For example,
 the following pass muster because they have the same name and can be 
used with one argument:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>void may(int);                            // #1
float may(float, float = 3);              // #2
void may(char);                           // #3
char * may(const char *);                 // #4
char may(const char &amp;);                   // #5
template&lt;class T&gt; void may(const T &amp;);    // #6
template&lt;class T&gt; void may(T *);          // #7</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Note that just the signatures 
and not the return types are considered. Two of these candidates (#4 and
 #7), however, are not viable because an integral type cannot be 
converted implicitly (that is, without an explicit type cast) to a 
pointer type. The remaining template is viable because it can be used to
 generate a specialization, with <tt>T</tt> taken as type <tt>char</tt>. That leaves five viable functions, each of which could be used if it were the only function declared.</p>
<p class="docText">Next, the compiler has to 
determine which of the viable functions is best. It looks at the 
conversion required to make the function call argument match the viable 
candidate’s argument. In general, the ranking from best to worst is 
this:</p>

<table border="0" class="docText"><tbody><tr><td valign="top" width="25"><div class="docText"><b>1. </b></div></td><td><div class="docText">Exact match, with regular functions outranking templates<br/><br/></div></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="25"><div class="docText"><b>2. </b></div></td><td><div class="docText">Conversion by promotion (for example, the automatic conversions of <tt>char</tt> and <tt>short</tt> to <tt>int</tt> and of <tt>float</tt> to <tt>double</tt>)<br/><br/></div></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="25"><div class="docText"><b>3. </b></div></td><td><div class="docText">Conversion by standard conversion (for example, converting <tt>int</tt> to <tt>char</tt> or <tt>long</tt> to <tt>double</tt>)<br/><br/></div></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="25"><div class="docText"><b>4. </b></div></td><td><div class="docText">User-defined conversions, such as those defined in class declarations<br/><br/></div></td></tr></tbody></table>
<p class="docText">For example, Function #1 is better than Function #2 because <tt>char</tt>-to-<tt>int</tt> is a promotion (refer to Chapter 3, “Dealing with Data”), whereas <tt>char</tt>-to-<tt>float</tt> is a standard conversion (refer to Chapter 3).
 Functions #3, #5, and #6 are better than either #1 or #2 because they 
are exact matches. Both #3 and #5 are better than #6 because #6 is a 
template. This analysis raises a couple questions. What is an exact 
match? And what happens if you get two of them, such as #3 and #5? 
Usually, as is the case with this example, two exact matches are an 
error; but a couple special cases are exceptions to this rule. Clearly, 
we need to investigate the matter further!</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EXEAK">Exact Matches and Best Matches</h5>
<p class="docText">C++ allows some “trivial conversions” when making an exact match. Table 8.1 lists them, with <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>Type</tt></span> standing for some arbitrary type. For example, an <tt>int</tt> actual argument is an exact match to an <tt>int &amp;</tt> formal parameter. Note that <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>Type</tt></span> can be something like <tt>char &amp;</tt>, so these rules include converting <tt>char &amp;</tt> to <tt>const char &amp;</tt>. The <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>Type (argument-list)</tt></span>
 entry means that a function name as an actual argument matches a 
function pointer as a formal parameter, as long as both have the same 
return type and argument list. (Remember function pointers from Chapter 7.
 Also recall that you can pass the name of a function as an argument to a
 function that expects a pointer to a function.) We’ll discuss the <tt>volatile</tt> keyword later in Chapter 9.</p>
<p></p><table cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0" frame="hsides" rules="none"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 8.1. Trivial Conversions Allowed for an Exact Match</h5></caption><colgroup align="left" span="2"><col width="300"></col><col width="300"></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">From an Actual Argument</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">To a Formal Argument</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>Type</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>Type &amp;</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>Type &amp;</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>Type</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>Type []</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>* Type</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>Type (argument-list)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>Type (*)(argument-list)</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>Type</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>const Type</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>Type</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>volatile Type</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>Type *</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>const Type *</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>Type *</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>volatile Type *</tt></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">Suppose you have the following function code:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>struct blot {int a; char b[10];};
blot ink = {25, "spots"};
...
recycle(ink);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In that case, all the following prototypes would be exact matches:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>void recycle(blot);          // #1  blot-to-blot
void recycle(const blot);    // #2  blot-to-(const blot)
void recycle(blot &amp;);        // #3  blot-to-(blot &amp;)
void recycle(const blot &amp;);  // #4  blot-to-(const blot &amp;)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">As you might expect, 
the result of having several matching prototypes is that the compiler 
cannot complete the overload resolution process. There is no best viable
 function, and the compiler generates an error message, probably using 
words such as <span class="docEmphasis">ambiguous</span>.</p>
<p class="docText">However, sometimes there 
can be overload resolution even if two functions are an exact match. 
First, pointers and references to non-<tt>const</tt> data are preferentially matched to non-<tt>const</tt> pointer and reference parameters. That is, if only Functions #3 and #4 were available in the <tt>recycle()</tt> example, #3 would be chosen because <tt>ink</tt> wasn’t declared as <tt>const</tt>. However, this discrimination between <tt>const</tt> and non-<tt>const</tt>
 applies just to data referred to by pointers and references. That is, 
if only #1 and #2 were available, you would get an ambiguity error.</p>
<p class="docText">Another case in which one 
exact match is better than another is when one function is a non 
template function and the other isn’t. In that case, the non template is
 considered better than a template, including explicit specializations.</p>
<p class="docText">If you wind up with two exact 
matches that both happen to be template functions, the template function
 that is the more specialized, if either, is the better function. That 
means, for example, that an explicit specialization is chosen over one 
generated implicitly from the template pattern:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>struct blot {int a; char b[10];};
template &lt;class Type&gt; void recycle (Type t); // template
template &lt;&gt; void recycle&lt;blot&gt; (blot &amp; t);   // specialization for blot
...
blot ink = {25, "spots"};
...
recycle(ink);  // use specialization</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The term <span class="docEmphasis">most specialized</span>
 doesn’t necessarily imply an explicit specialization; more generally, 
it indicates that fewer conversions take place when the compiler deduces
 what type to use. For example, consider the following two templates:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template &lt;class Type&gt; void recycle (Type t);    // #1
template &lt;class Type&gt; void recycle (Type * t);  // #2</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Suppose the program that contains those templates also contains the following code:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>struct blot {int a; char b[10];};
blot ink = {25, "spots"};
...
recycle(&amp;ink);  // address of a structure</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>recycle(&amp;ink)</tt> call matches Template #1, with <tt>Type</tt> interpreted as <tt>blot *</tt>. The <tt>recycle(&amp;ink)</tt> function call also matches Template #2, this time with <tt>Type</tt> being <tt>ink</tt>. This combination sends two implicit instantiations, <tt>recycle&lt;blot *&gt;(blot *)</tt> and <tt>recycle&lt;blot&gt;(blot *)</tt>, to the viable function pool.</p>
<p class="docText">Of these two template functions, <tt>recycle&lt;blot *&gt;(blot *)</tt>
 is considered the more specialized because it underwent fewer 
conversions in being generated. That is, Template #2 already explicitly 
said that the function argument was pointer-to-<span class="docEmphasis"><tt>Type</tt></span>, so <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>Type</tt></span> could be directly identified with <tt>blot</tt>. However, Template #1 had <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>Type</tt></span> as the function argument, so <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>Type</tt></span> had to be interpreted as pointer-to-<tt>blot</tt>. That is, in Template #2, <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>Type</tt></span> was already specialized as a pointer, hence it is “more specialized.”</p>
<p class="docText">The rules for finding the most specialized template are called the <span class="docEmphasis">partial ordering rules</span> for function templates. Like explicit instantiations, they are C++98 additions to the C++ language.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EBQAK">A Partial Ordering Rules Example</h5>
<p class="docText">Let’s examine a complete program that uses the partial ordering rules for identifying which template definition to use. Listing 8.14
 has two template definitions for displaying the contents of an array. 
The first definition (Template A) assumes that the array that is passed 
as an argument contains the data to be displayed. The second definition 
(Template B) assumes that the array elements are pointers to the data to
 be displayed.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EUQAK">Listing 8.14. <tt>tempover.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// tempover.cpp -- template overloading
#include &lt;iostream&gt;

template &lt;typename T&gt;            // template A
void ShowArray(T arr[], int n);

template &lt;typename T&gt;            // template B
void ShowArray(T * arr[], int n);

struct debts
{
    char name[50];
    double amount;
};

int main()
{
    using namespace std;
    int things[6] = {13, 31, 103, 301, 310, 130};
    struct debts mr_E[3] =
    {
        {"Ima Wolfe", 2400.0},
        {"Ura Foxe", 1300.0},
        {"Iby Stout", 1800.0}
    };
    double * pd[3];

// set pointers to the amount members of the structures in mr_E
    for (int i = 0; i &lt; 3; i++)
        pd[i] = &amp;mr_E[i].amount;

    cout &lt;&lt; "Listing Mr. E's counts of things:\n";
// things is an array of int
    ShowArray(things, 6);  // uses template A
    cout &lt;&lt; "Listing Mr. E's debts:\n";
// pd is an array of pointers to double
    ShowArray(pd, 3);      // uses template B (more specialized)
    return 0;
}

template &lt;typename T&gt;
void ShowArray(T arr[], int n)
{
    using namespace std;
    cout &lt;&lt; "template A\n";
    for (int i = 0; i &lt; n; i++)
        cout &lt;&lt; arr[i] &lt;&lt; ' ';
    cout &lt;&lt; endl;
}

template &lt;typename T&gt;
void ShowArray(T * arr[], int n)
{
    using namespace std;
    cout &lt;&lt; "template B\n";
    for (int i = 0; i &lt; n; i++)
        cout &lt;&lt; *arr[i] &lt;&lt; ' ';
    cout &lt;&lt; endl;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Consider this function call:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>ShowArray(things, 6);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The identifier <tt>things</tt> is the name of an array of <tt>int</tt>, so it matches the following template with <tt>T</tt> taken to be type <tt>int</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template &lt;typename T&gt;             // template A
void ShowArray(T arr[], int n);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Next, consider this function call:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>ShowArray(pd, 3);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here, <tt>pd</tt> is the name of an array of <tt>double *</tt>. This could be matched by Template A:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template &lt;typename T&gt;            // template A
void ShowArray(T arr[], int n);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here, <tt>T</tt> would be taken to be type <tt>double *</tt>. In this case, the template function would display the contents of the <tt>pd</tt> array: three addresses. The function call could also be matched by Template B:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template &lt;typename T&gt;            // template B
void ShowArray(T * arr[], int n);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In this case, <tt>T</tt> is type <tt>double</tt>, and the function displays the dereferenced elements <tt>*arr[i]</tt>—that is, the <tt>double</tt>
 values pointed to by the array contents. Of the two templates, Template
 B is the more specialized because it makes the specific assumption that
 the array contents are pointers, so it is the template that gets used.</p>
<p class="docText">Here’s the output of the program in Listing 8.14:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Listing Mr. E's counts of things:
template A
13 31 103 301 310 130
Listing Mr. E's debts:
template B
2400 1300 1800</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">If you remove Template B from the program, the compiler then uses Template A for listing the contents of <tt>pd</tt>, so it lists the addresses instead of the values. Try it and see.</p>
<p class="docText">In short, the overload 
resolution process looks for a function that’s the best match. If 
there’s just one, that function is chosen. If more than one are 
otherwise tied, but only one is a non template function, that non 
template function is chosen. If more than one candidate are otherwise 
tied and all are template functions, but one template is more 
specialized than the rest, that one is chosen. If there are two or more 
equally good non template functions, or if there are two or more equally
 good template functions, none of which is more specialized than the 
rest, the function call is ambiguous and an error. If there are no 
matching calls, of course, that is also an error.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EGUAK">Making Your Own Choices</h5>
<p class="docText">In some circumstances, you can lead the compiler to make the choice you want by suitably writing the function call. Consider Listing 8.15,
 which, by the way, eliminates the template prototype and places the 
template function definition at the top of the file. As with regular 
functions, a template function definition can act as its own prototype 
if it appears before the function is used.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EYUAK">Listing 8.15. <tt>choices.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// choices.cpp -- choosing a template
#include &lt;iostream&gt;

template&lt;class T&gt;  // or template &lt;typename T&gt;
T lesser(T a, T b)         // #1
{
    return a &lt; b ? a : b;
}

int lesser (int a, int b)  // #2
{
    a = a &lt; 0 ? -a : a;
    b = b &lt; 0 ? -b : b;
    return a &lt; b ? a : b;
}

int main()
{
    using namespace std;
    int m = 20;
    int n = -30;
    double x = 15.5;
    double y = 25.9;

    cout &lt;&lt; lesser(m, n) &lt;&lt; endl;       // use #2
    cout &lt;&lt; lesser(x, y) &lt;&lt; endl;       // use #1 with double
    cout &lt;&lt; lesser&lt;&gt;(m, n) &lt;&lt; endl;     // use #1 with int
    cout &lt;&lt; lesser&lt;int&gt;(x, y)  &lt;&lt; endl; // use #1 with int

    return 0;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">(The final function call converts <tt>double</tt> to <tt>int</tt>, and some compilers will issue warnings about that.)</p>
<p class="docText">Here is the program output:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>20
15.5
-30
15</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Listing 8.15
 provides a template that returns the lesser of two values and a 
standard function that returns the smaller absolute value of two values.
 If a function definition appears before its first use, the definition 
acts as a prototype, so this example omits the prototypes. Consider the 
following statement:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>cout &lt;&lt; lesser(m, n) &lt;&lt; endl;       // use #2</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The function call 
arguments match both the template function and the non template 
function, so the non template function is chosen, and it returns the 
value <tt>20</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Next, the function call in the statement matches the template, with type <tt>T</tt> taken to be <tt>double</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>cout &lt;&lt; lesser(x, y) &lt;&lt; endl;       // use #1 with double</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Now consider this statement:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>cout &lt;&lt; lesser&lt;&gt;(m, n) &lt;&lt; endl;     // use #1 with int</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The presence of the angle brackets in <tt>lesser&lt;&gt;(m, n)</tt>
 indicates that the compiler should choose a template function rather 
than a non template function, and the compiler, noting that the actual 
arguments are type <tt>int</tt>, instantiates the template using <tt>int</tt> for <tt>T</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Finally, consider this statement:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>cout &lt;&lt; lesser&lt;int&gt;(x, y)  &lt;&lt; endl; // use #1 with int</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here we have a request for an explicit instantiation using <tt>int</tt> for <tt>T</tt>, and that’s the function that gets used. The values of <tt>x</tt> and <tt>y</tt> are type cast to type <tt>int</tt>, and the function returns an <tt>int</tt> value, which is why the program displays <tt>15</tt> instead of <tt>15.5</tt>.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E5YAK">Functions with Multiple Type Arguments</h5>
<p class="docText">Where matters really get 
involved is when a function call with multiple arguments is matched to 
prototypes with multiple type arguments. The compiler must look at 
matches for all the arguments. If it can find a function that is better 
than all the other viable functions, it is chosen. For one function to 
be better than another function, it has to provide at least as good a 
match for all arguments and a better match for at least one argument.</p>
<p class="docText">This book does not intend 
to challenge the matching process with complex examples. The rules are 
there so that there is a well-defined result for any possible set of 
function prototypes and templates.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EMZAK">Template Function Evolution</h4>
<p class="docText">In the early days of C++, 
most people didn’t envision how powerful and useful template functions 
and template classes would prove to be. (Probably they didn’t even 
expend their envisionary
 powers on the topic.) But clever and dedicated programmers pushed the 
limits of template techniques and expanded the ideas of what was 
possible. Feedback from those who developed familiarity with templates 
led to changes that were incorporated into the C++98 Standard as well as
 the addition of the Standard Template Library. Since then, template 
programmers have continued to explore the possibilities offered by the 
genre, and occasionally they bump up against limitations. Their feedback
 has led to some changes in the C++11 Standard. We’ll look at a couple 
of related problems now and their solutions.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EO2AK">What’s That Type?</h5>
<p class="docText">One problem is that when you
 write a template function, it’s not always possible in C++98 to know 
what type to use in a declaration. Consider this partial example:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template&lt;class T1, class T2&gt;
void ft(T1 x, T2 y)
{
    ...
    ?type? xpy = x + y;
    ...
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">What should the type for <tt>xpy</tt> be? We don’t know in advance how <tt>ft()</tt> might be used. The proper type might be <tt>T1</tt> or <tt>T2</tt> or some other type altogether. For example, <tt>T1</tt> could be <tt>double</tt> and <tt>T2</tt> could be <tt>int</tt>, in which case the type of the sum is <tt>double</tt>. Or <tt>T1</tt> could be <tt>short</tt> and <tt>T2</tt> could be <tt>int</tt>, in which case the type of the sum is <tt>int</tt>. Or suppose <tt>T1</tt> is <tt>short</tt> and <tt>T2</tt> is <tt>char</tt>. Then addition invokes automatic integer promotions, and the resultant type is <tt>int</tt>. Also the <tt>+</tt>
 operator can be overloaded for structures and classes, complicating the
 options further. Therefore, in C++98 there is no obvious choice for the
 type of <tt>xpy</tt>.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EN4AK">The <tt>decltype</tt> Keyword (C++11)</h5>
<p class="docText">The C++11 solution is a new keyword: <tt>decltype</tt>. It can be used in this way:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int x;
decltype(x) y;   // make y the same type as x</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The argument to <tt>decltype</tt> can be an expression, so in the <tt>ft()</tt> example, we could use this code:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>decltype(x + y) xpy;  // make xpy the same type as x + y
xpy = x + y;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Alternatively, we could combine these two statements into an initialization:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>decltype(x + y) xpy = x + y;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">So we can fix the <tt>ft()</tt> template this way:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template&lt;class T1, class T2&gt;
void ft(T1 x, T2 y)
{
    ...
    decltype(x + y) xpy = x + y;
    ...
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>decltype</tt> 
facility is a bit more complex than it might appear from these examples.
 The compiler has to go through a checklist to decide on the type. 
Suppose we have the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>decltype(<span class="docEmphasis">expression</span>) var;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here’s a somewhat simplified version of the list.</p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Stage 1:</span> If <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>expression</tt></span> is an unparenthesized identifier (that is, no additional parentheses), then <tt>var</tt> is of the same type as the identifier, including qualifiers such as <tt>const</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>double x = 5.5;
double y = 7.9;
double &amp;rx = x;
const double * pd;
decltype(x) w;       // w is type double
decltype(rx) u = y;  // u is type double &amp;
decltype(pd) v;      // v is type const double *</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Stage 2:</span> If <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>expression</tt></span> is a function call, then <tt>var</tt> has the type of the function return type:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>long indeed(int);
decltype (indeed(3)) m; // m is type int</pre></div><br/>
<div class="docNote"><p class="docNoteTitle">Note</p>
<p class="docText">The call <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>expression</tt></span>
 isn’t evaluated. In this case, the compiler examines the prototype to 
get the return type; there’s no need to actually call the function.</p>
</div><br/>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Stage 3:</span> If <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>expression</tt></span> is an lvalue, then <tt>var</tt> is a reference to the expression type. This might seem to imply that earlier examples such as <tt>w</tt> should have been reference types, given that <tt>w</tt> is an lvalue. However, keep in mind that case was already captured in Stage 1. For this stage to apply, <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>expression</tt></span> can’t be an unparenthesized identifier. So what can it be? One obvious possibility is a parenthesized identifier:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>double xx = 4.4;
decltype ((xx)) r2 = xx;  // r2 is double &amp;
decltype(xx) w = xx;      // w is double (Stage 1 match)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Incidentally,
 parentheses don’t change the value or lvaluedness of an expression. For
 example, the following two statements have the same effect:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>xx = 98.6;
(xx) = 98.6;  // () don't affect use of xx</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Stage 4:</span> If none of the preceding special cases apply, <tt>var</tt> is of the same type as <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>expression</tt></span>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int j = 3;
int &amp;k = j
int &amp;n = j;
decltype(j+6) i1;   // i1 type int
decltype(100L) i2;  // i2 type long
decltype(k+n) i3;   // i3 type int;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Note that although <tt>k</tt> and <tt>n</tt> are references, the expression <tt>k+n</tt> is not a reference; it’s just the sum of two <tt>int</tt>s, hence an <tt>int</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">If you need more than one declaration, you can use <tt>typedef</tt> with <tt>decltype</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template&lt;class T1, class T2&gt;
void ft(T1 x, T2 y)
{
    ...
    typedef decltype(x + y) xytype;
    xytype xpy = x + y;
    xytype arr[10];
    xytype &amp; rxy = arr[2];   // rxy a reference
    ...
}</pre></div><br/>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EDEBK">Alternative Function Syntax (C++11 Trailing Return Type)</h5>
<p class="docText">The <tt>decltype</tt> mechanism by itself leaves another related problem unsolved. Consider this incomplete template function:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template&lt;class T1, class T2&gt;
?type? gt(T1 x, T2 y)
{
    ...
    return x + y;
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Again, we don’t know in advance what type results from adding <tt>x</tt> and <tt>y</tt>. It might seem that we could use <tt>decltype(x + y)</tt> for the return type. Unfortunately, at that point in the code, the parameters <tt>x</tt> and <tt>y</tt> have not yet been declared, so they are not in scope (visible and usable to the compiler). The <tt>decltype</tt> specifier has to come <span class="docEmphasis">after</span>
 the parameters are declared. To make this possible, C++11 allows a new 
syntax for declaring and defining functions. Here’s how it works using 
built-in types. The prototype</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>double h(int x, float y);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">can be written with this alternative syntax:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>auto h(int x, float y) -&gt; double;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This moves the return type to after the parameter declarations. The combination <tt>-&gt; double</tt> is called a <span class="docEmphasis">trailing return type</span>. Here, <tt>auto,</tt>
 in another new C++11 role, is a placeholder for the type provided by 
the trailing return type. The same form would be used with the function 
definition:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>auto h(int x, float y) -&gt; double
{/* function body */};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Combining this syntax with <tt>decltype</tt> leads to the following solution for specifying the return type for <tt>gt()</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template&lt;class T1, class T2&gt;
auto gt(T1 x, T2 y) -&gt; decltype(x + y)
{
    ...
    return x + y;
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Now <tt>decltype</tt> comes after the parameter declarations, so <tt>x</tt> and <tt>y</tt> are in scope and can be used.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
