<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Summary</h3>
<p class="docText">C++ has expanded C 
function capabilities. By using an inline keyword with a function 
definition and by placing that definition ahead of the first call to 
that function, you suggest to the C++ compiler that it make the function
 inline. That is, instead of having the program jump to a separate 
section of code to execute the function, the compiler replaces the 
function call with the corresponding code inline. An inline facility 
should be used only when the function is short.</p>
<p class="docText">A reference variable is a kind of 
disguised pointer that lets you create an alias (that is, a second name)
 for a variable. Reference variables are primarily used as arguments to 
functions that process structures and class objects. Normally, an 
identifier declared as a reference to a particular type can refer only 
to data of that type. However, when one class is derived from another, 
such as <tt>ofstream</tt> from <tt>ostream</tt>, a reference to the base type may also refer to the derived type.</p>
<p class="docText">C++ prototypes enable you to 
define default values for arguments. If a function call omits the 
corresponding argument, the program uses the default value. If the 
function includes an argument value, the program uses that value instead
 of the default. Default arguments can be provided only from right to 
left in the argument list. Thus, if you provide a default value for a 
particular argument, you must also provide default values for all 
arguments to the right of that argument.</p>
<p class="docText">A
 function’s signature is its argument list. You can define two functions
 having the same name, provided that they have different signatures. 
This is called <span class="docEmphasis">function polymorphism</span>, or <span class="docEmphasis">function overloading</span>. Typically, you overload functions to provide essentially the same service to different data types.</p>
<p class="docText">Function templates automate 
the process of overloading functions. You define a function by using a 
generic type and a particular algorithm, and the compiler generates 
appropriate function definitions for the particular argument types you 
use in a program.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
