<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter Review</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Chapter Review</h3>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1.</b></td><td class="docText">What kinds of functions are good candidates for inline status?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2.</b></td><td class="docText">Suppose the <tt>song()</tt> function has this prototype:
<div class="docText"><pre>void song(const char * name, int times);</pre></div><br/>
<div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">How would you modify the prototype so that the default value for <tt>times</tt> is <tt>1</tt>?</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">What changes would you make in the function definition?</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Can you provide a default value of <tt>"O, My Papa"</tt> for <tt>name</tt>?</p></div></li></ol></div></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3.</b></td><td class="docText">Write overloaded versions of <tt>iquote()</tt>, a function that displays its argument enclosed in double quotation marks. Write three versions: one for an <tt>int</tt> argument, one for a <tt>double</tt> argument, and one for a <tt>string</tt> argument.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4.</b></td><td class="docText">The following is a structure template:
<div class="docText"><pre>struct box
{
    char maker[40];
    float height;
    float width;
    float length;
    float volume;
};</pre></div><br/>
<div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Write a function that has a reference to a <tt>box</tt> structure as its formal argument and displays the value of each member.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Write a function that has a reference to a <tt>box</tt> structure as its formal argument and sets the <tt>volume</tt> member to the product of the other three dimensions.</p></div></li></ol></div></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5.</b></td><td class="docText">What changes would need be made to Listing 7.15 so that the functions <tt>fill()</tt> and <tt>show()</tt> use reference parameters?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6.</b></td><td class="docText">The
 following are some desired effects. Indicate whether each can be 
accomplished with default arguments, function overloading, both, or 
neither. Provide appropriate prototypes.
<div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>mass(density, volume)</tt> returns the mass of an object having a density of <tt>density</tt> and a volume of <tt>volume</tt>, whereas <tt>mass(density)</tt> returns the mass having a density of <tt>density</tt> and a volume of 1.0 cubic meters. All quantities are type <tt>double</tt>.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>repeat(10, "I'm OK")</tt> displays the indicated string 10 times, and <tt>repeat("But you're kind of stupid")</tt> displays the indicated string 5 times.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>average(3,6)</tt> returns the <tt>int</tt> average of two <tt>int</tt> arguments, and <tt>average(3.0, 6.0)</tt> returns the <tt>double</tt> average of two <tt>double</tt> values.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>mangle("I'm glad to meet you")</tt> returns the character <tt>I</tt> or a pointer to the string <tt>"I'm mad to gleet you"</tt>, depending on whether you assign the return value to a <tt>char</tt> variable or to a <tt>char*</tt> variable.</p></div></li></ol></div></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>7.</b></td><td class="docText">Write a function template that returns the larger of its two arguments.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>8.</b></td><td class="docText">Given the template of Chapter Review Question 7 and the <tt>box</tt> structure of Chapter Review Question 4, provide a template specialization that takes two <tt>box</tt> arguments and returns the one with the larger volume.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9.</b></td><td class="docText">What types are assigned to <tt>v1</tt>, <tt>v2</tt>, <tt>v3</tt>, <tt>v4</tt>, and <tt>v5</tt> in the following code (assuming the code is part of a complete program)?
<div class="docText"><pre>int g(int x);
...
float m = 5.5f;
float &amp; rm = m;
decltype(m) v1 = m;
decltype(rm) v2 = m;
decltype((m)) v3 = m;
decltype (g(100)) v4;
decltype (2.0 * m) v5;</pre></div><br/></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
