<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Programming Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Programming Exercises</h3>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1.</b></td><td class="docText">Write
 a function that normally takes one argument, the address of a string, 
and prints that string once. However, if a second, type <tt>int</tt>,
 argument is provided and is nonzero, the function should print the 
string a number of times equal to the number of times that function has 
been called at that point. (Note that the number of times the string is 
printed is not equal to the value of the second argument; it is equal to
 the number of times the function has been called.) Yes, this is a silly
 function, but it makes you use some of the techniques discussed in this
 chapter. Use the function in a simple program that demonstrates how the
 function works.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2.</b></td><td class="docText">The <tt>CandyBar</tt>
 structure contains three members. The first member holds the brand name
 of a candy bar. The second member holds the weight (which may have a 
fractional part) of the candy bar, and the third member holds the number
 of calories (an integer value) in the candy bar. Write a program that 
uses a function that takes as arguments a reference to <tt>CandyBar</tt>, a pointer-to-<tt>char</tt>, a <tt>double</tt>, and an <tt>int</tt>
 and uses the last three values to set the corresponding members of the 
structure. The last three arguments should have default values of 
“Millennium Munch,” 2.85, and 350. Also the program should use a 
function that takes a reference to a <tt>CandyBar</tt> as an argument and displays the contents of the structure. Use <tt>const</tt> where appropriate.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3.</b></td><td class="docText">Write a function that takes a reference to a <tt>string</tt> object as its parameter and that converts the contents of the <tt>string</tt> to uppercase. Use the <tt>toupper()</tt> function described in Table 6.4 of Chapter 6.
 Write a program that uses a loop which allows you to test the function 
with different input. A sample run might look like this:
<div class="docText"><pre>Enter a string (q to quit): <span class="docEmphStrong">go away</span>
GO AWAY
Next string (q to quit): <span class="docEmphStrong">good grief!</span>
GOOD GRIEF!
Next string (q to quit): q
Bye.</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4.</b></td><td class="docText">The following is a program skeleton:
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
using namespace std;
#include &lt;cstring&gt;      // for strlen(), strcpy()
struct stringy {
    char * str;        // points to a string
    int ct;            // length of string (not counting '\0')
    };

// prototypes for set(), show(), and show() go here
int main()
{
    stringy beany;
    char testing[] = "Reality isn't what it used to be.";

    set(beany, testing);    // first argument is a reference,
                // allocates space to hold copy of testing,
                // sets str member of beany to point to the
                // new block, copies testing to new block,
                // and sets ct member of beany
    show(beany);      // prints member string once
    show(beany, 2);   // prints member string twice
    testing[0] = 'D';
    testing[1] = 'u';
    show(testing);    // prints testing string once
    show(testing, 3); // prints testing string thrice
    show("Done!");
    return 0;
}

					  </pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Complete this skeleton by providing the described functions and prototypes. Note that there should be two <tt>show()</tt> functions, each using default arguments. Use <tt>const</tt> arguments when appropriate. Note that <tt>set()</tt> should use <tt>new</tt>
 to allocate sufficient space to hold the designated string. The 
techniques used here are similar to those used in designing and 
implementing classes. (You might have to alter the header filenames and 
delete the <tt>using</tt> directive, depending on your compiler.)</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5.</b></td><td class="docText">Write a template function <tt>max5()</tt> that takes as its argument an array of five items of type <tt>T</tt>
 and returns the largest item in the array. (Because the size is fixed, 
it can be hard-coded into the loop instead of being passed as an 
argument.) Test it in a program that uses the function with an array of 
five <tt>int</tt> value and an array of five <tt>double</tt> values.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6.</b></td><td class="docText">Write a template function <tt>maxn()</tt> that takes as its arguments an array of items of type <tt>T</tt>
 and an integer representing the number of elements in the array and 
that returns the largest item in the array. Test it in a program that 
uses the function template with an array of six <tt>int</tt> value and an array of four <tt>double</tt> values. The program should also include a specialization that takes an array of pointers-to-<tt>char</tt>
 as an argument and the number of pointers as a second argument and that
 returns the address of the longest string. If multiple strings are tied
 for having the longest length, the function should return the address 
of the first one tied for longest. Test the specialization with an array
 of five string pointers.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>7.</b></td><td class="docText">Modify Listing 8.14 so that it uses two template functions called <tt>SumArray()</tt>
 to return the sum of the array contents instead of displaying the 
contents. The program now should report the total number of things and 
the sum of all the debts.</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
