<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Summary</h3>
<p class="docText">C++ encourages the use 
of multiple files in developing programs. An effective organizational 
strategy is to use a header file to define user types and provide 
function prototypes for functions to manipulate the user types. You 
should use a separate source code file for the function definitions. 
Together, the header file and the source file define and implement the 
user-defined type and how it can be used. Then, <tt>main()</tt> and other functions using those functions can go into a third file.</p>
<p class="docText">C++’s storage schemes 
determine how long variables remain in memory (storage duration) and 
what parts of a program have access to them (scope and linkage). 
Automatic variables are variables that are defined within a block, such 
as a function body or a block within the body. They exist and are known 
only while the program executes statements in the block that contains 
the definition. Automatic variables may be declared by using the storage
 class specifier <tt>register</tt> or with no specifier at all, in which case the variable is automatically automatic. The <tt>register</tt> specifier was a hint to the compiler that the variable is heavily used, but that use is deprecated under C++11.</p>
<p class="docText">Static variables exist for 
the duration of a program. A variable defined outside any function is 
known to all functions in the file following its definition (file scope)
 and is made available to other files in the program (external linkage).
 For another file to use such a variable, that file must declare it by 
using the <tt>extern</tt> keyword. A variable that is shared across files should have a defining declaration in one file (<tt>extern</tt> needn’t be used but it can be used if combined with initialization) and reference declarations in the other files (<tt>extern</tt> is used with no initialization.). A variable defined outside any function but qualified with the keyword <tt>static</tt>
 has file scope but is not made available to other files (internal 
linkage). A variable defined inside a block but qualified with the 
keyword <tt>static</tt> is local to that block (local scope, no linkage) but retains its value for the duration of the program.</p>
<p class="docText">By default, C++ functions have external linkage, so they can be shared across files. But functions qualified with the keyword <tt>static</tt> have internal linkage and are confined to the defining file.</p>
<p class="docText">Dynamic memory allocation and deallocation, using <tt>new</tt> and <tt>delete</tt>, uses the free store, or heap, for data. The memory comes into use when <tt>new</tt> is called and is freed when <tt>delete</tt> is called. The program uses pointers to keep track of these memory locations.</p>
<p class="docText">Namespaces let you define named
 regions in which you can declare identifiers. The intent is to reduce 
name conflicts, particularly in large programs that use code from 
several vendors. You can make available identifiers in a namespace by 
using the scope-resolution operator, by using a <tt>using</tt> declaration, or by using a <tt>using</tt> directive.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
