<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Programming Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Programming Exercises</h3>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1.</b></td><td class="docText">Here is a header file:
<div class="docText"><pre>// golf.h -- for pe9-1.cpp

const int Len = 40;
struct golf
{
    char fullname[Len];
    int handicap;
};

// non-interactive version:
//  function sets golf structure to provided name, handicap
//  using values passed as arguments to the function
void setgolf(golf &amp; g, const char * name, int hc);

// interactive version:
//  function solicits name and handicap from user
//  and sets the members of g to the values entered
//  returns 1 if name is entered, 0 if name is empty string
int setgolf(golf &amp; g);

// function resets handicap to new value
void handicap(golf &amp; g, int hc);

// function displays contents of golf structure
void showgolf(const golf &amp; g);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Note that <tt>setgolf()</tt> is overloaded. Using the first version of <tt>setgolf()</tt> would look like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>golf ann;
setgolf(ann, "Ann Birdfree", 24);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The function call provides the information that’s stored in the <tt>ann</tt> structure. Using the second version of <tt>setgolf()</tt> would look like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>golf andy;
setgolf(andy);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The function would prompt the user to enter the name and handicap and store them in the <tt>andy</tt> structure. This function could (but doesn’t need to) use the first version internally.</p>
<p class="docText">Put together a multifile program based on this header. One file, named <tt>golf.cpp</tt>, should provide suitable function definitions to match the prototypes in the header file. A second file should contain <tt>main()</tt>
 and demonstrate all the features of the prototyped functions. For 
example, a loop should solicit input for an array of golf structures and
 terminate when the array is full or the user enters an empty string for
 the golfer’s name. The <tt>main()</tt> function should use only the prototyped functions to access the golf structures.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2.</b></td><td class="docText">Redo Listing 9.9, replacing the character array with a <tt>string</tt> object. The program should no longer have to check whether the input string fits, and it can compare the input string to <tt>""</tt> to check for an empty line.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3.</b></td><td class="docText">Begin with the following structure declaration:
<div class="docText"><pre>struct chaff
{
    char dross[20];
    int slag;
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Write a program that uses placement <tt>new</tt> to place an array of two such structures in a buffer. Then assign values to the structure members (remembering to use <tt>strcpy()</tt> for the <tt>char</tt> array) and use a loop to display the contents. Option 1 is to use a static array, like that in Listing 9.10, for the buffer. Option 2 is to use regular <tt>new</tt> to allocate the buffer.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4.</b></td><td class="docText">Write a three-file program based on the following namespace:
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedHeight">namespace SALES
{
    const int QUARTERS = 4;
    struct Sales
    {
        double sales[QUARTERS];
        double average;
        double max;
        double min;
    };
    // copies the lesser of 4 or n items from the array ar
    // to the sales member of s and computes and stores the
    // average, maximum, and minimum values of the entered items;
    // remaining elements of sales, if any, set to 0
    void setSales(Sales &amp; s, const double ar[], int n);
    // gathers sales for 4 quarters interactively, stores them
    // in the sales member of s and computes and stores the
    // average, maximum, and minimum values
    void setSales(Sales &amp; s);
    // display all information in structure s
    void showSales(const Sales &amp; s);
}

					  </pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The first file should be a
 header file that contains the namespace. The second file should be a 
source code file that extends the namespace to provide definitions for 
the three prototyped functions. The third file should declare two <tt>Sales</tt> objects. It should use the interactive version of <tt>setSales()</tt> to provide values for one structure and the non-interactive version of <tt>setSales()</tt> to provide values for the second structure. It should display the contents of both structures by using <tt>showSales()</tt>.</p></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
<p class="docText"> </p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
