<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>10. Objects and Classes</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h2 class="docChapterTitle" id="title-ID0ER2DI">10. Objects and Classes</h2>
<p class="docText">In this chapter you’ll learn about the following:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">Procedural and object-oriented programming</p></li><li><p class="docList">The concept of classes</p></li><li><p class="docList">How to define and implement a class</p></li><li><p class="docList">Public and private class access</p></li><li><p class="docList">Class data members</p></li><li><p class="docList">Class methods (also called class function members)</p></li><li><p class="docList">Creating and using class objects</p></li><li><p class="docList">Class constructors and destructors</p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>const</tt> member functions</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>this</tt> pointer</p></li><li><p class="docList">Creating arrays of objects</p></li><li><p class="docList">Class scope</p></li><li><p class="docList">Abstract data types</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">Object-oriented programming (OOP)
 is a particular conceptual approach to designing programs, and C++ has 
enhanced C with features that ease the way to applying that approach. 
The following are the most important OOP features:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">Abstraction</p></li><li><p class="docList">Encapsulation and data hiding</p></li><li><p class="docList">Polymorphism</p></li><li><p class="docList">Inheritance</p></li><li><p class="docList">Reusability of code</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">The
 class is the single most important C++ enhancement for implementing 
these features and tying them together. This chapter begins an 
examination of classes. It explains abstraction, encapsulation, and data
 hiding, and shows how classes implement these features. It discusses 
how to define a class, provide a class with public and private sections,
 and create member functions that work with the class data. Also this 
chapter acquaints you with constructors and destructors, which are 
special member functions for creating and disposing of objects that 
belong to a class. Finally, you meet the <tt>this</tt>
 pointer, an important component of some class programming. The 
following chapters extend this discussion to operator overloading 
(another variety of polymorphism) and inheritance, the basis for reusing
 code.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
