<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Procedural and Object-Oriented Programming</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Procedural and Object-Oriented Programming</h3>
<p class="docText">Although in this book we 
have occasionally explored the OOP perspective on programming, we’ve 
usually stuck pretty close to the standard procedural approach of 
languages such as C, Pascal, and BASIC. Let’s look at an example that 
clarifies how the OOP outlook differs from that of procedural 
programming.</p>
<p class="docText">As the newest member of the 
Genre Giants softball team, you’ve been asked to keep the team 
statistics. Naturally, you turn to your computer for help. If you were a
 procedural programmer, you might think along these lines:</p>
<blockquote>
<p class="docText">Let’s see, I want to enter the
 name, times at bat, number of hits, batting averages (for those who 
don’t follow baseball or softball, the batting average is the number of 
hits divided by the player’s official number of times at bat; an at bat 
terminates when a player gets on base or makes an out, but certain 
events, such as getting a walk, don’t count as official times at bat), 
and all those other great basic statistics for each player. Wait, the 
computer is supposed to make life easier for me, so I want to have it 
figure out some of that stuff, such as the batting average. Also I want 
the program to report the results. How should I organize this? I guess I
 should do things right and use functions. Yeah, I’ll make <tt>main()</tt>
 call a function to get the input, call another function to make the 
calculations, and then call a third function to report the results. 
Hmmm, what happens when I get data from the next game? I don’t want to 
start from scratch again. Okay, I can add a function to update the 
statistics. Golly, maybe I’ll need a menu in <tt>main()</tt>
 to select between entering, calculating, updating, and showing the 
data. Hmmm...how am I going to represent the data? I could use an array 
of strings to hold the players’ names, another array to hold the at bats
 for each player, yet another array to hold the hits, and so on. No, 
that’s dumb. I can design a structure to hold all the information for a 
single player and then use an array of those structures to represent the
 whole team.</p>
</blockquote>
<p class="docText">In short, with a procedural 
approach, you first concentrate on the procedures you will follow and 
then think about how to represent the data. (So that you don’t have to 
keep the program running the whole season, you probably also want to be 
able to save data to a file and read data from a file.)</p>
<p class="docText">Now
 let’s see how your perspective changes when you don your OOP hat (in an
 attractive polymorphic design). You begin by thinking about the data. 
Furthermore, you think about the data not only in terms of how to 
represent it, but in terms of how it’s to be used:</p>
<blockquote>
<p class="docText">Let’s see, what am I 
keeping track of? A ball player, of course. So I want an object that 
represents the whole player, not just her batting average or times at 
bat. Yeah, that’ll be my fundamental data unit, an object representing 
the name and statistics for a player. I’ll need some methods to handle 
this object. Hmmm, I guess I need a method to get basic information into
 this unit. The computer should calculate some of the stuff, like the 
batting averages—I can add methods to do calculations. And the program 
should do those calculations automatically, without the user having to 
remember to ask to have them done. Also I’ll need methods for updating 
and displaying the information. So the user gets three ways to interact 
with the data: initialization, updating, and reporting. That’s the user 
interface.</p>
</blockquote>
<p class="docText">In short, with an OOP 
approach, you concentrate on the object as the user perceives it, 
thinking about the data you need to describe the object and the 
operations that will describe the user’s interaction with the data. 
After you develop a description of that interface, you move on to decide
 how to implement the interface and data storage. Finally, you put 
together a program to use your new design.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
