<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Class Constructors and Destructors</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Class Constructors and Destructors</h3>
<p class="docText">At this point, you need to do more with the <tt>Stock</tt> class. There are certain standard functions, called <span class="docEmphasis">constructors</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">destructors</span>, that you should normally provide for a class. Let’s talk about why they are needed and how to write them.</p>
<p class="docText">One of C++’s aims is to make 
using class objects similar to using standard types. However, the code 
provided so far in this chapter doesn’t let you initialize a <tt>Stock</tt> object the way you can an ordinary <tt>int</tt> or <tt>struct</tt>. That is, the usual initialization syntax doesn’t carry over for the <tt>Stock</tt> type</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int year = 2001;                                   // valid initialization
struct thing
{
    char * pn;
    int m;
};
thing amabob = {"wodget", -23};                    // valid initialization
Stock hot = {"Sukie's Autos, Inc.", 200, 50.25};   // NO! compile error</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The reason you can’t initialize a <tt>Stock</tt>
 object this way is because the data parts have private access status, 
which means a program cannot access the data members directly. As you’ve
 seen, the only way a program can access the data members is through a 
member function. Therefore, you need to devise an appropriate member 
function if you’re to succeed in initializing an object. (You could 
initialize a class object as just shown if you made the data members 
public instead of private, but making the data public goes against one 
of the main justifications for using classes: data hiding.)</p>
<p class="docText">In general, it’s best that all objects be initialized when they are created. For example, consider the following code:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Stock gift;
gift.buy(10, 24.75);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">With the current implementation of the <tt>Stock</tt> class, the <tt>gift</tt> object has no value for the <tt>company</tt> member. The class design assumes that the user calls <tt>acquire()</tt>
 before calling any other member functions, but there is no way to 
enforce that assumption. One way around this difficulty is to have 
objects initialized automatically when they are created. To accomplish 
this, C++ provides for special member functions, called <span class="docEmphasis">class constructors</span>,
 especially for constructing new objects and assigning values to their 
data members. More precisely, C++ provides a name for these member 
functions and a syntax for using them, and you provide the method 
definition. The name is the same as the class name. For example, a 
possible constructor for the <tt>Stock</tt> class is a member function called <tt>Stock()</tt>.
 The constructor prototype and header have an interesting property: 
Although the constructor has no return value, it’s not declared type <tt>void</tt>. In fact, a constructor has no declared type.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EXJAK">Declaring and Defining Constructors</h4>
<p class="docText">Now you need to build a <tt>Stock</tt> constructor. Because a <tt>Stock</tt>
 object has three values to be provided from the outside world, you 
should give the constructor three arguments. (The fourth value, the <tt>total_val</tt> member, is calculated from <tt>shares</tt> and <tt>share_val</tt>, so you don’t have to provide it to the constructor.) Possibly, you may want to provide just the <tt>company</tt> member value and set the other values to zero; you can do this by using default arguments (see Chapter 8, “Adventures in Functions.”). Thus, the prototype would look like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>// constructor prototype with some default arguments
Stock(const string &amp; co, long n = 0, double pr = 0.0);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The first argument is a pointer to the string that is used to initialize the <tt>company string</tt> member. The <tt>n</tt> and <tt>pr</tt> arguments provide values for the <tt>shares</tt> and <tt>share_val</tt> members. Note that there is no return type. The prototype goes in the public section of the class declaration.</p>
<p class="docText">Next, here’s one possible definition for the constructor:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>// constructor definition
Stock::Stock(const string &amp; co, long n, double pr)
{
company = co;

    if (n &lt; 0)
    {
        std::cerr &lt;&lt; "Number of shares can't be negative; "
                   &lt;&lt; company &lt;&lt; " shares set to 0.\n";
        shares = 0;
    }
    else
        shares = n;
    share_val = pr;
    set_tot();
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This is the same code that the <tt>acquire()</tt>
 function used earlier in this chapter. The difference is that in this 
case, a program automatically invokes the constructor when it declares 
an object.</p>
<p></p><div class="box">
<h2 class="docSidebarTitle">Member Names and Parameter Names</h2>
<p class="docText">Often those new to constructors try to use the class member names as parameter names in the constructor, as in this example:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>// NO!
Stock::Stock(const string &amp; company, long shares, double share_val)
{
...
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This is wrong. The 
constructor arguments don’t represent the class members; they represent 
values that are assigned to the class members. Thus, they must have 
distinct names, or you end up with confusing code like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>shares = shares;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">One common coding practice to help avoid such confusion is to use an <tt>m_</tt> prefix to identify data member names:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>class Stock
{
private:
    string m_company;
    long m_shares;
    ...</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Another common practice is to use an underbar suffix for member names:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>class Stock
{
private:
    string company_;
    long shares_;
    ...</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">With either convention, you then can use <tt>company</tt> and <tt>shares</tt> as the parameter names in the public interface.</p>
</div><p></p><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EZQAK">Using Constructors</h4>
<p class="docText">C++ provides two ways to initialize an object by using a constructor. The first is to call the constructor explicitly:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Stock food = Stock("World Cabbage", 250, 1.25);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This sets the <tt>company</tt> member of the <tt>food</tt> object to the string <tt>"World Cabbage"</tt>, the <tt>shares</tt> member to <tt>250</tt>, and so on.</p>
<p class="docText">The second way is to call the constructor implicitly:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Stock garment("Furry Mason", 50, 2.5);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This more compact form is equivalent to the following explicit call:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Stock garment = Stock("Furry Mason", 50, 2.5));</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">C++ uses a class constructor whenever you create an object of that class, even when you use <tt>new</tt> for dynamic memory allocation. Here’s how to use the constructor with <tt>new</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Stock *pstock = new Stock("Electroshock Games", 18, 19.0);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This statement creates a <tt>Stock</tt> object, initializes it to the values provided by the arguments, and assigns the address of the object to the <tt>pstock</tt>
 pointer. In this case, the object doesn’t have a name, but you can use 
the pointer to manage the object. We’ll discuss pointers to objects 
further in Chapter 11.</p>
<p class="docText">Constructors are used differently from the other class methods. Normally, you use an object to invoke a method:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>stock1.show();  // stock1 object invokes show() method</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">However, you can’t use an 
object to invoke a constructor because until the constructor finishes 
its work of making the object, there is no object. Rather than being 
invoked by an object, the constructor is used to create the object.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EDXAK">Default Constructors</h4>
<p class="docText">A <span class="docEmphasis">default constructor</span>
 is a constructor that is used to create an object when you don’t 
provide explicit initialization values. That is, it’s a constructor used
 for declarations like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Stock fluffy_the_cat;  // uses the default constructor</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Hey, Listing 10.3
 already did that! The reason this statement works is that if you fail 
to provide any constructors, C++ automatically supplies a default 
constructor. It’s an implicit version of a default constructor, and it 
does nothing. For the <tt>Stock</tt> class, the default constructor would look like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Stock::Stock() { }</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The net result is that the <tt>fluffy_the_cat</tt> object is created with its members uninitialized, just as the following creates <tt>x</tt> without providing a value for <tt>x</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int x;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The fact that the default constructor has no arguments reflects the fact that no values appear in the declaration.</p>
<p class="docText">A curious fact about default 
constructors is that the compiler provides one only if you don’t define 
any constructors. After you define any constructor for a class, the 
responsibility for providing a default constructor for that class passes
 from the compiler to you. If you provide a nondefault constructor, such
 as <tt>Stock(const string &amp; co, long n, double pr)</tt>, and don’t provide your own version of a default constructor, then a declaration like this becomes an error:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Stock stock1;  // not possible with current constructor</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The reason for this behavior is
 that you might want to make it impossible to create uninitialized 
objects. If, however, you wish to create objects without explicit 
initialization, you must define your own default constructor. This is a 
constructor that takes no arguments. You can define a default 
constructor two ways. One is to provide default values for all the 
arguments to the existing constructor:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Stock(const string &amp; co = "Error", int n = 0, double pr = 0.0);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The second is to use function overloading to define a second constructor, one that has no arguments:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Stock();</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">You can have only one default 
constructor, so be sure that you don’t do both. Actually, you should 
usually initialize objects in order to ensure that all members begin 
with known, reasonable values. Thus, a user-provided default constructor
 typically provides implicit initialization for all member values. For 
example, this is how you might define one for the <tt>Stock</tt> class:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Stock::Stock()        // default constructor
{
    company = "no name";
    shares = 0;
    share_val = 0.0;
    total_val = 0.0;
}</pre></div><br/>
<div class="docNote"><p class="docNoteTitle">Tip</p>
<p class="docText">When you design a class, you should usually provide a default constructor that implicitly initializes all class members.</p>
</div><br/>
<p class="docText">After you’ve used either 
method (no arguments or default values for all arguments) to create the 
default constructor, you can declare object variables without 
initializing them explicitly:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Stock first;                // calls default constructor implicitly
Stock first = Stock();      // calls it explicitly
Stock *prelief = new Stock; // calls it implicitly</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">However, you shouldn’t be misled by the implicit form of the nondefault constructor:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Stock first("Concrete Conglomerate");      // calls constructor
Stock second();                            // declares a function
Stock third;                               // calls default constructor</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The first declaration here 
calls the nondefault constructor—that is, the one that takes arguments. 
The second declaration states that <tt>second()</tt> is a function that returns a <tt>Stock</tt> object. When you implicitly call the default constructor, you don’t use parentheses.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EH4AK">Destructors</h4>
<p class="docText">When you use a constructor 
to create an object, the program undertakes the responsibility of 
tracking that object until it expires. At that time, the program 
automatically calls a special member function bearing the formidable 
title <span class="docEmphasis">destructor</span>. The destructor should clean up any debris, so it actually serves a useful purpose. For example, if your constructor uses <tt>new</tt> to allocate memory, the destructor should use <tt>delete</tt> to free that memory. The <tt>Stock</tt> constructor doesn’t do anything fancy like using <tt>new</tt>, so the <tt>Stock</tt> class destructor doesn’t really
 have any tasks to perform. In such a case, you can simply let the 
compiler generate an implicit, do-nothing destructor, which is exactly 
what the first version of the <tt>Stock</tt> 
class does. On the other hand, it’s certainly worth looking into how to 
declare and define destructors, so let’s provide one for the <tt>Stock</tt> class.</p>
<p class="docText">Like a constructor, a destructor has a special name: It is formed from the class name preceded by a tilde (<tt>~</tt>). Thus, the destructor for the <tt>Stock</tt> class is called <tt>~Stock()</tt>.
 Also like a constructor, a destructor can have no return value and has 
no declared type. Unlike a constructor, a destructor must have no 
arguments. Thus, the prototype for a <tt>Stock</tt> destructor must be this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>~Stock();</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Because a <tt>Stock</tt> destructor has no vital duties, you can code it as a do-nothing function:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Stock::~Stock()
{
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">However, just so that you can see when the destructor is called, let’s code it this way:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Stock::~Stock()    // class destructor
{
    cout &lt;&lt; "Bye, " &lt;&lt; company &lt;&lt; "!\n";
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">When should a destructor 
be called? The compiler handles this decision; normally your code 
shouldn’t explicitly call a destructor. (See the section “Looking Again at Placement <tt>new</tt>” in Chapter 12,
 “Classes and Dynamic Memory Allocation,” for an exception.) If you 
create a static storage class object, its destructor is called 
automatically when the program terminates. If you create an automatic 
storage class object, as the examples have been doing, its destructor is
 called automatically when the program exits the block of code in which 
the object is defined. If the object is created by using <tt>new</tt>, it resides in heap memory, or the free store, and its destructor is called automatically when you use <tt>delete</tt>
 to free the memory. Finally, a program can create temporary objects to 
carry out certain operations; in that case, the program automatically 
calls the destructor for the object when it has finished using it.</p>
<p class="docText">Because a destructor is 
called automatically when a class object expires, there ought to be a 
destructor. If you don’t provide one, the compiler implicitly declares a
 default constructor and, if it detects code that leads to the 
destruction of an object, it provides a definition for the destructor.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EUABK">Improving the <tt>Stock</tt> Class</h4>
<p class="docText">At this point we need to 
incorporate the constructors and the destructor into the class and 
method definitions. Given the significance of adding constructors, we’ll
 advance the name from <tt>stock00.h</tt> to <tt>stock10.h</tt>. The class methods go into a file called <tt>stock10.cpp</tt>. Finally, we place the program using these resources in a third file, <tt>usestok2.cpp</tt>.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EKBBK">The Header File</h5>
<p class="docText">Listing 10.4
 shows the header file for the stock program. It adds prototypes for the
 constructor and destructor functions to the original class declaration.
 Also it dispenses with the <tt>acquire()</tt> function, which is no longer necessary now that the class has constructors. The file also uses the <tt>#ifndef</tt> technique described in Chapter 9 to protect against multiple inclusion of this file.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ECFBK">Listing 10.4. <tt>stock10.h</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// stock10.h -- Stock class declaration with constructors, destructor added
#ifndef STOCK10_H_
#define STOCK01_H_
#include &lt;string&gt;

class Stock
{
private:
    std::string company;
    long shares;
    double share_val;
    double total_val;
    void set_tot() { total_val = shares * share_val; }
public:
// two constructors
    Stock();        // default constructor
    Stock(const std::string &amp; co, long n = 0, double pr = 0.0);
    ~Stock();       // noisy destructor
    void buy(long num, double price);
    void sell(long num, double price);
    void update(double price);
    void show();
};

#endif

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ERFBK">The Implementation File</h5>
<p class="docText">Listing 10.5 provides the method definitions for the stock program. It includes the <tt>stock10.h</tt>
 file in order to provide the class declaration. (Recall that enclosing 
the filename in double quotation marks instead of in brackets causes the
 compiler to search for it at the same location where your source files 
are located.) Also Listing 10.5 includes the <tt>iostream</tt> header file to provide I/O support. The listing also provides using declarations and qualified names (such as <tt>std::string</tt>)
 to provide access to various declarations in the header files. This 
file adds the constructor and destructor method definitions to the prior
 methods. To help you see when these methods are called, they each 
display a message. This is not a usual feature of constructors and destructors, but it can help you better visualize how classes use them.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EEHBK">Listing 10.5. <tt>stock10.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// stock10.cpp -- Stock class with constructors, destructor added
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include "stock10.h"

// constructors (verbose versions)
Stock::Stock()        // default constructor
{
    std::cout &lt;&lt; "Default constructor called\n";
    company = "no name";
    shares = 0;
    share_val = 0.0;
    total_val = 0.0;
}

Stock::Stock(const std::string &amp; co, long n, double pr)
{
    std::cout &lt;&lt; "Constructor using " &lt;&lt; co &lt;&lt; " called\n";
    company = co;

    if (n &lt; 0)
    {
        std::cout &lt;&lt; "Number of shares can't be negative; "
                   &lt;&lt; company &lt;&lt; " shares set to 0.\n";
        shares = 0;
    }
    else
        shares = n;
    share_val = pr;
    set_tot();
}
// class destructor
Stock::~Stock()        // verbose class destructor
{
    std::cout &lt;&lt; "Bye, " &lt;&lt; company &lt;&lt; "!\n";
}

// other methods
void Stock::buy(long num, double price)
{
     if (num &lt; 0)
    {
        std::cout &lt;&lt; "Number of shares purchased can't be negative. "
             &lt;&lt; "Transaction is aborted.\n";
    }
    else
    {
        shares += num;
        share_val = price;
        set_tot();
    }
}

void Stock::sell(long num, double price)
{
    using std::cout;
    if (num &lt; 0)
    {
        cout &lt;&lt; "Number of shares sold can't be negative. "
             &lt;&lt; "Transaction is aborted.\n";
    }
    else if (num &gt; shares)
    {
        cout &lt;&lt; "You can't sell more than you have! "
             &lt;&lt; "Transaction is aborted.\n";
    }
    else
    {
        shares -= num;
        share_val = price;
        set_tot();
    }
}

void Stock::update(double price)
{
    share_val = price;
    set_tot();
}

void Stock::show()
{
    using std::cout;
    using std::ios_base;
    // set format to #.###
    ios_base::fmtflags orig =
        cout.setf(ios_base::fixed, ios_base::floatfield);
    std::streamsize prec = cout.precision(3);

    cout &lt;&lt; "Company: " &lt;&lt; company
        &lt;&lt; "  Shares: " &lt;&lt; shares &lt;&lt; '\n';
    cout &lt;&lt; "  Share Price: $" &lt;&lt; share_val;
    // set format to #.##
    cout.precision(2);
    cout &lt;&lt; "  Total Worth: $" &lt;&lt; total_val &lt;&lt; '\n';

    // restore original format
    cout.setf(orig, ios_base::floatfield);
    cout.precision(prec);
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ETHBK">A Client File</h5>
<p class="docText">Listing 10.6 provides a short program for testing the new methods in the stock program. Because it simply uses the <tt>Stock</tt> class, this listing is a client of the <tt>Stock</tt> class. Like <tt>stock10.cpp</tt>, it includes the <tt>stock10.h</tt>
 file to provide the class declaration. The program demonstrates 
constructors and destructors. It also uses the same formatting commands 
invoked by Listing 10.3. To compile the complete program, you use the techniques for multifile programs described in Chapters 1 and 9.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EVKBK">Listing 10.6. <tt>usestok1.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// usestok1.cpp -- using the Stock class
// compile with stock10.cpp
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include "stock10.h"

int main()
{
  {
    using std::cout;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Using constructors to create new objects\n";
    Stock stock1("NanoSmart", 12, 20.0);            // syntax 1
    stock1.show();
    Stock stock2 = Stock ("Boffo Objects", 2, 2.0); // syntax 2
    stock2.show();

    cout &lt;&lt; "Assigning stock1 to stock2:\n";
    stock2 = stock1;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Listing stock1 and stock2:\n";
    stock1.show();
    stock2.show();

    cout &lt;&lt; "Using a constructor to reset an object\n";
    stock1 = Stock("Nifty Foods", 10, 50.0);    // temp object
    cout &lt;&lt; "Revised stock1:\n";
    stock1.show();
    cout &lt;&lt; "Done\n";
  }
    return 0;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Compiling the program represented by Listings 10.4, 10.5, and 10.6 produces an executable program. Here’s one compiler’s output from the executable program:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedHeight">Using constructors to create new objects
Constructor using NanoSmart called
Company: NanoSmart  Shares: 12
  Share Price: $20.00  Total Worth: $240.00
Constructor using Boffo Objects called
Company: Boffo Objects  Shares: 2
  Share Price: $2.00  Total Worth: $4.00
Assigning stock1 to stock2:
Listing stock1 and stock2:
Company: NanoSmart  Shares: 12
  Share Price: $20.00  Total Worth: $240.00
Company: NanoSmart  Shares: 12
  Share Price: $20.00  Total Worth: $240.00
Using a constructor to reset an object
Constructor using Nifty Foods called
Bye, Nifty Foods!
Revised stock1:
Company: Nifty Foods  Shares: 10
  Share Price: $50.00  Total Worth: $500.00
Done
Bye, NanoSmart!
Bye, Nifty Foods!

					  </pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Some compilers may produce a program with the following initial output, which has one additional line:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Using constructors to create new objects
Constructor using NanoSmart called
Company: NanoSmart  Shares: 12
  Share Price: $20.00  Total Worth: $240.00
Constructor using Boffo Objects called
Bye, Boffo Objects!                          &lt;&lt; <span class="docEmphRomanAlt">additional line</span>
Company: Boffo Objects  Shares: 2
  Share Price: $2.00  Total Worth: $4.00
...</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The following “Program Notes” section explains the <tt>"Bye, Boffo Objects!"</tt> line of this output.</p>
<div class="docNote"><p class="docNoteTitle">Note</p>
<p class="docText">You may have noticed that Listing 10.6 has an extra brace at the beginning and near the end of <tt>main()</tt>. Automatic variables such as <tt>stock1</tt> and <tt>stock2</tt>
 expire when the program exits the block that contains their 
definitions. Without the extra braces, that block would be the body of <tt>main()</tt>, so the destructors would not be called until after <tt>main()</tt>
 completed execution. In a windowing environment, this would mean that 
the window would close before the last two destructor calls, preventing 
you from seeing the last two messages. But with the braces, the last two
 destructor calls occur before the return statement is reached, so the 
messages are displayed.</p>
</div><br/>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EMNBK">Program Notes</h5>
<p class="docText">In Listing 10.6, the statement</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Stock stock1("NanoSmart", 12, 20.0);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">creates a <tt>Stock</tt> object called <tt>stock1</tt> and initializes its data members to the indicated values:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Constructor using NanoSmart called
Company: NanoSmart  Shares: 12</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The following statement uses another syntax to create and initialize an object called <tt>stock2</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Stock stock2 = Stock ("Boffo Objects", 2, 2.0);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The C++ Standard gives a 
compiler a couple ways to execute this second syntax. One is to make it 
behave exactly like the first syntax:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Constructor using Boffo Objects called
Company: Boffo Objects  Shares: 2</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The second way is to allow the call to the constructor to create a temporary object that is then copied to <tt>stock2</tt>.
 Then the temporary object is discarded. If the compiler uses this 
option, the destructor is called for the temporary object, producing 
this output instead:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Constructor using Boffo Objects called
Bye, Boffo Objects!
Company: Boffo Objects  Shares: 2</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The compiler that 
produced this output disposed of the temporary object immediately, but 
it’s possible that a compiler might wait longer, in which case the 
destructor message would be displayed later.</p>
<p class="docText">The following statement illustrates that you can assign one object to another of the same type:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>stock2 = stock1;     // object assignment</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">As with structure 
assignment, class object assignment, by default, copies the members of 
one object to the other. In this case, the original contents of <tt>stock2</tt> are overwritten.</p>
<div class="docNote"><p class="docNoteTitle">Note</p>
<p class="docText">When you assign one object 
to another of the same class, by default C++ copies the contents of each
 data member of the source object to the corresponding data member of 
the target object.</p>
</div><br/>
<p class="docText">You can use the constructor for more than initializing a new object. For example, the program has this statement in <tt>main()</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>stock1 = Stock("Nifty Foods", 10, 50.0);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>stock1</tt> object already exists. Therefore, instead of initializing <tt>stock1</tt>,
 this statement assigns new values to the object. It does so by having 
the constructor create a new, temporary object and then copying the 
contents of the new object to <tt>stock1</tt>.
 Then the program disposes of the temporary object, invoking the 
destructor as it does so, as illustrated by the following annotated 
output:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Using a constructor to reset an object
Constructor using Nifty Foods called &gt;&gt; <span class="docEmphRomanAlt">temporary object created</span>
Bye, Nifty Foods!                    &gt;&gt; <span class="docEmphRomanAlt">temporary object destroyed</span>
Revised stock1:
Company: Nifty Foods  Shares: 10     &gt;&gt; <span class="docEmphRomanAlt">data now copied to stock1</span>
  Share Price: $50.00  Total Worth: $500.00</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Some compilers might dispose of the temporary object later, delaying the destructor call.</p>
<p class="docText">Finally, at the end, the program displays this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Done
Bye, NanoSmart!
Bye, Nifty Foods!</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">When the <tt>main()</tt> function terminates, its local variables (<tt>stock1</tt> and <tt>stock2</tt>)
 pass from your plane of existence. Because such automatic variables go 
on the stack, the last object created is the first deleted, and the 
first created is the last deleted. (Recall that <tt>"NanoSmart"</tt> was originally in <tt>stock1</tt> but was later transferred to <tt>stock2</tt>, and <tt>stock1</tt> was reset to <tt>"Nifty Foods"</tt>.)</p>
<p class="docText">The output points out that there is a fundamental difference between the following two statements:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Stock stock2 = Stock ("Boffo Objects", 2, 2.0);
stock1 = Stock("Nifty Foods", 10, 50.0); // temporary object</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The first of these 
statements invokes initialization; it creates an object with the 
indicated value, and it may or may not create a temporary object. The 
second statement invokes assignment. Using a constructor in an 
assignment statement in this fashion always causes the creation of a 
temporary object before assignment occurs.</p>
<div class="docNote"><p class="docNoteTitle">Tip</p>
<p class="docText">If you can set 
object values either through initialization or by assignment, choose 
initialization. It is usually more efficient.</p>
</div><br/>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EDTBK">C++11 List Initialization</h5>
<p class="docText">With
 C++11, can you use the list-initialization syntax with classes? Yes, 
you can, providing the brace contents match the argument list of a 
constructor:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Stock hot_tip = {"Derivatives Plus Plus", 100, 45.0};
Stock jock {"Sport Age Storage, Inc"};
Stock temp {};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The braced lists in the first two declarations match the following constructor:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Stock::Stock(const std::string &amp; co, long n = 0, double pr = 0.0);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Therefore, that constructor will be used to create the two objects. For <tt>jock</tt>, the default values of <tt>0</tt> and <tt>0.0</tt> will be used for the second and third arguments. The third declaration matches the default constructor, so <tt>temp</tt> is constructed using it.</p>
<p class="docText">In addition, C++11 offers a class called <tt>std::initializer_list</tt>
 that can be used as a type for a function or method parameter. This 
class can represent a list of arbitrary length, providing all the 
entries are of the same type or can be converted to the same type. Chapter 16, “The <tt>string</tt> Class and the Standard Template Library,” will return to this topic.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EIXBK"><tt>const</tt> Member Functions</h5>
<p class="docText">Consider the following code snippet:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>const Stock land = Stock("Kludgehorn Properties");
land.show();</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText"><a name="second line"></a>With current C++, the compiler should object to the second line. Why? Because the code for <tt>show()</tt> fails to guarantee that it won’t modify the invoking object, which, because it is <tt>const</tt>, should not be altered. We’ve solved this kind of problem before by declaring a function’s argument to be a <tt>const</tt> reference or a pointer to <tt>const</tt>. But there’s a syntax problem: The <tt>show()</tt> method doesn’t have any arguments for <tt>const</tt>
 to qualify. Instead, the object it uses is provided implicitly by the 
method invocation. What is needed is a new syntax, one that says a 
function promises not to modify the invoking object. The C++ solution is
 to place the <tt>const</tt> keyword after the function parentheses. That is, the <tt>show()</tt> declaration should look like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>void show() const;         // promises not to change invoking object</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Similarly, the beginning of the function definition should look like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>void stock::show() const   // promises not to change invoking object</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Class functions declared and defined this way are called <tt>const</tt> member functions. Just as you should use <tt>const</tt> references and pointers as formal function arguments whenever appropriate, you should make class methods <tt>const</tt> whenever they don’t modify the invoking object. We’ll follow this rule from here on out.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EJZBK">Constructors and Destructors in Review</h4>
<p class="docText">Now
 that we’ve gone through a few examples of constructors and destructors,
 you might want to pause and assimilate what has passed. To help you, 
here is a summary of these methods.</p>
<p class="docText">A constructor is a 
special class member function that’s called whenever an object of that 
class is created. A class constructor has the same name as its class, 
but through the miracle of function overloading, you can have more than 
one constructor with the same name, provided that each has its own 
signature, or argument list. Also a constructor has no declared type. 
Usually a constructor is used to initialize members of a class object. 
Your initialization should match the constructor’s argument list. For 
example, suppose the <tt>Bozo</tt> class has the following prototype for a class constructor:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Bozo(const char * fname, const char * lname);   // constructor prototype</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In this case, you can use it to initialize new objects as follows:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Bozo bozetta = bozo("Bozetta", "Biggens");   // primary form
Bozo fufu("Fufu", "O'Dweeb");                // short form
Bozo *pc = new Bozo("Popo", "Le Peu");       // dynamic object</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">If C++11 rules are in effect, you can use list initialization instead:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Bozo bozetta = {"Bozetta", "Biggens"};       // C++11
Bozo fufu{"Fufu", "O'Dweeb"}                 // C++11;
Bozo *pc = new Bozo{"Popo", "Le Peu"};       // C++11</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">If a constructor has just one 
argument, that constructor is invoked if you initialize an object to a 
value that has the same type as the constructor argument. For example, 
suppose you have this constructor prototype:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Bozo(int age);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Then you can use any of the following forms to initialize an object:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Bozo dribble = bozo(44);   // primary form
Bozo roon(66);             // secondary form
Bozo tubby = 32;           // special form for one-argument constructors</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Actually, the third example is a new point, not a review point, but it seemed like a nice time to tell you about it. Chapter 11 mentions a way to turn off this feature because it can lead to unpleasant surprises.</p>
<div class="docNote"><p class="docNoteTitle">Caution</p>
<p class="docText">A constructor that you can use with a single argument allows you to use assignment syntax to initialize an object to a value:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Classname object = value;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This feature can cause problems, but it can be blocked, as described in Chapter 11.</p>
</div><br/>
<p class="docText">A
 default constructor has no arguments, and it is used if you create an 
object without explicitly initializing it. If you fail to provide any 
constructors, the compiler defines a default constructor for you. 
Otherwise, you have to supply your own default constructor. It can have 
no arguments or else it must have default values for all arguments:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Bozo();                                   // default constructor prototype
Bistro(const char * s = "Chez Zero");     // default for Bistro class</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The program uses the default constructor for uninitialized objects:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Bozo bubi;             // use default
Bozo *pb = new Bozo;   // use default</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Just as a program invokes a 
constructor when an object is created, it invokes a destructor when an 
object is destroyed. You can have only one destructor per class. It has 
no return type (not even <tt>void</tt>), it has no arguments, and its name is the class name preceded by a tilde. For example, the <tt>Bozo</tt> class destructor has the following prototype:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>~Bozo();    // class destructor</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Class destructors that use <tt>delete</tt> become necessary when class constructors use <tt>new</tt>.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
