<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>An Array of Objects</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">An Array of Objects</h3>
<p class="docText">Often, as with the <tt>Stock</tt>
 examples, you want to create several objects of the same class. You can
 create separate object variables, as the examples have done so far in 
this chapter, but it might make more sense to create an array of 
objects. That might sound like a major leap into the unknown, but, in 
fact, you declare an array of objects the same way you declare an array 
of any of the standard types:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Stock mystuff[4]; // creates an array of 4 Stock objects</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Recall that a program always 
calls the default class constructor when it creates class objects that 
aren’t explicitly initialized. This declaration requires either that the
 class explicitly define no constructors at all, in which case the 
implicit do-nothing default constructor is used, or, as in this case, 
that an explicit default constructor be defined. Each element—<tt>mystuff[0]</tt>, <tt>mystuff[1]</tt>, and so on—is a <tt>Stock</tt> object and thus can be used with the <tt>Stock</tt> methods:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>mystuff[0].update();      // apply update() to 1st element
mystuff[3].show();        // apply show() to 4th element
const Stock * tops = mystuff[2].topval(mystuff[1]);
      // compare 3rd and 2nd elements and set tops
      // to point at the one with a higher total value</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">You can use a 
constructor to initialize the array elements. In that case, you have to 
call the constructor for each individual element:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>const int STKS = 4;
Stock stocks[STKS] = {
    Stock("NanoSmart", 12.5, 20),
    Stock("Boffo Objects", 200, 2.0),
    Stock("Monolithic Obelisks", 130, 3.25),
    Stock("Fleep Enterprises", 60, 6.5)
    };</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here the code uses the
 standard form for initializing an array: a comma-separated list of 
values enclosed in braces. In this case, a call to the constructor 
method represents each value. If the class has more than one constructor, you can use different constructors for different elements:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>const int STKS = 10;
Stock stocks[STKS] = {
    Stock("NanoSmart", 12.5, 20),
    Stock(),
    Stock("Monolithic Obelisks", 130, 3.25),
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This initializes <tt>stocks[0]</tt> and <tt>stocks[2]</tt> using the <tt>Stock(const string &amp; co, long n, double pr)</tt> constructor as well as <tt>stocks[1]</tt> using the <tt>Stock()</tt>
 constructor. Because this declaration only partially initializes the 
array, the remaining seven members are initialized using the default 
constructor.</p>
<p class="docText">Listing 10.9
 applies these principles to a short program that initializes four array
 elements, displays their contents, and tests the elements to find the 
one with the highest total value. Because <tt>topval()</tt> examines just two objects at a time, the program uses a <tt>for</tt> loop to examine the whole array. Also it uses a pointer-to-<tt>Stock</tt> to keep track of which element has the highest value. This listing uses the Listing 10.7 header file and the Listing 10.8 methods file.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EKRAK">Listing 10.9. <tt>usestok2.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// usestok2.cpp -- using the Stock class
// compile with stock20.cpp
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include "stock20.h"

const int STKS = 4;
int main()
{
// create an array of initialized objects
    Stock stocks[STKS] = {
        Stock("NanoSmart", 12, 20.0),
        Stock("Boffo Objects", 200, 2.0),
        Stock("Monolithic Obelisks", 130, 3.25),
        Stock("Fleep Enterprises", 60, 6.5)
        };

    std::cout &lt;&lt; "Stock holdings:\n";
    int st;
    for (st = 0; st &lt; STKS; st++)
        stocks[st].show();
// set pointer to first element
    const Stock * top = &amp;stocks[0];
    for (st = 1; st &lt; STKS; st++)
        top = &amp;top-&gt;topval(stocks[st]);
// now top points to the most valuable holding
    std::cout &lt;&lt; "\nMost valuable holding:\n";
    top-&gt;show();
     return 0;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here is the output from the program in Listing 10.9:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Stock holdings:
Company: NanoSmart  Shares: 12
  Share Price: $20.000  Total Worth: $240.00
Company: Boffo Objects  Shares: 200
  Share Price: $2.000  Total Worth: $400.00
Company: Monolithic Obelisks  Shares: 130
  Share Price: $3.250  Total Worth: $422.50
Company: Fleep Enterprises  Shares: 60
  Share Price: $6.500  Total Worth: $390.00

Most valuable holding:
Company: Monolithic Obelisks  Shares: 130
  Share Price: $3.250  Total Worth: $422.50</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">One thing to note about Listing 10.9 is that most of the work goes into designing the class. When that’s done, writing the program itself is rather simple.</p>
<p class="docText">Incidentally, knowing about the <tt>this</tt>
 pointer makes it easier to see how C++ works under the skin. For 
example, the original Unix implementation used a C++ front-end <tt>cfront</tt>
 that converted C++ programs to C programs. To handle method 
definitions, all it had to do is convert a C++ method definition like</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>void Stock::show() const
{
    cout &lt;&lt; "Company: " &lt;&lt; company
         &lt;&lt; "  Shares: " &lt;&lt; shares &lt;&lt; '\n'
         &lt;&lt; "  Share Price: $" &lt;&lt; share_val
         &lt;&lt; "  Total Worth: $" &lt;&lt; total_val &lt;&lt; '\n';
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">to the following C-style definition:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>void show(const Stock * this)
{
    cout &lt;&lt; "Company: " &lt;&lt; this-&gt;company
         &lt;&lt; "  Shares: " &lt;&lt; this-&gt;shares &lt;&lt; '\n'
         &lt;&lt; "  Share Price: $" &lt;&lt; this-&gt;share_val
         &lt;&lt; "  Total Worth: $" &lt;&lt; this-&gt;total_val &lt;&lt; '\n';
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">That is, it converted a <tt>Stock::</tt> qualifier to a function argument that is a pointer to <tt>Stock</tt> and then uses the pointer to access class members.</p>
<p class="docText">Similarly, the front end converted function calls like</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>top.show();</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">to this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>show(&amp;top);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In this fashion, the <tt>this</tt> pointer is assigned the address of the invoking object. (The actual details might be more involved.)</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
