<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Class Scope</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Class Scope</h3>
<p class="docText">Chapter 9
 discusses global (or file) scope and local (or block) scope. Recall 
that you can use a variable with global scope anywhere in the file that 
contains its definition, whereas a variable with local scope is local to
 the block that contains its definition. Function names, too, can have 
global scope, but they never have local scope. C++ classes introduce a 
new kind of scope: class scope.</p>
<p class="docText">Class scope applies to names 
defined in a class, such as the names of class data members and class 
member functions. Items that have class scope are known within the class
 but not outside the class. Thus, you can use the same class member 
names in different classes without conflict. For example, the <tt>shares</tt> member of the <tt>Stock</tt> class is distinct from the <tt>shares</tt> member of a <tt>JobRide</tt>
 class. Also class scope means you can’t directly access members of a 
class from the outside world. This is true even for public function 
members. That is, to invoke a public member function, you have to use an
 object:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Stock sleeper("Exclusive Ore", 100, 0.25);  // create object
sleeper.show();      // use object to invoke a member function
show();              // invalid -- can't call method directly</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Similarly, you have to use the scope-resolution operator when you define member functions:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>void Stock::update(double price)
{
    ...
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In short, within a 
class declaration or a member function definition you can use an 
unadorned member name (the unqualified name), as when <tt>sell()</tt> calls the <tt>set_tot()</tt>
 member function. A constructor name is recognized when it is called 
because its name is the same as the class name. Otherwise, you must use 
the direct membership operator (<tt>.</tt>), the indirect membership operator (<tt>-&gt;</tt>), or the scope-resolution operator (<tt>::</tt>),
 depending on the context, when you use a class member name. The 
following code fragment illustrates how identifiers with class scope can
 be accessed:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>class Ik
{
private:
   int fuss;       // fuss has class scope
public:
   Ik(int f  = 9) {fuss = f; }  // fuss is in scope
   void ViewIk() const;         // ViewIk has class scope
};

void Ik::ViewIk() const    //Ik:: places ViewIk into Ik scope
{
   cout &lt;&lt; fuss &lt;&lt; endl;   // fuss in scope within class methods
}
...
int main()
{
   Ik * pik = new Ik;
   Ik ee = Ik(8); // constructor in scope because has class name
   ee.ViewIk();   // class object brings ViewIk into scope
   pik-&gt;ViewIk(); // pointer-to-Ik brings ViewIk into scope
...</pre></div><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ECQAK">Class Scope Constants</h4>
<p class="docText">Sometimes it would be nice to have symbolic constants with class scope. For example, a class declaration might use the literal <tt>30</tt>
 to specify an array size. Because the constant is the same for all 
objects, it would be nice to create a single constant shared by all 
objects. You might think the following would be a solution:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>class Bakery
{
private:
    const int Months = 12;    // declare a constant? FAILS
    double costs[Months];
    ...</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">But this won’t work 
because declaring a class describes what an object looks like but 
doesn’t create an object. Hence, until you create an object, there’s no 
place to store a value. (Actually, C++11 provides for member 
initialization, but not in a way that would make the preceding array 
declaration work; Chapter 12 returns to this topic.) There are, however, a couple ways to achieve essentially the same desired effect.</p>
<p class="docText">First, you can declare an 
enumeration within a class. An enumeration given in a class declaration 
has class scope, so you can use enumerations to provide class scope 
symbolic names for integer constants. That is, you can start off the <tt>Bakery</tt> declaration this way:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>class Bakery
{
private:
    enum {Months = 12};
    double costs[Months];
    ...</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Note
 that declaring an enumeration in this fashion does not create a class 
data member. That is, each individual object does not carry an 
enumeration in it. Rather, <tt>Len</tt> is just a symbolic name that the compiler replaces with <tt>30</tt> when it encounters it in code in class scope.</p>
<p class="docText">Because the <tt>Bakery</tt>
 class uses the enumeration merely to create a symbolic constant, with 
no intent of creating variables of the enumeration type, you needn’t 
provide an enumeration tag. Incidentally, for many implementations, the <tt>ios_base</tt> class does something similar in its public section; that’s the source of identifiers such as <tt>ios_base::fixed</tt>. Here <tt>fixed</tt> is typically an enumerator defined in the <tt>ios_base</tt> class.</p>
<p class="docText">C++ has a second way of defining a constant within a class—using the keyword <tt>static</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>class Bakery
{
private:
    static const int Months = 12;
    double costs[Months];
    ...</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This creates a single constant called <tt>Months</tt> that is stored with other static variables rather than in an object. Thus, there is only one <tt>Months</tt> constant shared by all <tt>Bakery</tt> objects. Chapter 12
 looks further into static class members. In C++98 you can use this 
technique only for declaring static constants with integral and 
enumeration values. Thus, C++98 doesn’t allow you to store a <tt>double</tt> constant this way. C++11 removes that restriction.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EEUAK">Scoped Enumerations (C++11)</h4>
<p class="docText">Traditional enumerations have some problems. One is that enumerators from two different <tt>enum</tt> definitions can conflict. Suppose you were working on a project involving eggs and T-shirts. You might try something like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>enum egg {Small, Medium, Large, Jumbo};
enum t_shirt {Small, Medium, Large, Xlarge};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This won’t fly because the <tt>egg Small</tt> and the <tt>t_shirt Small</tt>
 would both be in the same scope, and the names conflict. C++11 provides
 a new form of enumeration that avoids this problem by having class 
scope for its enumerators. The declarations for this form look like 
this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>enum class egg {Small, Medium, Large, Jumbo};
enum class t_shirt {Small, Medium, Large, Xlarge};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Alternatively, you can use the keyword <tt>struct</tt> instead of <tt>class</tt>. In either case, you now need to use the <tt>enum</tt> name to qualify the enumerator:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>egg choice = egg::Large;        // the Large enumerator of the egg enum
t_shirt Floyd = t_shirt::Large; // the Large enumerator of the t_shirt enum</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Now that the enumerators have class scope, enumerators from different <tt>enum</tt> definitions no longer have potential name conflicts, and your egg-and-T-shirt project can proceed.</p>
<p class="docText">C++11 also 
tightens up type security for scoped enumerations. Regular enumerations 
get converted to integer types automatically in some situations, such as
 assignment to an <tt>int</tt> variable or being used in a comparison expression, but scoped enumerations have no implicit conversions to integer types:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>enum egg_old {Small, Medium, Large, Jumbo};        // unscoped
enum class t_shirt {Small, Medium, Large, Xlarge}; // scoped
egg_old one = Medium;                              // unscoped
t_shirt rolf = t_shirt::Large;                     // scoped
int king = one;      // implicit type conversion for unscoped
int ring = rolf;     // not allowed, no implicit type conversion
if (king &lt; Jumbo)    // allowed
    std::cout &lt;&lt; "Jumbo converted to int before comparison.\n";
if (king &lt; t_shirt::Medium)   // not allowed
    std::cout &lt;&lt; "Not allowed: &lt; not defined for scoped enum.\n";</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">But you can do an explicit type conversion if you feel you have to:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int Frodo = int(t_shirt::Small); // Frodo set to 0</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Enumerations are represented by
 some underlying integer type, and under C98 that choice was 
implementation-dependent. Thus, a structure containing an enumeration 
might be of different sizes on different systems. C++11 removes that 
dependency for scoped enumerations. By default, the underlying type for 
C++11 scoped enumerations is <tt>int</tt>. Furthermore, there’s a syntax for indicating a different choice:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>// underlying type for pizza is short
enum class : short pizza {Small, Medium, Large, XLarge};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>: short</tt> specifies the underlying type to be <tt>short</tt>.
 The underlying type has to be an integer type. Under C++11, you also 
can use this syntax to indicate the underlying type for an unscoped 
enumeration, but if you don’t choose the type, the choice the compiler 
makes is implementation-dependent.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
