<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Abstract Data Types</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Abstract Data Types</h3>
<p class="docText">The <tt>Stock</tt>
 class is pretty specific. Often, however, programmers define classes to
 represent more general concepts. For example, using classes is a good 
way to implement what computer scientists describe as <span class="docEmphasis">abstract data types</span>
 (ADTs). As the name suggests, an ADT describes a data type in a general
 fashion without bringing in language or implementation details. 
Consider, for example, the stack. By using the stack, you can store data
 so that data
 is always added to or deleted from the top of the stack. For example, 
C++ programs use a stack to manage automatic variables. As new automatic
 variables are generated, they are added to the top of the stack. When 
they expire, they are removed from the stack.</p>
<p class="docText">Let’s look at the properties 
of a stack in a general, abstract way. First, a stack holds several 
items. (That property makes it a <span class="docEmphasis">container</span>, an even more general abstraction.) Next, a stack is characterized by the operations you can perform on it:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">You can create an empty stack.</p></li><li><p class="docList">You can add an item to the top of a stack (that is, you can <span class="docEmphasis">push</span> an item).</p></li><li><p class="docList">You can remove an item from the top (that is, you can <span class="docEmphasis">pop</span> an item).</p></li><li><p class="docList">You can check whether the stack is full.</p></li><li><p class="docList">You can check whether the stack is empty.</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">You can match this 
description with a class declaration in which the public member 
functions provide an interface that represents the stack operations. The
 private data members take care of storing the stack data. The class 
concept is a nice match to the ADT approach.</p>
<p class="docText">The private section has to 
commit itself to how to hold the data. For example, you can use an 
ordinary array, a dynamically allocated array, or some more advanced 
data structure, such as a linked list. However, the public interface 
should hide the exact representation. Instead, it should be expressed in
 general terms, such as creating a stack, pushing an item, and so on. Listing 10.10 shows one approach. It assumes that the <tt>bool</tt> type has been implemented. If it hasn’t been implemented on your system, you can use <tt>int</tt>, <tt>0</tt>, and <tt>1</tt> rather than <tt>bool</tt>, <tt>false</tt>, and <tt>true</tt>.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EDTAK">Listing 10.10. <tt>stack.h</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>// stack.h -- class definition for the stack ADT
#ifndef STACK_H_
#define STACK_H_

typedef unsigned long Item;

class Stack
{
private:
    enum {MAX = 10};    // constant specific to class
    Item items[MAX];    // holds stack items
    int top;            // index for top stack item
public:
    Stack();
    bool isempty() const;
    bool isfull() const;
    // push() returns false if stack already is full, true otherwise
    bool push(const Item &amp; item);   // add item to stack
    // pop() returns false if stack already is empty, true otherwise
    bool pop(Item &amp; item);          // pop top into item
};
#endif</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">In the example in Listing 10.10<a name="section shows"></a>,
 the private section shows that the stack is implemented by using an 
array, but the public section doesn’t reveal that fact. Thus, you can 
replace the array with, say, a dynamic array without changing the class 
interface. This means changing the stack implementation doesn’t require 
that you recode programs that use the stack. You just recompile the 
stack code and link it with existing program code.</p>
<p class="docText">The interface is redundant in that <tt>pop()</tt> and <tt>push()</tt> return information about the stack status (full or empty) instead of being type <tt>void</tt>.
 This provides the programmer with a couple options as to how to handle 
exceeding the stack limit or emptying the stack. He or she can use <tt>isempty()</tt> and <tt>isfull()</tt> to check before attempting to modify the stack, or else use the return value of <tt>push()</tt> and <tt>pop()</tt> to determine whether the operation is successful.</p>
<p class="docText">Rather than define the stack in terms of some particular type, the class describes it in terms of a general <tt>Item</tt> type. In this case, the header file uses <tt>typedef</tt> to make <tt>Item</tt> the same as <tt>unsigned long</tt>. If you want, say, a stack of <tt>double</tt>s or of a structure type, you can change the <tt>typedef</tt> and leave the class declaration and method definitions unaltered. Class templates (see Chapter 14, “Reusing Code in C++”) provide a more powerful method for isolating from the class design the type of data stored.</p>
<p class="docText">Next, you need to implement the class methods. Listing 10.11 shows one possibility.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E6VAK">Listing 10.11. <tt>stack.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// stack.cpp -- Stack member functions
#include "stack.h"
Stack::Stack()    // create an empty stack
{
    top = 0;
}

bool Stack::isempty() const
{
    return top == 0;
}

bool Stack::isfull() const
{
    return top == MAX;
}

bool Stack::push(const Item &amp; item)
{
    if (top &lt; MAX)
    {
        items[top++] = item;
        return true;
    }
    else
        return false;
}

bool Stack::pop(Item &amp; item)
{
    if (top &gt; 0)
    {
        item = items[--top];
        return true;
    }
    else
        return false;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The default constructor guarantees that all stacks are created empty. The code for <tt>pop()</tt> and <tt>push()</tt>
 guarantees that the top of the stack is managed properly. Guarantees 
like this are one of the things that make OOP reliable. Suppose that, 
instead, you create a separate array to represent the stack and an 
independent variable to represent the index of the top. In that case, it
 is your responsibility to get the code right each time you create a new
 stack. Without the protection that private data offers, there’s always 
the possibility of making some program blunder that alters data 
unintentionally.</p>
<p class="docText">Let’s test this stack. Listing 10.12
 models the life of a clerk who processes purchase orders from the top 
of his in-basket, using the LIFO (last-in, first-out) approach of a 
stack.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ELXAK">Listing 10.12. <tt>stacker.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// stacker.cpp -- testing the Stack class
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;cctype&gt;  // or ctype.h
#include "stack.h"
int main()
{
    using namespace std;
    Stack st; // create an empty stack
    char ch;
    unsigned long po;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Please enter A to add a purchase order,\n"
        &lt;&lt; "P to process a PO, or Q to quit.\n";
    while (cin &gt;&gt; ch &amp;&amp; toupper(ch) != 'Q')
    {
        while (cin.get() != '\n')
            continue;
        if (!isalpha(ch))
        {
            cout &lt;&lt; '\a';
            continue;
        }
        switch(ch)
        {
             case 'A':
             case 'a': cout &lt;&lt; "Enter a PO number to add: ";
                       cin &gt;&gt; po;
                       if (st.isfull())
                           cout &lt;&lt; "stack already full\n";
                       else
                           st.push(po);
                       break;
             case 'P':
             case 'p': if (st.isempty())
                           cout &lt;&lt; "stack already empty\n";
                       else {
                           st.pop(po);
                           cout &lt;&lt; "PO #" &lt;&lt; po &lt;&lt; " popped\n";
                       }
                       break;
        }
        cout &lt;&lt; "Please enter A to add a purchase order,\n"
             &lt;&lt; "P to process a PO, or Q to quit.\n";
    }
    cout &lt;&lt; "Bye\n";
    return 0;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The little <tt>while</tt> loop in Listing 10.12
 that gets rid of the rest of the line isn’t absolutely necessary at 
this point, but it will come in handy in a modification of this program 
in Chapter 14. Here’s a sample run:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedHeight">Please enter A to add a purchase order,
P to process a PO, or Q to quit.
<span class="docEmphStrong">A</span>
Enter a PO number to add: <span class="docEmphStrong">17885</span>
Please enter A to add a purchase order,
P to process a PO, or Q to quit.
<span class="docEmphStrong">P</span>
PO #17885 popped
Please enter A to add a purchase order,
P to process a PO, or Q to quit.
<span class="docEmphStrong">A</span>
Enter a PO number to add: <span class="docEmphStrong">17965</span>
Please enter A to add a purchase order,
P to process a PO, or Q to quit.
<span class="docEmphStrong">A</span>
Enter a PO number to add: <span class="docEmphStrong">18002</span>
Please enter A to add a purchase order,
P to process a PO, or Q to quit.
<span class="docEmphStrong">P</span>
PO #18002 popped
Please enter A to add a purchase order,
P to process a PO, or Q to quit.
<span class="docEmphStrong">P</span>
PO #17965 popped
Please enter A to add a purchase order,
P to process a PO, or Q to quit.
<span class="docEmphStrong">P</span>
stack already empty
Please enter A to add a purchase order,
P to process a PO, or Q to quit.
<span class="docEmphStrong">Q</span>
Bye

					  </pre></div><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
