<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Summary</h3>
<p class="docText">OOP
 emphasizes how a program represents data. The first step toward solving
 a programming problem by using the OOP approach is to describe the data
 in terms of its interface with the program, specifying how the data is 
used. Next, you need to design a class that implements the interface. 
Typically, private data members store the information, whereas public 
member functions, also called methods, provide the only access to the 
data. The class combines data and methods into one unit, and the private
 aspect accomplishes data hiding.</p>
<p class="docText">Usually, you separate
 a class declaration into two parts, typically kept in separate files. 
The class declaration proper goes into a header file, with the methods 
represented by function prototypes. The source code that defines the 
member functions goes into a methods file. This approach separates the 
description of the interface from the details of the implementation. In 
principle, you need to know only the public class interface to use the 
class. Of course, you can look at the implementation (unless it’s been 
supplied to you in compiled form only), but your program shouldn’t rely 
on details of the implementation, such as knowing that a particular 
value is stored as an <tt>int</tt>. As long as a 
program and a class communicate only through methods defining the 
interface, you are free to improve either part separately without 
worrying about unforeseen interactions.</p>
<p class="docText">A class is
 a user-defined type, and an object is an instance of a class. This 
means an object is a variable of that type or the equivalent of a 
variable, such as memory allocated by <tt>new</tt>
 according to the class specification. C++ tries to make user-defined 
types as similar as possible to standard types, so you can declare 
objects, pointers to objects, and arrays of objects. You can pass 
objects as arguments, return them as function return values, and assign 
one object to another of the same type. If you provide a constructor 
method, you can initialize objects when they are created. If you provide
 a destructor method, the program executes that method when the object 
expires.</p>
<p class="docText">Each object holds its own copies of the data portion of a class declaration, but they share the class methods. If <tt>mr_object</tt> is the name of a particular object and <tt>try_me()</tt> is a member function, you invoke the member function by using the dot membership operator: <tt>mr_object.try_me()</tt>. OOP terminology describes this function call as sending a <tt>try_me</tt> message to the <tt>mr_object</tt> object. Any reference to class data members in the <tt>try_me()</tt> method then applies to the data members of the <tt>mr_object</tt> object. Similarly, the function call <tt>i_object.try_me()</tt> accesses the data members of the <tt>i_object</tt> object.</p>
<p class="docText">If you want a member function
 to act on more than one object, you can pass additional objects to the 
method as arguments. If a method needs to refer explicitly to the object
 that evoked it, it can use the <tt>this</tt> pointer. The <tt>this</tt> pointer is set to the address of the evoking object, so <tt>*this</tt> is an alias for the object itself.</p>
<p class="docText">Classes are well matched 
to describing ADTs. The public member function interface provides the 
services described by an ADT, and the class’s private section and the 
code for the class methods provide an implementation that is hidden from
 clients of the class.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
