<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter Review</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Chapter Review</h3>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1.</b></td><td class="docText">What is a class?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2.</b></td><td class="docText">How does a class accomplish abstraction, encapsulation, and data hiding?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3.</b></td><td class="docText">What is the relationship between an object and a class?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4.</b></td><td class="docText">In what way, aside from being functions, are class function members different from class data members?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5.</b></td><td class="docText">Define
 a class to represent a bank account. Data members should include the 
depositor’s name, the account number (use a string), and the balance. 
Member functions should allow the following:
<ul><li><p class="docList">Creating an object and initializing it.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Displaying the depositor’s name, account number, and balance</p></li><li><p class="docList">Depositing an amount of money given by an argument</p></li><li><p class="docList">Withdrawing an amount of money given by an argument</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">Just show the class 
declaration, not the method implementations. (Programming Exercise 1 
provides you with an opportunity to write the implementation.)</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6.</b></td><td class="docText">When are class constructors called? When are class destructors called?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>7.</b></td><td class="docText">Provide code for a constructor for the bank account class from Chapter Review Question 5.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>8.</b></td><td class="docText">What is a default constructor? What is the advantage of having one?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9.</b></td><td class="docText">Modify the <tt>Stock</tt> class definition (the version in <tt>stock20.h</tt>)
 so that it has member functions that return the values of the 
individual data members. Note: A member that returns the company name 
should not provide a weapon for altering the array. That is, it can’t 
simply return a <tt>string</tt> reference. It could return a <tt>const</tt> reference.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>10.</b></td><td class="docText">What are <tt>this</tt> and <tt>*this</tt>?</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
