<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>11. Working with Classes</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h2 class="docChapterTitle" id="title-ID0EEVAK">11. Working with Classes</h2>
<p class="docText">In this chapter you’ll learn about the following:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">Operator overloading</p></li><li><p class="docList">Friend functions</p></li><li><p class="docList">Overloading the <tt>&lt;&lt;</tt> operator for output</p></li><li><p class="docList">State members</p></li><li><p class="docList">Using <tt>rand()</tt> to generate random values</p></li><li><p class="docList">Automatic conversions and type casts for classes</p></li><li><p class="docList">Class conversion functions</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">C++ classes are feature-rich, complex, and powerful. In Chapter 10,
 “Objects and Classes,” you began a journey toward object-oriented 
programming by learning to define and use a simple class. You saw how a 
class defines a data type by defining the type of data to be used to 
represent an object and by also defining, through member functions, the 
operations that can be performed with that data. And you learned about 
two special member functions, the constructor and the destructor, that 
manage creating and discarding objects made to a class specification. 
This chapter takes you a few steps further in the exploration of class 
properties, concentrating on class design techniques rather than on 
general principles. You’ll probably find some of the features covered 
here straightforward and some a bit more subtle. To best understand 
these new features, you should try the examples and experiment with 
them: What happens if you use a regular argument instead of a reference 
argument for this function? What happens if you leave something out of a
 destructor? Don’t be afraid to make mistakes; usually you can learn 
more from unraveling an error than by doing something correctly but by 
rote. (However, don’t assume that a maelstrom of mistakes inevitably 
leads to incredible insight.) In the end, you’ll be rewarded with a 
fuller understanding of how C++ works and of what C++ can do for you.</p>
<p class="docText">This chapter starts with operator overloading, which lets you use standard C++ operators such as <tt>=</tt> and <tt>+</tt>
 with class objects. Then it examines friends, the C++ mechanism for 
letting nonmember functions access private data. Finally, it looks at 
how you can instruct C++ to perform automatic type conversions with classes. As you go through this chapter and Chapter 12,
 “Classes and Dynamic Memory Allocation,” you’ll gain a greater 
appreciation of the roles class constructors and class destructors play.
 Also you’ll see some of the stages you may go through as you develop 
and improve a class design.</p>
<p class="docText">One difficulty with learning 
C++, at least by the time you’ve gotten this far into the subject, is 
that there is an awful lot to remember. And it’s unreasonable to expect 
to remember it all until you’ve logged enough experience on which to 
hang your memories. Learning C++, in this respect, is like learning a 
feature-laden word processor or spreadsheet program. No one feature is 
that daunting, but, in practice, most people really know well only those
 features they use regularly, such as searching for text or italicizing.
 You may recall having read somewhere how to generate alternative 
characters or create a table of contents, but those skills probably 
won’t be part of your daily repertoire until you face a situation in 
which you need them frequently. Probably the best approach to absorbing 
the wealth of material in this chapter is to begin incorporating just 
some of these new features into your own C++ programming. As your 
experiences enhance your understanding and appreciation of these 
features, you can begin adding other C++ features. As Bjarne Stroustrup,
 the creator of C++, suggested at a C++ conference for professional 
programmers: “Ease yourself into the language. Don’t feel you have to 
use all of the features, and don’t try to use them all on the first 
day.”</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
