<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Operator Overloading</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Operator Overloading</h3>
<p class="docText">Let’s look at a technique for giving object operations a prettier look. <span class="docEmphasis">Operator overloading</span> is an example of C++ polymorphism. In Chapter 8,
 “Adventures in Functions,” you saw how C++ enables you to define 
several functions that have the same name, provided that they have 
different signatures (argument lists). That is called <span class="docEmphasis">function overloading</span>, or <span class="docEmphasis">functional polymorphism</span>.
 Its purpose is to let you use the same function name for the same basic
 operation, even though you apply the operation to different data types.
 (Imagine how awkward English would be if you had to use a different 
verb form for each different type of object—for example, lift_lft your 
left foot, but lift_sp your spoon.) Operator overloading extends the 
overloading concept to operators, letting you assign multiple meanings 
to C++ operators. Actually, many C++ (and C) operators already are 
overloaded. For example, the <tt>*</tt> operator, when applied to an address, yields the value stored at that address. But applying <tt>*</tt> to two numbers yields the product of the values. C++ uses the number and type of operands to decide which action to take.</p>
<p class="docText">C++ lets you extend operator overloading to user-defined types, permitting you, say, to use the <tt>+</tt>
 symbol to add two objects. Again, the compiler uses the number and type
 of operands to determine which definition of addition to use. 
Overloaded operators can often make code look more natural. For example,
 a common computing task is adding two arrays. Usually, this winds up 
looking like the following <tt>for</tt> loop:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>for (int i = 0; i &lt; 20; i++)
       evening[i] = sam[i] + janet[i];  // add element by element</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">But in C++, you can define a class that represents arrays and that overloads the <tt>+</tt> operator so that you can do this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>evening = sam + janet;                 // add two array objects</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This simple addition notation conceals the mechanics and emphasizes what is essential, and that is another goal of OOP.</p>
<p class="docText">To overload an operator, you use a special function form called an <span class="docEmphasis">operator function</span>. An operator function has the following form, where <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>op</tt></span> is the symbol for the operator being overloaded:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>operator<span class="docEmphasis">op</span>(<span class="docEmphasis">argument-list</span>)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">For example, <tt>operator+()</tt> overloads the <tt>+</tt> operator and <tt>operator*()</tt> overloads the <tt>*</tt> operator. The <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>op</tt></span> has to be a valid C++ operator; you can’t just make up a new symbol. For example, you can’t have an <tt>operator@()</tt> function because C++ has no <tt>@</tt> operator. But the <tt>operator[]()</tt> function would overload the <tt>[]</tt> operator because <tt>[]</tt> is the array-indexing operator. Suppose, for example, that you have a <tt>Salesperson</tt> class for which you define an <tt>operator+()</tt> member function to overload the <tt>+</tt> operator so that it adds sales figures of one salesperson object to another. Then, if <tt>district2</tt>, <tt>sid</tt>, and <tt>sara</tt> are all objects of the <tt>Salesperson</tt> class, you can write this equation:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>district2 = sid + sara;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The compiler, recognizing the operands as belonging to the <tt>Salesperson</tt> class, replaces the operator with the corresponding operator function:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>district2 = sid.operator+(sara);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The function then uses the <tt>sid</tt> object implicitly (because it invoked the method) and the <tt>sara</tt>
 object explicitly (because it’s passed as an argument) to calculate the
 sum, which it then returns. Of course, the nice part is that you can 
use the nifty <tt>+</tt> operator notation instead of the clunky function notation.</p>
<p class="docText">C++ imposes some 
restrictions on operator overloading, but they’re easiest to understand 
after you’ve seen how overloading works. So let’s develop a few examples
 to clarify the process and then discuss the limitations.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
