<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Introducing Friends</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Introducing Friends</h3>
<p class="docText">As you’ve seen, C++ controls 
access to the private portions of a class object. Usually, public class 
methods serve as the only access, but sometimes this restriction is too 
rigid to fit particular programming problems. In such cases, C++ 
provides another form of access: the <span class="docEmphasis">friend</span>. Friends come in three varieties:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">Friend functions</p></li><li><p class="docList">Friend classes</p></li><li><p class="docList">Friend member functions</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">By making a function a 
friend to a class, you allow the function the same access privileges 
that a member function of the class has. We’ll look into friend 
functions now, leaving the other two varieties to Chapter 15, “Friends, Exceptions, and More.”</p>
<p class="docText">Before seeing how to make 
friends, let’s look into why they might be needed. Often, overloading a 
binary operator (that is, an operator with two arguments) for a class 
generates a need for friends. Multiplying a <tt>Time</tt> object by a real number provides just such a situation, so let’s study that case.</p>
<p class="docText">In the previous <tt>Time</tt> 
class example, the overloaded multiplication operator is different from 
the other two overloaded operators in that it combines two different 
types. That is, the addition and subtraction operators each combine two <tt>Time</tt> values, but the multiplication operator combines a <tt>Time</tt> value with a <tt>double</tt> value. This restricts how the operator can be used. Remember, the left operand is the invoking object. That is,</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>A = B * 2.75;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">translates to the following member function call:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>A = B.operator*(2.75);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">But what about the following statement?</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>A = 2.75 * B;     // cannot correspond to a member function</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Conceptually, <tt>2.75 * B</tt> should be the same as <tt>B * 2.75</tt>, but the first expression cannot correspond to a member function because <tt>2.75</tt> is not a type <tt>Time</tt> object. Remember, the left operand is the invoking object, but <tt>2.75</tt> is not an object. So the compiler cannot replace the expression with a member function call.</p>
<p class="docText">One way around this difficulty is to tell everyone (and to remember yourself) that you can only write <tt>B * 2.75</tt> but never write <tt>2.75 * B</tt>. This is a server-friendly, client-beware solution, and that’s not what OOP is about.</p>
<p class="docText">However, there is 
another possibility—using a nonmember function. (Remember, most 
operators can be overloaded using either member or nonmember functions.)
 A nonmember function is not invoked by an object; instead, any values 
it uses, including objects, are explicit arguments. Thus, the compiler 
could match the expression</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>A = 2.75 * B;     // cannot correspond to a member function</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">to the following nonmember function call:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>A = operator*(2.75, B);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The function would have this prototype:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Time operator*(double m, const Time &amp; t);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">With the nonmember overloaded 
operator function, the left operand of an operator expression 
corresponds to the first argument of the operator function, and the 
right operand corresponds to the second argument. Meanwhile, the 
original member function handles operands in the opposite order—that is,
 a <tt>Time</tt> value multiplied by a <tt>double</tt> value.</p>
<p class="docText">Using a nonmember function solves the problem of getting the operands in the desired order (first <tt>double</tt> and then <tt>Time</tt>),
 but it raises a new problem: Nonmember functions can’t directly access 
private data in a class. Well, at least ordinary nonmember functions 
lack access. But there is a special category of nonmember functions, 
called <span class="docEmphasis">friends</span>, that can access private members of a class.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EWBBK">Creating Friends</h4>
<p class="docText">The first step toward 
creating a friend function is to place a prototype in the class 
declaration and prefix the declaration with the keyword <tt>friend</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedWidth">friend Time operator*(double m, const Time &amp; t);  // goes in class declaration

					  </pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This prototype has two implications:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">Although the <tt>operator*()</tt>
 function is declared in the class declaration, it is not a member 
function. So it isn’t invoked by using the membership operator.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Although the <tt>operator*()</tt> function is not a member function, it has the same access rights as a member function.</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">The second step is to write the function definition. Because it is not a member function, you don’t use the <tt>Time::</tt> qualifier. Also you don’t use the <tt>friend</tt> keyword in the definition. The definition should look like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Time operator*(double m, const Time &amp; t)  // friend not used in definition
{
    Time result;
    long totalminutes = t.hours * mult * 60 +t. minutes * mult;
    result.hours = totalminutes / 60;
    result.minutes = totalminutes % 60;
    return result;
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">With this declaration and definition, the statement</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>A = 2.75 * B;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">translates to the following and invokes the nonmember friend function just defined:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>A = operator*(2.75, B);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In short, a friend function to a class is a nonmember function that has the same access rights as a member function.</p>
<p></p><div class="box">
<h2 class="docSidebarTitle">Are Friends Unfaithful to OOP?</h2>
<p class="docText">At first glance, it might seem 
that friends violate the OOP principle of data hiding because the friend
 mechanism allows nonmember functions to access private data. However, 
that’s an overly narrow view. Instead, you should think of friend 
functions as part of an extended interface for a class. For example, 
from a conceptual point of view, multiplying a <tt>double</tt> by a <tt>Time</tt> value is pretty much the same as multiplying a <tt>Time</tt> value by a <tt>double</tt>.
 That the first requires a friend function whereas the second can be 
done with a member function is the result of C++ syntax, not of a deep 
conceptual difference. By using both a friend function and a class 
method, you can express either operation with the same user interface. 
Also keep in mind that only a class declaration can decide which 
functions are friends, so the class declaration still controls which 
functions access private data. In short, class methods and friends are 
simply two different mechanisms for expressing a class interface.</p>
</div><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">Actually, you can write 
this particular friend function as a non-friend by altering the 
definition so that it switches which value comes first in the 
multiplication:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Time operator*(double m, const Time &amp; t)
{
    return t * m;     // use t.operator*(m)
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The original version accessed <tt>t.minutes</tt> and <tt>t.hours</tt> explicitly, so it had to be a friend. This version only uses the <tt>Time</tt> object <tt>t</tt>
 as a whole, letting a member function handle the private values, so 
this version doesn’t have to be a friend. Nonetheless, there are reasons
 to make this version a friend, too. Most importantly, it ties the 
function in as part of the official class interface. Second, if you 
later find a need for the function to access private data directly, you 
only have to change the function definition and not the class prototype.</p>
<div class="docNote"><p class="docNoteTitle">Tip</p>
<p class="docText">If you want to overload an 
operator for a class and you want to use the operator with a nonclass 
term as the first operand, you can use a friend function to reverse the 
operand order.</p>
</div><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EQFBK">A Common Kind of Friend: Overloading the <tt>&lt;&lt;</tt> Operator</h4>
<p class="docText">One very useful feature of classes is that you can overload the <tt>&lt;&lt;</tt> operator so that you can use it with <tt>cout</tt>
 to display an object’s contents. In some ways, this overloading is a 
bit trickier than the earlier examples, so we’ll develop it in two steps
 instead of in one.</p>
<p class="docText">Suppose <tt>trip</tt> is a <tt>Time</tt> object. To display <tt>Time</tt> values, we’ve been using <tt>Show()</tt>. Wouldn’t it be nice, however, if you could do the following?</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>cout &lt;&lt; trip;  // make cout recognize Time class?</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">You can do this because <tt>&lt;&lt;</tt>
 is one of the C++ operators that can be overloaded. In fact, it already
 is heavily overloaded. In its most basic incarnation, the <tt>&lt;&lt;</tt> operator is one of C and C++’s bit manipulation operators; it shifts bits left in a value (see Appendix E). But the <tt>ostream</tt> class overloads the operator, converting it into an output tool. Recall that <tt>cout</tt> is an <tt>ostream</tt> object and that it is smart enough to recognize all the basic C++ types. That’s because the <tt>ostream</tt> class declaration includes an overloaded <tt>operator&lt;&lt;()</tt> definition for each of the basic types. That is, one definition uses an <tt>int</tt> argument, one uses a <tt>double</tt> argument, and so on. So one way to teach <tt>cout</tt> to recognize a <tt>Time</tt> object is to add a new function operator definition to the <tt>ostream</tt> class declaration. But it’s a dangerous idea to alter the <tt>iostream</tt> file and mess around with a standard interface. Instead, use the <tt>Time</tt> class declaration to teach the <tt>Time</tt> class how to use <tt>cout</tt>.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EEMBK">The First Version of Overloading <tt>&lt;&lt;</tt></h5>
<p class="docText">To teach the <tt>Time</tt> class to use <tt>cout</tt>, you can use a friend function. Why? Because a statement like the following uses two objects, with the <tt>ostream</tt> class object (<tt>cout</tt>) first:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>cout &lt;&lt; trip;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">If you use a <tt>Time</tt> member function to overload <tt>&lt;&lt;</tt>, the <tt>Time</tt> object would come first, as it did when you overloaded the <tt>*</tt> operator with a member function. That means you would have to use the <tt>&lt;&lt;</tt> operator this way:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>trip &lt;&lt; cout;   // if operator&lt;&lt;() were a Time member function</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This would be confusing. But by using a friend function, you can overload the operator this way:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>void operator&lt;&lt;(ostream &amp; os, const Time &amp; t)
{
    os &lt;&lt; t.hours &lt;&lt; " hours, " &lt;&lt; t.minutes &lt;&lt; " minutes";
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This lets you use</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>cout &lt;&lt; trip;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">to print data in the following format:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>4 hours, 23 minutes</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText"></p><p></p><div class="box">
<h2 class="docSidebarTitle">Friend or No Friend?</h2>
<p class="docText">The new <tt>Time</tt> class declaration makes the <tt>operator&lt;&lt;()</tt> function a friend function to the <tt>Time</tt> class. But this function, although not inimical to the <tt>ostream</tt> class, is not a friend to that class. The <tt>operator&lt;&lt;()</tt> function takes an <tt>ostream</tt> argument and a <tt>Time</tt>
 argument, so it might seem that this function has to be a friend to 
both classes. If you look at the code for the function, however, you’ll 
notice that the function accesses individual members of the <tt>Time</tt> object but only uses the <tt>ostream</tt> object as a whole. Because <tt>operator&lt;&lt;()</tt> accesses private <tt>Time</tt> object members directly, it has to be a friend to the <tt>Time</tt> class. But because it does not directly access private <tt>ostream</tt> object members, the function does not have to be a friend to the <tt>ostream</tt> class. That’s nice because it means you don’t have to tinker with the <tt>ostream</tt> definition.</p>
</div><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">Note that the new <tt>operator&lt;&lt;()</tt> definition uses the <tt>ostream</tt> reference <tt>os</tt> as its first argument. Normally, <tt>os</tt> refers to the <tt>cout</tt> object, as it does in the expression <tt>cout &lt;&lt; trip</tt>. But you could use the operator with other <tt>ostream</tt> objects, in which case <tt>os</tt> would refer to those objects.</p>
<p></p><div class="box">
<h2 class="docSidebarTitle">What? You Don’t Know of Any Other <tt>ostream</tt> Objects?</h2>
<p class="docText">Another <tt>ostream</tt> object is <tt>cerr</tt>,
 which routes output to the standard error stream, which, by default, is
 the display. But in Unix, Linux, and the Windows Command Line 
environment you can redirect the standard error stream to a file. Also 
recall that Chapter 6, “Branching Statements and Logical Operators,” introduces <tt>ofstream</tt> objects, which can be used to send output to a file. Through the magic of inheritance (see Chapter 13, “Class Inheritance”), <tt>ofstream</tt> objects can use <tt>ostream</tt> methods. Thus you can use the <tt>operator&lt;&lt;()</tt> definition to write <tt>Time</tt> data to files as well as to the screen. You just pass a suitably initialized <tt>ofstream</tt> object instead of <tt>cout</tt> as the first argument.</p>
</div><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">The call <tt>cout &lt;&lt; trip</tt> should use the <tt>cout</tt> object itself, not a copy, so the function passes the object as a reference instead of by value. Thus, the expression <tt>cout &lt;&lt; trip</tt> causes <tt>os</tt> to be an alias for <tt>cout</tt>, and the expression <tt>cerr &lt;&lt; trip</tt> causes <tt>os</tt> to be an alias for <tt>cerr</tt>. The <tt>Time</tt>
 object can be passed by value or by reference because either form makes
 the object values available to the function. Again, passing by 
reference uses less memory and time than passing by value.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EPSBK">The Second Version of Overloading <tt>&lt;&lt;</tt></h5>
<p class="docText">The implementation just presented has a problem. Statements such as this work fine:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>cout &lt;&lt; trip;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">But the implementation doesn’t allow you to combine the redefined <tt>&lt;&lt;</tt> operator with the ones <tt>cout</tt> normally uses:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>cout &lt;&lt; "Trip time: " &lt;&lt; trip &lt;&lt; " (Tuesday)\n"; // can't do</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">To understand why this doesn’t work and what must be done to make it work, you first need to know a bit more about how <tt>cout</tt> operates. Consider the following statements:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int x = 5;
int y = 8;
cout &lt;&lt; x &lt;&lt; y;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">C++ reads the output statement from left to right, meaning it is equivalent to the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>(cout &lt;&lt; x) &lt;&lt; y;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>&lt;&lt;</tt> operator, as defined in <tt>iostream</tt>, takes an <tt>ostream</tt> object to its left. Clearly, the expression <tt>cout &lt;&lt; x</tt> satisfies that requirement because <tt>cout</tt> is an <tt>ostream</tt> object. But the output statement also requires that the whole expression <tt>(cout &lt;&lt; x)</tt> be a type <tt>ostream</tt> object because that expression is to the left of <tt>&lt;&lt; y</tt>. Therefore, the <tt>ostream</tt> class implements the <tt>operator&lt;&lt;()</tt> function so that it returns a reference to an <tt>ostream</tt> object. In particular, it returns a reference to the invoking object—<tt>cout</tt>, in this case. Thus, the expression <tt>(cout &lt;&lt; x)</tt> is itself the <tt>ostream</tt> object <tt>cout</tt>, and it can be used to the left of the <tt>&lt;&lt;</tt> operator.</p>
<p class="docText">You can take the same approach with the friend function. You just revise the <tt>operator&lt;&lt;()</tt> function so that it returns a reference to an <tt>ostream</tt> object:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>ostream &amp; operator&lt;&lt;(ostream &amp; os, const Time &amp; t)
{
    os &lt;&lt; t.hours &lt;&lt; " hours, " &lt;&lt; t.minutes &lt;&lt; " minutes";
    return os;
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Note that the return type is <tt>ostream &amp;</tt>. Recall that this means that the function returns a reference to an <tt>ostream</tt>
 object. Because a program passes an object reference to the function to
 begin with, the net effect is that the function’s return value is just 
the object passed to it. That is, the statement</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>cout &lt;&lt; trip;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">becomes the following function call:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>operator&lt;&lt;(cout, trip);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">And that call returns the <tt>cout</tt> object. So now the following statement does work:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>cout &lt;&lt; "Trip time: " &lt;&lt; trip &lt;&lt; " (Tuesday)\n"; // can do</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Let’s break this into separate steps to see how it works. First, the following invokes the particular <tt>ostream</tt> definition of <tt>&lt;&lt;</tt> that displays a string and returns the <tt>cout</tt> object:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>cout &lt;&lt; "Trip time: "</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">So the expression <tt>cout &lt;&lt; "Trip time: "</tt> displays the string and then is replaced by its return value, <tt>cout</tt>. This reduces the original statement to the following one:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>cout &lt;&lt; trip &lt;&lt; " (Tuesday)\n";</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Next, the program uses the <tt>Time</tt> declaration of <tt>&lt;&lt;</tt> to display the trip values and to return the <tt>cout</tt> object again. This reduces the statement to the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>cout &lt;&lt; " (Tuesday)\n";</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The program now finishes up by using the <tt>ostream</tt> definition of <tt>&lt;&lt;</tt> for strings to display the final string.</p>
<p class="docText">As a point of interest, this version of <tt>operator&lt;&lt;()</tt> also can be used for file output:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>#include &lt;fstream&gt;
...
ofstream fout;
fout.open("savetime.txt");
Time trip(12, 40);
fout &lt;&lt; trip;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The last statement becomes this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>operator&lt;&lt;(fout, trip);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">And as Chapter 8 points out, the properties of class inheritance allow an <tt>ostream</tt> reference to refer to <tt>ostream</tt> objects and to <tt>ofstream</tt> objects.</p>
<div class="docNote"><p class="docNoteTitle">Tip</p>
<p class="docText">In general, to overload the <tt>&lt;&lt;</tt> operator to display an object of class <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>c_name</tt></span>, you use a friend function with a definition in this form:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>ostream &amp; operator&lt;&lt;(ostream &amp; os, const <span class="docEmphasis">c_name</span> &amp; obj)
{
    os &lt;&lt; ... ;  // display object contents
    return os;
}</pre></div><br/>
</div><br/>
<p class="docText">Listing 11.10 shows the class definition as modified to include the two friend functions <tt>operator*()</tt> and <tt>operator&lt;&lt;()</tt>.
 It implements the first of these as an inline function because the code
 is so short. (When the definition is also the prototype, as in this 
case, you use the <tt>friend</tt> prefix.)</p>
<div class="docNote"><p class="docNoteTitle">Caution</p>
<p class="docText">You use the <tt>friend</tt>
 keyword only in the prototype found in the class declaration. You don’t
 use it in the function definition unless the definition is also the 
prototype.</p>
</div><br/>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EX2BK">Listing 11.10. <tt>mytime3.h</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// mytime3.h -- Time class with friends
#ifndef MYTIME3_H_
#define MYTIME3_H_
#include &lt;iostream&gt;

class Time
{
private:
    int hours;
    int minutes;
public:
    Time();
    Time(int h, int m = 0);
    void AddMin(int m);
    void AddHr(int h);
    void Reset(int h = 0, int m = 0);
    Time operator+(const Time &amp; t) const;
    Time operator-(const Time &amp; t) const;
    Time operator*(double n) const;
    friend Time operator*(double m, const Time &amp; t)
        { return t * m; }   // inline definition
    friend std::ostream &amp; operator&lt;&lt;(std::ostream &amp; os, const Time &amp; t);
};

#endif

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Listing 11.11 shows the revised set of definitions. Note again that the methods use the <tt>Time::</tt> qualifier, whereas the friend function does not. Also note that because <tt>mytime3.h</tt> includes <tt>iostream</tt> and provides the <tt>using</tt> declaration <tt>std::ostream</tt>, including <tt>mytime3.h</tt> in <tt>mytime3.cpp</tt> provides support for using <tt>ostream</tt> in the implementation file.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EO4BK">Listing 11.11. <tt>mytime3.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// mytime3.cpp  -- implementing Time methods
#include "mytime3.h"

Time::Time()
{
    hours = minutes = 0;
}

Time::Time(int h, int m )
{
    hours = h;
    minutes = m;
}

void Time::AddMin(int m)
{
    minutes += m;
    hours += minutes / 60;
    minutes %= 60;
}

void Time::AddHr(int h)
{
    hours += h;
}

void Time::Reset(int h, int m)
{
    hours = h;
    minutes = m;
}

Time Time::operator+(const Time &amp; t) const
{
    Time sum;
    sum.minutes = minutes + t.minutes;
    sum.hours = hours + t.hours + sum.minutes / 60;
    sum.minutes %= 60;
    return sum;
}

Time Time::operator-(const Time &amp; t) const
{
    Time diff;
    int tot1, tot2;
    tot1 = t.minutes + 60 * t.hours;
    tot2 = minutes + 60 * hours;
    diff.minutes = (tot2 - tot1) % 60;
    diff.hours = (tot2 - tot1) / 60;
    return diff;
}

Time Time::operator*(double mult) const
{
    Time result;
    long totalminutes = hours * mult * 60 + minutes * mult;
    result.hours = totalminutes / 60;
    result.minutes = totalminutes % 60;
    return result;
}

std::ostream &amp; operator&lt;&lt;(std::ostream &amp; os, const Time &amp; t)
{
    os &lt;&lt; t.hours &lt;&lt; " hours, " &lt;&lt; t.minutes &lt;&lt; " minutes";
    return os;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Listing 11.12 shows a sample program. Technically, <tt>usetime3.cpp</tt> doesn’t have to include <tt>iostream</tt> because <tt>mytime3.h</tt> already includes that file. However, as a user of the <tt>Time</tt>
 class, you don’t necessarily know which files are included in the class
 code, so you would take the responsibility of declaring those header 
files that you know your part of the code needs.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EKBCK">Listing 11.12. <tt>usetime3.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>//usetime3.cpp -- using the fourth draft of the Time class
// compile usetime3.cpp and mytime3.cpp together
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include "mytime3.h"

int main()
{
   using std::cout;
   using std::endl;
   Time aida(3, 35);
   Time tosca(2, 48);
   Time temp;

   cout &lt;&lt; "Aida and Tosca:\n";
   cout &lt;&lt; aida&lt;&lt;"; " &lt;&lt; tosca &lt;&lt; endl;
   temp = aida + tosca;     // operator+()
   cout &lt;&lt; "Aida + Tosca: " &lt;&lt; temp &lt;&lt; endl;
   temp = aida* 1.17;  // member operator*()
   cout &lt;&lt; "Aida * 1.17: " &lt;&lt; temp &lt;&lt; endl;
   cout &lt;&lt; "10.0 * Tosca: " &lt;&lt; 10.0 * tosca &lt;&lt; endl;

   return 0;
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here is the output of the program in Listings 11.10, 11.11, and 11.12:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Aida and Tosca:
3 hours, 35 minutes; 2 hours, 48 minutes
Aida + Tosca: 6 hours, 23 minutes
Aida * 1.17: 4 hours, 11 minutes
10.0 * Tosca: 28 hours, 0 minutes</pre></div><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
