<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Overloaded Operators: Member Versus Nonmember Functions</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Overloaded Operators: Member Versus Nonmember Functions</h3>
<p class="docText">For many operators, you have a
 choice between using member functions or nonmember functions to 
implement operator overloading. Typically, the nonmember version is a 
friend function so that it can directly access the private data for a class. For example, consider the addition operator for the <tt>Time</tt> class. It has this prototype in the <tt>Time</tt> class declaration:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Time operator+(const Time &amp; t) const; // member version</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Instead, the class could use the following prototype:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>// nonmember version
friend Time operator+(const Time &amp; t1, const Time &amp; t2);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The addition operator requires two operands. For the member function version, one is passed implicitly via the <tt>this</tt> pointer and the second is passed explicitly as a function argument. For the friend version, both are passed as arguments.</p>
<div class="docNote"><p class="docNoteTitle">Note</p>
<p class="docText">A nonmember version of an 
overloaded operator function requires as many formal parameters as the 
operator has operands. A member version of the same operator requires 
one fewer parameter because one operand is passed implicitly as the 
invoking object.</p>
</div><br/>
<p class="docText">Either of these two prototypes matches the expression <tt>T2 + T3</tt>, where <tt>T2</tt> and <tt>T3</tt> are type <tt>Time</tt> objects. That is, the compiler can convert the statement</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>T1 = T2 + T3;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">to either of the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>T1 = T2.operator+(T3);    // member function
T1 = operator+(T2, T3);   // nonmember function</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Keep in mind that you must 
choose one or the other form when defining a given operator, but not 
both. Because both forms match the same expression, defining both forms 
is an ambiguity error, leading to a compilation error.</p>
<p class="docText">Which form, then, is it best
 to use? For some operators, as mentioned earlier, the member function 
is the only valid choice. Otherwise, it often doesn’t make much 
difference. Sometimes, depending on the class design, the nonmember 
version may have an advantage, particularly if you have defined type 
conversions for the class. The section “Conversions and Friends,” near the end of this chapter, discusses this situation further.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
