<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Automatic Conversions and Type Casts for Classes</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Automatic Conversions and Type Casts for Classes</h3>
<p class="docText">The next topic on the class 
menu is type conversion. We’ll look into how C++ handles conversions to 
and from user-defined types. To set the stage, let’s first review how 
C++ handles conversions for its built-in types. When you make a 
statement that assigns a value of one standard type to a variable of 
another standard type, C++ automatically converts the value to the same 
type as the receiving variable, provided that the two types are 
compatible. For example, the following statements all generate numeric 
type conversions:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>long count = 8;      // int value 8 converted to type long
double time = 11;    // int value 11 converted to type double
int side = 3.33;     // double value 3.33 converted to type int 3</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">These assignments work 
because C++ recognizes that the diverse numeric types all represent the 
same basic thing—a number—and because C++ incorporates built-in rules 
for making the conversions. Recall from Chapter 3, “Dealing with Data,” however, that you can lose some precision in these conversions. For example, assigning <tt>3.33</tt> to the <tt>int</tt> variable <tt>side</tt> results in <tt>side</tt> getting the value <tt>3</tt>, losing the <tt>0.33</tt> part.</p>
<p class="docText">The C++ language does not 
automatically convert types that are not compatible. For example, the 
following statement fails because the left side is a pointer type, 
whereas the right side is a number:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int * p = 10;  // type clash</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">And
 even though a computer may represent an address internally with an 
integer, integers and pointers are conceptually quite different. For 
example, you wouldn’t square a pointer. However, when automatic 
conversions fail, you may use a type cast:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int * p = (int *) 10;  // ok, p and (int *) 10 both pointers</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This sets a pointer to the address <tt>10</tt> by type casting <tt>10</tt> to type pointer-to-<tt>int</tt> (that is, type <tt>int *</tt>). Whether this assignment makes sense is another matter.</p>
<p class="docText">You may define a class 
sufficiently related to a basic type or to another class that it makes 
sense to convert from one form to another. In such a case, you can tell 
C++ how to make such conversions automatically or, perhaps, via a type 
cast. To see how that works, you can recast the pounds-to-stone program 
from Chapter 3
 into class form. First, you need to design an appropriate type. 
Fundamentally, you’re representing one thing (a weight) two ways (pounds
 and stone). A class provides an excellent way to incorporate two 
representations of one concept into a single entity. Therefore, it makes
 sense to place both representations of weight into the same class and 
then provide class methods for expressing the weight in different forms.
 Listing 11.16 provides the class header.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ESKBK">Listing 11.16. <tt>stonewt.h</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>// stonewt.h -- definition for the Stonewt class
#ifndef STONEWT_H_
#define STONEWT_H_
class Stonewt
{
private:
    enum {Lbs_per_stn = 14};      // pounds per stone
    int stone;                    // whole stones
    double pds_left;              // fractional pounds
    double pounds;                // entire weight in pounds
public:
    Stonewt(double lbs);          // constructor for double pounds
    Stonewt(int stn, double lbs); // constructor for stone, lbs
    Stonewt();                    // default constructor
    ~Stonewt();
    void show_lbs() const;        // show weight in pounds format
    void show_stn() const;        // show weight in stone format
};
#endif</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">As mentioned in Chapter 10, <tt>enum</tt>
 provides a convenient way to define class-specific constants, provided 
that they are integers. Or you could use the following alternative:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>static const int Lbs_per_stn = 14;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Note that the <tt>Stonewt</tt> class has three constructors. They allow you to initialize a <tt>Stonewt</tt> object to a floating-point number of pounds or to a combination of stone and pounds. Or you can create a <tt>Stonewt</tt> object without initializing it:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Stonewt blossem(132.5);   // weight = 132.5 pounds
Stonewt buttercup(10, 2); // weight = 10 stone, 2 pounds
Stonewt bubbles;          // weight = default value</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The class doesn’t really need 
to declare a destructor because the automatic default constructor is 
fine for this case. On the other hand, providing an explicit declaration
 prepares you for the future, when you will have to define constructors.</p>
<p class="docText">Also the <tt>Stonewt</tt> 
class provides two display functions. One displays the weight in pounds,
 and the other displays the weight in stone and pounds. Listing 11.17
 shows the class methods implementation. Note that each constructor 
assigns values to all three private members. Thus, creating a <tt>Stonewt</tt> object automatically sets both representations of weight.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EINBK">Listing 11.17. <tt>stonewt.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// stonewt.cpp -- Stonewt methods
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
using std::cout;
#include "stonewt.h"

// construct Stonewt object from double value
Stonewt::Stonewt(double lbs)
{
    stone = int (lbs) / Lbs_per_stn;    // integer division
    pds_left = int (lbs) % Lbs_per_stn + lbs - int(lbs);
    pounds = lbs;
}

// construct Stonewt object from stone, double values
Stonewt::Stonewt(int stn, double lbs)
{
    stone = stn;
    pds_left = lbs;
    pounds =  stn * Lbs_per_stn +lbs;
}

Stonewt::Stonewt()          // default constructor, wt = 0
{
    stone = pounds = pds_left = 0;
}

Stonewt::~Stonewt()         // destructor
{
}

// show weight in stones
void Stonewt::show_stn() const
{
    cout &lt;&lt; stone &lt;&lt; " stone, " &lt;&lt; pds_left &lt;&lt; " pounds\n";
}

// show weight in pounds
void Stonewt::show_lbs() const
{
    cout &lt;&lt; pounds &lt;&lt; " pounds\n";
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Because a <tt>Stonewt</tt> object represents a single weight, it makes sense to provide ways to convert an integer or a floating-point value to a <tt>Stonewt</tt>
 object. And you have already done so! In C++, any constructor that 
takes a single argument acts as a blueprint for converting a value of 
that argument type to the class type. Thus the following constructor 
serves as instructions for converting a type <tt>double</tt> value to a type <tt>Stonewt</tt> value:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Stonewt(double lbs);  // template for double-to-Stonewt conversion</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">That is, you can write code like the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Stonewt myCat;        // create a Stonewt object
myCat = 19.6;         // use Stonewt(double) to convert 19.6 to Stonewt</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The program uses the <tt>Stonewt(double)</tt> constructor to construct a temporary <tt>Stonewt</tt> object, using <tt>19.6</tt> as the initialization value. Then memberwise assignment copies the contents of the temporary object into <tt>myCat</tt>. This process is termed an <span class="docEmphasis">implicit conversion</span> because it happens automatically, without the need of an explicit type cast.</p>
<p class="docText">Only a constructor that can 
be used with just one argument works as a conversion function. The 
following constructor has two arguments, so it cannot be used to convert
 types:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Stonewt(int stn, double lbs);  // not a conversion function</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">However, it would act as a guide to <tt>int</tt><a name="second parameter"></a> conversion if it provided a default value for the second parameter:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Stonewt(int stn, double lbs = 0);  // int-to-Stonewt conversion</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Having a constructor work as 
an automatic type-conversion function seems like a nice feature. As 
programmers acquired more experience working with C++, however, they 
found that the automatic aspect isn’t always desirable because it can 
lead to unexpected conversions. So C++ added a new keyword, <tt>explicit</tt>, to turn off the automatic aspect. That is, you can declare the constructor this way:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>explicit Stonewt(double lbs);   // no implicit conversions allowed</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This turns off implicit 
conversions such as the preceding example but still allows explicit 
conversions—that is, conversions using explicit type casts:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedWidth">Stonewt myCat;          // create a Stonewt object
myCat = 19.6;           // not valid if Stonewt(double) is declared as explicit
mycat = Stonewt(19.6);  // ok, an explicit conversion
mycat = (Stonewt) 19.6; // ok, old form for explicit typecast

					  </pre></div><br/>
<div class="docNote"><p class="docNoteTitle">Note</p>
<p class="docText">A
 C++ constructor that contains one argument defines a type conversion 
from the argument type to the class type. If the constructor is 
qualified with the keyword <tt>explicit</tt>, the constructor is used for explicit conversions only; otherwise, it is also used for implicit conversions.</p>
</div><br/>
<p class="docText">When does the compiler use the <tt>Stonewt(double)</tt> function? If the keyword <tt>explicit</tt> is used in the declaration, <tt>Stonewt(double)</tt> is used only for an explicit type cast; otherwise, it is also used for the following implicit conversions:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">When you initialize a <tt>Stonewt</tt> object to a type <tt>double</tt> value</p></li><li><p class="docList">When you assign a type <tt>double</tt> value to a <tt>Stonewt</tt> object</p></li><li><p class="docList">When you pass a type <tt>double</tt> value to a function that expects a <tt>Stonewt</tt> argument</p></li><li><p class="docList">When a function that’s declared to return a <tt>Stonewt</tt> value tries to return a <tt>double</tt> value</p></li><li><p class="docList">When any of the preceding situations use a built-in type that can unambiguously be converted to type <tt>double</tt></p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">Let’s look at the last point in more detail. The argument-matching process provided by function prototyping lets the <tt>Stonewt(double)</tt> constructor act as conversions for other numerical types. That is, both of the following statements work by first converting <tt>int</tt> to <tt>double</tt> and then using the <tt>Stonewt(double)</tt> constructor:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Stonewt Jumbo(7000);   // uses Stonewt(double), converting int to double
Jumbo = 7300;          // uses Stonewt(double), converting int to double</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">However, this two-step conversion process works only if there is an unambiguous choice. That is, if the class also defined a <tt>Stonewt(long)</tt> constructor, the compiler would reject these statements, probably pointing out that an <tt>int</tt> can be converted to either a <tt>long</tt> or a <tt>double</tt>, so the call is ambiguous.</p>
<p class="docText">Listing 11.18 uses the class constructors to initialize some <tt>Stonewt</tt> objects and to handle type conversions. Be sure to compile Listing 11.17 along with Listing 11.18.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EXXBK">Listing 11.18. <tt>stone.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// stone.cpp -- user-defined conversions
// compile with stonewt.cpp
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
using std::cout;
#include "stonewt.h"
void display(const Stonewt &amp; st, int n);
int main()
{
    Stonewt incognito = 275; // uses constructor to initialize
    Stonewt wolfe(285.7);    // same as Stonewt wolfe = 285.7;
    Stonewt taft(21, 8);

    cout &lt;&lt; "The celebrity weighed ";
    incognito.show_stn();
    cout &lt;&lt; "The detective weighed ";
    wolfe.show_stn();
    cout &lt;&lt; "The President weighed ";
    taft.show_lbs();
    incognito = 276.8;      // uses constructor for conversion
    taft = 325;             // same as taft = Stonewt(325);
    cout &lt;&lt; "After dinner, the celebrity weighed ";
    incognito.show_stn();
    cout &lt;&lt; "After dinner, the President weighed ";
    taft.show_lbs();
    display(taft, 2);
    cout &lt;&lt; "The wrestler weighed even more.\n";
    display(422, 2);
    cout &lt;&lt; "No stone left unearned\n";
    return 0;
}

void display(const Stonewt &amp; st, int n)
{
    for (int i = 0; i &lt; n; i++)
    {
        cout &lt;&lt; "Wow! ";
        st.show_stn();
    }
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here is the output of the program in Listing 11.18:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>The celebrity weighed 19 stone, 9 pounds
The detective weighed 20 stone, 5.7 pounds
The President weighed 302 pounds
After dinner, the celebrity weighed 19 stone, 10.8 pounds
After dinner, the President weighed 325 pounds
Wow! 23 stone, 3 pounds
Wow! 23 stone, 3 pounds
The wrestler weighed even more.
Wow! 30 stone, 2 pounds
Wow! 30 stone, 2 pounds
No stone left unearned</pre></div><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EUYBK">Program Notes</h4>
<p class="docText">Note that when a constructor has a single argument, you can use the following form when initializing a class object:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>// a syntax for initializing a class object when
// using a constructor with one argument
Stonewt incognito = 275;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This is equivalent to the other two forms shown earlier:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>// standard syntax forms for initializing class objects
Stonewt incognito(275);
Stonewt incognito = Stonewt(275);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">However, the last two forms can also be used with constructors that have multiple arguments.</p>
<p class="docText">Next, note the following two assignments from Listing 11.18:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>incognito = 276.8;
taft = 325;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The first of these assignments uses the constructor with a type <tt>double</tt> argument to convert <tt>276.8</tt> to a type <tt>Stonewt</tt> value. This sets the <tt>pounds</tt> member of <tt>incognito</tt> to <tt>276.8</tt>. Because it uses the constructor, this assignment also sets the <tt>stone</tt> and <tt>pds_left</tt> members of the class. Similarly, the second assignment converts a type <tt>int</tt> value to type <tt>double</tt> and then uses <tt>Stonewt(double)</tt> to set all three member values in the process.</p>
<p class="docText">Finally, note the following function call:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>display(422, 2);    // convert 422 to double, then to Stonewt</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The prototype for <tt>display()</tt> indicates that its first argument should be the <tt>Stonewt</tt> object. (Either a <tt>Stonewt</tt> or a <tt>Stonewt &amp;</tt> formal parameter matches a <tt>Stonewt</tt> argument.) Confronted with an <tt>int</tt> argument, the compiler looks for a <tt>Stonewt(int)</tt> constructor to convert the <tt>int</tt> to the desired <tt>Stonewt</tt> type. Failing to find that constructor, the compiler looks for a constructor with some other built-in type to which an <tt>int</tt> can be converted. The <tt>Stonewt(double)</tt> constructor fits the bill. So the compiler converts <tt>int</tt> to <tt>double</tt> and then uses <tt>Stonewt(double)</tt> to convert the result to a <tt>Stonewt</tt> object.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ED5BK">Conversion Functions</h4>
<p class="docText">Listing 11.18 converts a number to a <tt>Stonewt</tt> object. Can you do the reverse? That is, can you convert a <tt>Stonewt</tt> object to a <tt>double</tt> value, as in the following?</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Stonewt wolfe(285.7);
double host = wolfe;  // ?? possible ??</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The answer is that you can do this—but not by using constructors. Constructors only provide for converting another type <span class="docEmphasis">to</span> the class type. To do the reverse, you have to use a special form of a C++ operator function called a <span class="docEmphasis">conversion function</span>.</p>
<p class="docText">Conversion
 functions are user-defined type casts, and you can use them the way you
 would use a type cast. For example, if you define a <tt>Stonewt</tt>-to-<tt>double</tt> conversion function, you can use the following conversions:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Stonewt wolfe(285.7);
double host = double (wolfe);      // syntax #1
double thinker = (double) wolfe;   // syntax #2</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Or you can let the compiler figure out what to do:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Stonewt wells(20, 3);
double star = wells;   // implicit use of conversion function</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The compiler, noting that the right side is type <tt>Stonewt</tt> and the left side is type <tt>double</tt>,
 looks to see if you’ve defined a conversion function that matches this 
description. (If it can’t find such a definition, the compiler generates
 an error message to the effect that it can’t assign a <tt>Stonewt</tt> to a <tt>double</tt>.)</p>
<p class="docText">So how do you create a conversion function? To convert to type <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>typeName</tt></span>, you use a conversion function in this form:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>operator <span class="docEmphasis">typeName</span>();</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Note the following points:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">The conversion function must be a class method.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The conversion function must not specify a return type.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The conversion function must have no arguments.</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">For example, a function to convert to type <tt>double</tt> would have this prototype:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>operator double();</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>typeName</tt></span> part (in this case <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>typeName</tt></span> is <tt>double</tt>)
 tells the conversion the type to which to convert, so no return type is
 needed. The fact that the function is a class method means it has to be
 invoked by a particular class object, and that tells the function which
 value to convert. Thus, the function doesn’t need arguments.</p>
<p class="docText">To add functions that convert <tt>stone_wt</tt> objects to type <tt>int</tt> and to type <tt>double</tt>, then, requires adding the following prototypes to the class declaration:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>operator int();
operator double();</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Listing 11.19 shows the modified class declaration.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ENDCK">Listing 11.19. <tt>stonewt1.h</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// stonewt1.h -- revised definition for the Stonewt class
#ifndef STONEWT1_H_
#define STONEWT1_H_
class Stonewt
{
private:
    enum {Lbs_per_stn = 14};      // pounds per stone
    int stone;                    // whole stones
    double pds_left;              // fractional pounds
    double pounds;                // entire weight in pounds
public:
    Stonewt(double lbs);          // construct from double pounds
    Stonewt(int stn, double lbs); // construct from stone, lbs
    Stonewt();                    // default constructor
    ~Stonewt();
    void show_lbs() const;        // show weight in pounds format
    void show_stn() const;        // show weight in stone format
// conversion functions
    operator int() const;
    operator double() const;
};
#endif

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Listing 11.20 shows Listing 11.18
 modified to include the definitions for these two conversion functions.
 Note that each function returns the desired value, even though there is
 no declared return type. Also note that the <tt>int</tt> conversion definition rounds to the nearest integer rather than truncating. For example, if <tt>pounds</tt> is <tt>114.4</tt>, then <tt>pounds + 0.5</tt> is <tt>114.9</tt>, and <tt>int (114.9)</tt> is <tt>114</tt>. But if <tt>pounds</tt> is <tt>114.6</tt>, <tt>pounds + 0.5</tt> is <tt>115.1</tt>, and <tt>int (115.1)</tt> is <tt>115</tt>.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EYFCK">Listing 11.20. <tt>stonewt1.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// stonewt1.cpp -- Stonewt class methods + conversion functions
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
using std::cout;
#include "stonewt1.h"

// construct Stonewt object from double value
Stonewt::Stonewt(double lbs)
{
    stone = int (lbs) / Lbs_per_stn;    // integer division
    pds_left = int (lbs) % Lbs_per_stn + lbs - int(lbs);
    pounds = lbs;
}

// construct Stonewt object from stone, double values
Stonewt::Stonewt(int stn, double lbs)
{
    stone = stn;
    pds_left = lbs;
    pounds =  stn * Lbs_per_stn +lbs;
}

Stonewt::Stonewt()          // default constructor, wt = 0
{
    stone = pounds = pds_left = 0;
}

Stonewt::~Stonewt()         // destructor
{
}

// show weight in stones
void Stonewt::show_stn() const
{
    cout &lt;&lt; stone &lt;&lt; " stone, " &lt;&lt; pds_left &lt;&lt; " pounds\n";
}

// show weight in pounds
void Stonewt::show_lbs() const
{
    cout &lt;&lt; pounds &lt;&lt; " pounds\n";
}

// conversion functions
Stonewt::operator int() const
{

    return int (pounds + 0.5);

}

Stonewt::operator double()const
{
    return pounds;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Listing 11.21 tests the new conversion functions. The assignment statement in the program uses an implicit conversion, whereas the final <tt>cout</tt> statement uses an explicit type cast. Be sure to compile Listing 11.20 along with Listing 11.21.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EQHCK">Listing 11.21. <tt>stone1.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>// stone1.cpp -- user-defined conversion functions
// compile with stonewt1.cpp
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include "stonewt1.h"

int main()
{
    using std::cout;
    Stonewt poppins(9,2.8);     // 9 stone, 2.8 pounds
    double p_wt = poppins;      // implicit conversion
    cout &lt;&lt; "Convert to double =&gt; ";
    cout &lt;&lt; "Poppins: " &lt;&lt; p_wt &lt;&lt; " pounds.\n";
    cout &lt;&lt; "Convert to int =&gt; ";
    cout &lt;&lt; "Poppins: " &lt;&lt; int (poppins) &lt;&lt; " pounds.\n";
    return 0;
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here’s the output from the program in Listings 11.19, 11.20, and 11.21, which shows the result of converting the type <tt>Stonewt</tt> object to type <tt>double</tt> and to type <tt>int</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Convert to double =&gt; Poppins: 128.8 pounds.
Convert to int =&gt; Poppins: 129 pounds.</pre></div><br/>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E6KCK">Applying Type Conversions Automatically</h5>
<p class="docText">Listing 11.21 uses <tt>int (poppins)</tt> with <tt>cout</tt>. Suppose that, instead, it omitted the explicit type cast:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>cout &lt;&lt; "Poppins: " &lt;&lt; poppins &lt;&lt; " pounds.\n";</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Would the program use an implicit conversion, as in the following statement?</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>double p_wt = poppins;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The answer is no. In the <tt>p_wt</tt> example, the context indicates that <tt>poppins</tt> should be converted to type <tt>double</tt>. But in the <tt>cout</tt> example, nothing indicates whether the conversion should be to <tt>int</tt> or to <tt>double</tt>.
 Facing this lack of information, the compiler would complain that you 
were using an ambiguous conversion. Nothing in the statement indicates 
what type to use.</p>
<p class="docText">Interestingly, if the class defined only the <tt>double</tt>
 conversion function, the compiler would accept the statement. That’s 
because with only one conversion possible, there is no ambiguity.</p>
<p class="docText">You can have a similar 
situation with assignment. With the current class declarations, the 
compiler rejects the following statement as being ambiguous:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>long gone = poppins;   // ambiguous</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In C++, you can assign both <tt>int</tt> and <tt>double</tt> values to a <tt>long</tt>
 variable, so the compiler legitimately can use either conversion 
function. The compiler doesn’t want the responsibility of choosing 
which. But if you eliminate one of the two conversion functions, the 
compiler accepts the statement. For example, suppose you omit the <tt>double</tt> definition. Then the compiler will use the <tt>int</tt> conversion to convert <tt>poppins</tt> to a type <tt>int</tt> value. Then it converts the <tt>int</tt> value to type <tt>long</tt> when assigning it to <tt>gone</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">When the class defines two or 
more conversions, you can still use an explicit type cast to indicate 
which conversion function to use. You can use either of these type cast 
notations:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>long gone = (double) poppins;  // use double conversion
long gone = int (poppins);     // use int conversion</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The first of these statements converts <tt>poppins</tt> weight to a <tt>double</tt> value, and then assignment converts the <tt>double</tt> value to type <tt>long</tt>. Similarly, the second statement converts <tt>poppins</tt> first to type <tt>int</tt> and then to <tt>long</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Like conversion 
constructors, conversion functions can be a mixed blessing. The problem 
with providing functions that make automatic, implicit conversions is 
that they may make conversions when you don’t expect them. Suppose, for 
example, that you happen to write the following code when you’re sleep 
deprived:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int ar[20];
...
Stonewt temp(14, 4);
...
int Temp = 1;
...
cout &lt;&lt; ar[temp] &lt;&lt; "!\n";  // used temp instead of Temp</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Normally, you’d expect the compiler to catch a blunder such as using an object instead of an integer as an array index. But the <tt>Stonewt</tt> class defines an <tt>operator int()</tt>, so the <tt>Stonewt</tt> object <tt>temp</tt> is converted to the <tt>int 200</tt>
 and be used as an array index. The moral is that often it’s best to use
 explicit conversions and exclude the possibility of implicit 
conversions. In C++98, the keyword <tt>explicit</tt>
 doesn’t work with conversion functions, but C++11 removes that 
limitation. So with C++11, you can declare a conversion operator as 
explicit:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>class Stonewt
{
...
// conversion functions
    explicit operator int() const;
    explicit operator double() const;
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">With these declarations in place, you would use a type cast to invoke the operators.</p>
<p class="docText">Another approach is to 
replace a conversion function with a nonconversion function that does 
the same task—but only if called explicitly. That is, you can replace</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Stonewt::operator int() { return int (pounds + 0.5); }</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">with</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int Stonewt::Stone_to_Int() { return int (pounds + 0.5); }</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This disallows the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int plb = poppins;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">But if you really need a conversion, it allows the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int plb = poppins.Stone_to_Int();</pre></div><br/>
<div class="docNote"><p class="docNoteTitle">Caution</p>
<p class="docText">You should use implicit conversion functions with care. Often a function that can only be invoked explicitly is the best choice.</p>
</div><br/>
<p class="docText">In summary, then, C++ provides the following type conversions for classes:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">A class 
constructor that has but a single argument serves as an instruction for 
converting a value of the argument type to the class type. For example, 
the <tt>Stonewt</tt> class constructor with a type <tt>int</tt> argument is invoked automatically when you assign a type <tt>int</tt> value to a <tt>Stonewt</tt> object. However, using <tt>explicit</tt> in the constructor declaration eliminates implicit conversions and allows only explicit conversions.</p></li><li><p class="docList">A special class member operator function called a <span class="docEmphasis">conversion function</span>
 serves as an instruction for converting a class object to some other 
type. The conversion function is a class member, has no declared return 
type, has no arguments, and is called <tt>operator</tt> <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>typeName</tt></span><tt>()</tt>, where <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>typeName</tt></span>
 is the type to which the object is to be converted. This conversion 
function is invoked automatically when you assign a class object to a 
variable of that type or use the type cast operator to that type.</p></li></ul>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EWUCK">Conversions and Friends</h4>
<p class="docText">Let’s bring addition to the <tt>Stonewt</tt> class. As mentioned in the discussion of the <tt>Time</tt>
 class, you can use either a member function or a friend function to 
overload addition. (To simplify matters, assume that no conversion 
functions of the <tt>operator double()</tt> form are defined.) You can implement addition with the following member function:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Stonewt Stonewt::operator+(const Stonewt &amp; st) const
{
    double pds = pounds + st.pounds;
    Stonewt sum(pds);
    return sum;
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Or you can implement addition as a friend function this way:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Stonewt operator+(const Stonewt &amp; st1, const Stonewt &amp; st2)
{
    double pds = st1.pounds + st2.pounds;
    Stonewt sum(pds);
    return sum;
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Remember, you can provide the method definition or the friend definition but not both. Either form lets you do the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Stonewt jennySt(9, 12);
Stonewt bennySt(12, 8);
Stonewt total;
total = jennySt + bennySt;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Also given the <tt>Stonewt(double)</tt> constructor, each form lets you do the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Stonewt jennySt(9, 12);
double kennyD = 176.0;
Stonewt total;
total = jennySt + kennyD;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">But only the friend function lets you do this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Stonewt jennySt(9, 12);
double pennyD = 146.0;
Stonewt total;
total = pennyD + jennySt;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">To see why, you can translate each addition into the corresponding function calls. First,</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>total = jennySt + bennySt;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">becomes</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>total = jennySt.operator+(bennySt);   // member function</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">or else</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>total = operator+(jennySt, bennySt);  // friend function</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In either case, the actual argument types match the formal arguments. Also the member function is invoked, as required, by a <tt>Stonewt</tt> object.</p>
<p class="docText">Next,</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>total = jennySt + kennyD;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">becomes</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>total = jennySt.operator+(kennyD);   // member function</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">or else</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>total = operator+(jennySt, kennyD);  // friend function</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Again, the member function is invoked, as required, by a <tt>Stonewt</tt> object. This time, in each case, one argument (<tt>kennyD</tt>) is type <tt>double</tt>, which invokes the <tt>Stonewt(double)</tt> constructor to convert the argument to a <tt>Stonewt</tt> object.</p>
<p class="docText">By the way, having an <tt>operator double()</tt>
 member function defined would create confusion at this point because 
that would create another option for interpretation. Instead of 
converting <tt>kennyD</tt> to <tt>double</tt> and performing <tt>Stonewt</tt> addition, the compiler could convert <tt>jennySt</tt> to <tt>double</tt> and perform <tt>double</tt> addition. Having too many conversion functions creates ambiguities.</p>
<p class="docText">Finally,</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>total = pennyD + jennySt;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">becomes</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>total = operator+(pennyD, jennySt);  // friend function</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here, both arguments are type <tt>double</tt>, which invokes the <tt>Stonewt(double)</tt> constructor to convert them to <tt>Stonewt</tt> objects.</p>
<p class="docText">However, the member function version wouldn’t be able to a<tt>dd jennySt</tt> to <tt>pennyD</tt>. Converting the addition syntax to a function call would look like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>total = pennyD.operator+(jennySt);   // not meaningful</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">But this is meaningless because only a class object can invoke a member function. C++ does not attempt to convert <tt>pennyD</tt> to a <tt>Stonewt</tt> object. Conversion takes place for member function arguments, not for member function invokers.</p>
<p class="docText">The lesson here is that defining 
addition as a friend makes it easier for a program to accommodate 
automatic type conversions. The reason is that both operands become 
function arguments, so function prototyping comes into play for both 
operands.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EF2CK">Choices in Implementing Addition</h5>
<p class="docText">Given that you want to add <tt>double</tt> quantities to <tt>Stonewt</tt>
 quantities, you have a couple choices. The first, as you just saw, is 
to define the following as a friend function and have the <tt>Stonewt(double)</tt> constructor handle conversions of type <tt>double</tt> arguments to type <tt>Stonewt</tt> arguments:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>operator+(const Stonewt &amp;, const Stonewt &amp;)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The second choice is to further overload the addition operator with functions that explicitly use one type <tt>double</tt> argument:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Stonewt operator+(double x);  // member function
friend Stonewt operator+(double x, Stonewt &amp; s);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">That way, the following statement exactly matches the <tt>operator+(double x)</tt> member function:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>total = jennySt + kennyD; // Stonewt + double</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">And the following statement exactly matches the <tt>operator+(double x, Stonewt &amp; s)</tt> friend function:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>total = pennyD + jennySt; // double + Stonewt</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Earlier, we did something similar for <tt>Vector</tt> multiplication.</p>
<p class="docText">Each choice has advantages. 
The first choice (relying on implicit conversions) results in a shorter 
program because you define fewer functions. That also implies less work 
for you and fewer chances to mess up. The disadvantage is the added 
overhead in time and memory needed to invoke the conversion constructor 
whenever a conversion is needed. The second choice (additional functions
 explicitly matching the types), however, is the mirror image. It makes 
for a longer program and more work on your part, but it runs a bit 
faster.</p>
<p class="docText">If your program makes intensive use of adding <tt>double</tt> values to <tt>Stonewt</tt>
 objects, it may pay to overload addition to handle such cases directly.
 If the program uses such addition only occasionally, it’s simpler to 
rely on automatic conversions, or if you want to be more careful, on 
explicit conversions.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
