<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Summary</h3>
<p class="docText">This chapter covers many 
important aspects of defining and using classes. Some of the material in
 this chapter may seem vague to you until your own experiences enrich 
your understanding.</p>
<p class="docText">Normally, the only way you can 
access private class members is by using a class method. C++ alleviates 
that restriction with friend functions. To make a function a friend 
function, you declare the function in the class declaration and preface 
the declaration with the keyword <tt>friend</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">C++ extends overloading to
 operators by letting you define special operator functions that 
describe how particular operators relate to a particular class. An 
operator function can be a class member function or a friend function. 
(A few operators can only be class member functions.) C++ lets you 
invoke an operator function either by calling the function or by using 
the overloaded operator with its usual syntax. An operator function for 
the operator <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>op</tt></span> has this form:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>operator<span class="docEmphasis">op</span>(<span class="docEmphasis">argument-list</span>)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis"><tt>argument-list</tt></span>
 represents operands for the operator. If the operator function is a 
class member function, then the first operand is the invoking object and
 isn’t part of <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>argument-list</tt></span>. For example, this chapter overloaded addition by defining an <tt>operator+()</tt> member function for the <tt>Vector</tt> class. If <tt>up</tt>, <tt>right</tt>, and <tt>result</tt> are three vectors, you can use either of the following statements to invoke vector addition:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>result = up.operator+(right);
result = up + right;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">For the second version, the fact that the operands <tt>up</tt> and <tt>right</tt> are type <tt>Vector</tt> tells C++ to use the <tt>Vector</tt> definition of addition.</p>
<p class="docText">When an operator function
 is a member function, the first operand is the object invoking the 
function. In the preceding statements, for example, the <tt>up</tt>
 object is the invoking object. If you want to define an operator 
function so that the first operand is not a class object, you must use a
 friend function. Then you can pass the operands to the function 
definition in whichever order you want.</p>
<p class="docText">One of the most common tasks for operator overloading is defining the <tt>&lt;&lt;</tt> operator so that it can be used in conjunction with the <tt>cout</tt> object to display an object’s contents. To allow an <tt>ostream</tt>
 object to be the first operand, you define the operator function as a 
friend. To allow the redefined operator to be concatenated with itself, 
you make the return type <tt>ostream &amp;</tt>. Here’s a general form that satisfies those requirements:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>ostream &amp; operator&lt;&lt;(ostream &amp; os, const <span class="docEmphasis">c_name</span> &amp; obj)
{
    os &lt;&lt; ... ;  // display object contents
    return os;
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">If, however, the class has 
methods that return values for the data members you want to display, you
 can use those methods instead of direct access in <tt>operator&lt;&lt;()</tt>. In that case, the function needn’t (and shouldn’t) be a friend.</p>
<p class="docText">C++ lets you establish 
conversions to and from class types. First, any class constructor that 
takes a single argument acts as a conversion function, converting values
 of the argument type to the class type. C++ invokes the constructor 
automatically if you assign a value of the argument type to an object. 
For example, suppose you have a <tt>String</tt> class with a constructor that takes a <tt>char *</tt> value as its sole argument. Then, if <tt>bean</tt> is a <tt>String</tt> object, you can use the following statement:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>bean = "pinto";   // converts type char * to type String</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">If, however, you precede the constructor declaration with the keyword <tt>explicit</tt>, the constructor can be used only for explicit conversions:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>bean = String("pinto");   // converts type char * to type String explicitly</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">To convert from a class to 
another type, you must define a conversion function and provide 
instruction about how to make the conversion. A conversion function must
 be a member function. If it is to convert to type <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>typeName</tt></span>, it should have the following prototype:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>operator <span class="docEmphasis">typeName()</span>;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Note that it must have 
no declared return type, must have no arguments, and must (despite 
having no declared return type) return the converted value. For example,
 a function to convert type <tt>Vector</tt> to type <tt>double</tt> would have this function form:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Vector::operator double()
{
    ...
    return a_double_value;
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Experience has shown that often it is better not to rely on such implicit conversion functions.</p>
<p class="docText">As you might have 
noticed, classes require much more care and attention to detail than do 
simple C-style structures. In return, they do much more for you.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
