<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Programming Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Programming Exercises</h3>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1.</b></td><td class="docText">Modify Listing 11.15
 so that it writes the successive locations of the random walker into a 
file. Label each position with the step number. Also have the program 
write the initial conditions (target distance and step size) and the 
summarized results to the file. The file contents might look like this:
<div class="docText"><pre>Target Distance: 100, Step Size: 20
0: (x,y) = (0, 0)
1: (x,y) = (-11.4715, 16.383)
2: (x,y) = (-8.68807, -3.42232)
...
26: (x,y) = (42.2919, -78.2594)
27: (x,y) = (58.6749, -89.7309)
After 27 steps, the subject has the following location:
(x,y) = (58.6749, -89.7309)
 or
(m,a) = (107.212, -56.8194)
Average outward distance per step = 3.97081</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2.</b></td><td class="docText">Modify the <tt>Vector</tt> class header and implementation files (Listings 11.13 and 11.14)
 so that the magnitude and angle are no longer stored as data 
components. Instead, they should be calculated on demand when the <tt>magval()</tt> and <tt>angval()</tt>
 methods are called. You should leave the public interface unchanged 
(the same public methods with the same arguments) but alter the private 
section, including some of the private method and the method 
implementations. Test the modified version with Listing 11.15, which should be left unchanged because the public interface of the <tt>Vector</tt> class is unchanged.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3.</b></td><td class="docText">Modify Listing 11.15
 so that instead of reporting the results of a single trial for a 
particular target/step combination, it reports the highest, lowest, and 
average number of steps for <span class="docEmphasis">N</span> trials, where <span class="docEmphasis">N</span> is an integer entered by the user.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4.</b></td><td class="docText">Rewrite the final <tt>Time</tt> class example (Listings 11.10, 11.11, and 11.12) so that all the overloaded operators are implemented using friend functions.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5.</b></td><td class="docText">Rewrite the <tt>Stonewt</tt> class (Listings 11.16 and 11.17)
 so that it has a state member that governs whether the object is 
interpreted in stone form, integer pounds form, or floating-point pounds
 form. Overload the <tt>&lt;&lt;</tt> operator to replace the <tt>show_stn()</tt> and <tt>show_lbs()</tt> methods. Overload the addition, subtraction, and multiplication operators so that one can add, subtract, and multiply <tt>Stonewt</tt> values. Test your class with a short program that uses all the class methods and friends.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6.</b></td><td class="docText">Rewrite the <tt>Stonewt</tt> class (Listings 11.16 and 11.17) so that it overloads all six relational operators. The operators should compare the <tt>pounds</tt> members and return a type <tt>bool</tt> value. Write a program that declares an array of six <tt>Stonewt</tt>
 objects and initializes the first three objects in the array 
declaration. Then it should use a loop to read in values used to set the
 remaining three array elements. Then it should report the smallest 
element, the largest element, and how many elements are greater or equal
 to 11 stone. (The simplest approach is to create a <tt>Stonewt</tt> object initialized to 11 stone and to compare the other objects with that object.)</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>7.</b></td><td class="docText">A
 complex number has two parts: a real part and an imaginary part. One 
way to write an imaginary number is this: (3.0, 4.0). Here 3.0 is the 
real part and 4.0 is the imaginary part. Suppose a = (A,Bi) and c = 
(C,Di). Here are some complex operations:
<ul><li><p class="docList">Addition: a + c = (A + C, (B + D)i)</p></li><li><p class="docList">Subtraction: a - c = (A - C, (B - D)i)</p></li><li><p class="docList">Multiplication: a × c = (A × C - B×D, (A×D + B×C)i)</p></li><li><p class="docList">Multiplication: (x a real number): x × c = (x×C,x×Di)</p></li><li><p class="docList">Conjugation: ~a = (A, - Bi)</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">Define a complex class so that the following program can use it with correct results:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
using namespace std;
#include "complex0.h"  // to avoid confusion with complex.h
int main()
{
    complex a(3.0, 4.0);   // initialize to (3,4i)
    complex c;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Enter a complex number (q to quit):\n";
    while (cin &gt;&gt; c)
    {
        cout &lt;&lt; "c is " &lt;&lt; c &lt;&lt; '\n';
        cout &lt;&lt; "complex conjugate is " &lt;&lt; ~c &lt;&lt; '\n';
        cout &lt;&lt; "a is " &lt;&lt; a &lt;&lt; '\n";
        cout &lt;&lt; "a + c is " &lt;&lt; a + c &lt;&lt; '\n';
        cout &lt;&lt; "a - c is " &lt;&lt; a - c &lt;&lt; '\n';
        cout &lt;&lt; "a * c is " &lt;&lt; a * c &lt;&lt; '\n';
        cout &lt;&lt; "2 * c is " &lt;&lt; 2 * c &lt;&lt; '\n';
        cout &lt;&lt; "Enter a complex number (q to quit):\n";
    }
    cout &lt;&lt; "Done!\n";
    return 0;
}

					  </pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Note that you have to overload the <tt>&lt;&lt;</tt> and <tt>&gt;&gt;</tt> operators. Standard C++ already has complex support—rather more extensive than in this example—in a <tt>complex</tt> header file, so use <tt>complex0.h</tt> to avoid conflicts. Use <tt>const</tt> whenever warranted.</p>
<p class="docText">Here is a sample run of the program:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Enter a complex number (q to quit):
real: <span class="docEmphStrong">10</span>
imaginary: <span class="docEmphStrong">12</span>
c is (10,12i)
complex conjugate is (10,-12i)
a is (3,4i)
a + c is (13,16i)
a - c is (-7,-8i)
a * c is (-18,76i)
2 * c is (20,24i)
Enter a complex number (q to quit):
real: <span class="docEmphStrong">q</span>
Done!</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Note that <tt>cin &gt;&gt; c</tt>, through overloading, now prompts for real and imaginary parts.</p></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
<p class="docText"> </p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
