<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>12. Classes and Dynamic Memory Allocation</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h2 class="docChapterTitle" id="title-ID0ESQBK">12. Classes and Dynamic Memory Allocation</h2>
<p class="docText">In this chapter you’ll learn about the following:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">Using dynamic memory allocation for class members</p></li><li><p class="docList">Implicit and explicit copy constructors</p></li><li><p class="docList">Implicit and explicit overloaded assignment operators</p></li><li><p class="docList">What you must do if you use <tt>new</tt> in a constructor</p></li><li><p class="docList">Using <tt>static</tt> class members</p></li><li><p class="docList">Using placement <tt>new</tt> with objects</p></li><li><p class="docList">Using pointers to objects</p></li><li><p class="docList">Implementing a queue abstract data type (ADT)</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">This chapter looks at how to use <tt>new</tt> and <tt>delete</tt>
 with classes and how to deal with some of the subtle problems that 
using dynamic memory can cause. This may sound like a short list of 
topics, but these topics affect constructor design, destructor design, 
and operator overloading.</p>
<p class="docText">Let’s look at a specific 
example of how C++ can add to your memory load. Suppose you want to 
create a class with a member that represents someone’s last name. The 
simplest, most primitive way is to use a character array member to hold 
the name. But this has some drawbacks. You might use a 14-character 
array and then run into Bartholomew Smeadsbury-Crafthovingham. Or to be 
safer, you might use a 40-character array. But if you then create an 
array of 2,000 such objects, you’ll waste a lot of memory with character
 arrays that are only partly filled. (At that point, you’re adding to 
the computer’s memory load.) There is an alternative.</p>
<p class="docText">Often it is much better to 
decide many matters, such as how much storage to use, when a program 
runs rather than when it’s compiled. The usual C++ approach to storing a
 name in an object is to use the <tt>new</tt>
 operator in a class constructor to allocate the correct amount of 
memory while the program is running. The usual way to accomplish this is
 to use the <tt>string</tt>
 class, which takes care of the memory management details for you. But 
you won’t learn much about memory management that way, so let’s attack 
the problem directly. Introducing <tt>new</tt>
 to a class constructor raises several new problems unless you remember 
to take a series of additional steps, such as expanding the class 
destructor, bringing all constructors into harmony with the <tt>new</tt>
 destructor, and writing additional class methods to facilitate correct 
initialization and assignment. (This chapter, of course, explains all 
these steps.)</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
