<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>The New, Improved String Class</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">The New, Improved <tt>String</tt> Class</h3>
<p class="docText">Now that we are a bit wiser, we can revise the <tt>StringBad</tt> class, renaming it <tt>String</tt>.
 First, add the copy constructor and the assignment operator just 
discussed so that the class correctly manages the memory used by class 
objects. Next, now that you’ve seen when objects are constructed and 
destroyed, we can mute the class constructors and destructors so that 
they no longer announce each time they are used. Also now that you’re no
 longer watching the constructors at work, we can simplify the default 
constructor so that it constructs an empty string instead of <tt>"C++"</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Next, we can add a few capabilities to the class. A useful <tt>String</tt> class would incorporate all the functionality of the standard <tt>cstring</tt> library of string functions, but we’ll add only enough to see what happens. (Keep in mind that this <tt>String</tt> class is an illustrative example and that the C++ standard <tt>string</tt> class is much more extensive.) In particular, we’ll add the following methods:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int length () const { return len; }
friend bool operator&lt;(const String &amp;st, const String &amp;st2);
friend bool operator&gt;(const String &amp;st1, const String &amp;st2);
friend bool operator==(const String &amp;st, const String &amp;st2);
friend operator&gt;&gt;(istream &amp; is, String &amp; st);
char &amp; operator[](int i);
const char &amp; operator[](int i) const;
static int HowMany();</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The first new method returns the length of the stored string. The next three friend functions allow you to compare strings. The <tt>operator&gt;&gt;()</tt> function provides simple input capabilities. The two <tt>operator[]()</tt> functions provide array-notation access to individual characters in a string. The static class method <tt>HowMany()</tt> complements the static class data member <tt>num_strings</tt>. Let’s look at some details.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E63BK">The Revised Default Constructor</h4>
<p class="docText">The new default constructor merits notice. It look likes this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>String::String()
{
    len = 0;
    str = new char[1];
    str[0] = '\0';               // default string
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">You might wonder why the code uses</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>str = new char[1];</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">and not this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>str = new char;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Both
 forms allocate the same amount of memory. The difference is that the 
first form is compatible with the class destructor and the second is 
not. Recall that the destructor contains this code:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>delete [] str;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Using <tt>delete []</tt> is compatible with pointers initialized by using <tt>new []</tt> and with the null pointer. So another possibility would be to replace</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>str = new char[1];
str[0] = '\0';               // default string</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">with this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>str = 0; // sets str to the null pointer</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The effect of using <tt>delete []</tt> with any pointers initialized any other way is undefined:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>char words[15] = "bad idea";
char * p1= words;
char * p2 = new char;
char * p3;
delete [] p1; // undefined, so don't do it
delete [] p2; // undefined, so don't do it
delete [] p3; // undefined, so don't do it</pre></div><br/>
<p></p><div class="box">
<h2 class="docSidebarTitle">C++11 Null Pointer</h2>
<p class="docText">In C++98, the literal <tt>0</tt> has two meanings—it can be the numeric value <tt>0</tt>,
 and it can be the null pointer—thus making it difficult for the reader 
and compiler to distinguish between the two. Sometimes programmers use <tt>(void *) 0</tt>
 to identify the pointer version. (The null pointer itself may have a 
nonzero internal representation.) Other programmers use NULL, a C macro 
defined to represent the null pointer. However, this proved to be an 
incomplete solution. C++11 provides a better solution by introducing a 
new keyword, <tt>nullptr</tt>, to denote the null pointer. You still can use <tt>0</tt> as before—otherwise an enormous amount of existing code would be invalidated—but henceforth the recommendation is to use <tt>nullptr</tt> instead:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>str = nullptr;  // C++11 null pointer notation</pre></div><br/>
</div><p></p><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EMCCK">Comparison Members</h4>
<p class="docText">Three of the methods in the <tt>String</tt> class perform comparisons. The <tt>operator&lt;()</tt> function returns <tt>true</tt>
 if the first string comes before the second string alphabetically (or, 
more precisely, in the machine collating sequence). The simplest way to 
implement the string comparison functions is to use the standard <tt>strcmp()</tt> function, which returns a negative value if its first argument precedes the second alphabetically, <tt>0</tt> if the strings are the same, and a positive value if the first follows the second alphabetically. So you can use <tt>strcmp()</tt> like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>bool operator&lt;(const String &amp;st1, const String &amp;st2)
{
    if (std::strcmp(st1.str, st2.str) &lt; 0)
        return true;
    else
        return false;
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Because the built-in <tt>&lt;</tt> operator already returns a type <tt>bool</tt> value, you can simplify the code further to this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>bool operator&lt;(const String &amp;st1, const String &amp;st2)
{
    return (std::strcmp(st1.str, st2.str) &lt; 0);
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Similarly, you can code the other two comparison functions like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>bool operator&gt;(const String &amp;st1, const String &amp;st2)
{
    return st2 &lt; st1;
}
bool operator==(const String &amp;st1, const String &amp;st2)
{
    return (std::strcmp(st1.str, st2.str) == 0);
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The first definition expresses the <tt>&gt;</tt> operator in terms of the <tt>&lt;</tt> operator and would be a good choice for an inline function.</p>
<p class="docText">Making the comparison functions friends facilitates comparisons between <tt>String</tt> objects and regular C strings. For example, suppose <tt>answer</tt> is a <tt>String</tt> object and that you have the following code:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>if ("love" == answer)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This gets translated to the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>if (operator==("love", answer))</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The compiler then uses one of the constructors to convert the code, in effect, to this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>if (operator==(String("love"), answer))</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">And this matches the prototype.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EJHCK">Accessing Characters by Using Bracket Notation</h4>
<p class="docText">With a standard C-style string, you can use brackets to access individual characters:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>char city[40] = "Amsterdam";
cout &lt;&lt; city[0] &lt;&lt; endl; // display the letter A</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In C++ the two bracket 
symbols constitute a single operator, the bracket operator, and you can 
overload this operator by using a method called <tt>operator[]()</tt>. Typically, a binary C++ operator (one with two operands) puts the operator between the two operands, as in <tt>2 + 5</tt>.
 But the bracket operator places one operand in front of the first 
bracket and the other operand between the two brackets. Thus, in the 
expression <tt>city[0]</tt>, <tt>city</tt> is the first operand, <tt>[]</tt> is the operator, and <tt>0</tt> is the second operand.</p>
<p class="docText">Suppose that <tt>opera</tt> is a <tt>String</tt> object:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>String opera("The Magic Flute");</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">If you use the expression <tt>opera[4]</tt>, C++ looks for a method with this name and signature:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>String::operator[](int i)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">If it finds a matching prototype, the compiler replaces the expression <tt>opera[4]</tt> with this function call:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>opera.operator[](4)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>opera</tt> object invokes the method, and the array subscript <tt>4</tt> becomes the function argument.</p>
<p class="docText">Here’s a simple implementation:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>char &amp; String::operator[](int i)
{
    return str[i];
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">With this definition, the statement</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>cout &lt;&lt; opera[4];</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">becomes this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>cout &lt;&lt; opera.operator[4];</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The return value is <tt>opera.str[4]</tt>, or the character <tt>'M'</tt>. So the public method gives access to private data.</p>
<p class="docText">Declaring the return type as type <tt>char &amp;</tt> allows you to assign values to a particular element. For example, you can use the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>String means("might");
means[0] = 'r';</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The second statement is converted to an overloaded operator function call:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>means.operator[][0] = 'r';</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This assigns <tt>'r'</tt> to the method’s return value. But the function returns a reference to <tt>means.str[0]</tt>, making the code equivalent to</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>means.str[0] = 'r';</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This last line of code violates private access, but because <tt>operator[]()</tt> is a class method, it is allowed to alter the array contents. The net effect of the code is that <tt>"might"</tt> becomes <tt>"right"</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Suppose you have a constant object:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>const String answer("futile");</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Then, if the only available definition for <tt>operator[]()</tt>is the one you’ve just seen, the following code is labeled an error:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>cout &lt;&lt; answer[1];  // compile-time error</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The reason is that <tt>answer</tt> is <tt>const</tt>,
 and the method doesn’t promise not to alter data. (In fact, sometimes 
the method’s job is to alter data, so it can’t promise not to.)</p>
<p class="docText">However, C++ distinguishes between <tt>const</tt> and non-<tt>const</tt> function signatures when overloading, so you can provide a second version of <tt>operator[]()</tt> that is used just by <tt>const String</tt> objects:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>// for use with const String objects
const char &amp; String::operator[](int i) const
{
    return str[i];
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">With the definitions, you have read/write access to regular <tt>String</tt> objects and read-only access to <tt>const String</tt> data:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>String text("Once upon a time");
const String answer("futile");
cout &lt;&lt; text[1];    // ok, uses non-const version of operator[]()
cout &lt;&lt; answer[1];  // ok, uses const version of operator[]()
cin &gt;&gt; text[1];     // ok, uses non-const version of operator[]()
cin &gt;&gt; answer[1];   // compile-time error</pre></div><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ENPCK">Static Class Member Functions</h4>
<p class="docText">It’s possible to declare a member function as being static. (The keyword <tt>static</tt>
 should appear in the function declaration but not in the function 
definition if the latter is separate.) This has two important 
consequences.</p>
<p class="docText">First, a static member function doesn’t have to be invoked by an object; in fact, it doesn’t even get a <tt>this</tt>
 pointer to play with. If the static member function is declared in the 
public section, it can be invoked using the class name and the 
scope-resolution operator. For instance, you can give the <tt>String</tt> class a static member function called <tt>HowMany()</tt> with the following prototype/definition in the class declaration:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>static int HowMany() { return num_strings; }</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">It could be invoked like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int count = String::HowMany();  // invoking a static member function</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The second consequence is
 that because a static member function is not associated with a 
particular object, the only data members it can use are the static data 
members. For example, the <tt>HowMany()</tt> static method can access the <tt>num_strings</tt> static member, but not <tt>str</tt> or <tt>len</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Similarly, a static member 
function can be used to set a classwide flag that controls how some 
aspect of the class interface behaves. For example, it can control the 
formatting used by a method that displays class contents.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ENWCK">Further Assignment Operator Overloading</h4>
<p class="docText">Before looking at the new listings for the <tt>String</tt> class example, let’s consider another matter. Suppose you want to copy an ordinary string to a <tt>String</tt> object. For example, suppose you use <tt>getline()</tt> to read a string and you want to place it in a <tt>String</tt> object. The class methods already allow you to do the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>String name;
char temp[40];
cin.getline(temp, 40);
name = temp;  // use constructor to convert type</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">However, this might not be a 
satisfactory solution if you have to do it often. To see why, let’s 
review how the final statement works:</p>

<table border="0" class="docText"><tbody><tr><td valign="top" width="25"><div class="docText"><b>1. </b></div></td><td><div class="docText">The program uses the <tt>String(const char *)</tt> constructor to construct a temporary <tt>String</tt> object containing a copy of the string stored in <tt>temp</tt>. Remember from Chapter 11, “Working with Classes,” that a constructor with a single argument serves as a conversion function.<br/><br/></div></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="25"><div class="docText"><b>2. </b></div></td><td><div class="docText">In Listing 12.6, later in this chapter, the program uses the <tt>String &amp; String::operator=(const String &amp;)</tt> function to copy information from the temporary object to the <tt>name</tt> object.<br/><br/></div></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="25"><div class="docText"><b>3. </b></div></td><td><div class="docText">The program calls the <tt>~String()</tt> destructor to delete the temporary object.<br/><br/></div></td></tr></tbody></table>
<p class="docText">The simplest way to make 
the process more efficient is to overload the assignment operator so 
that it works directly with ordinary strings. This removes the extra 
steps of creating and destroying a temporary object. Here’s one possible
 implementation:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>String &amp; String::operator=(const char * s)
{
    delete [] str;
    len = std::strlen(s);
    str = new char[len + 1];
    std::strcpy(str, s);
    return *this;
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">As usual, you must deallocate memory formerly managed by <tt>str</tt> and allocate enough memory for the new string.</p>
<p class="docText">Listing 12.4 shows the revised class declaration. In addition to the changes already mentioned, it defines the constant <tt>CINLIM</tt>, which is used in implementing <tt>operator&gt;&gt;()</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText"></p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EVZCK">Listing 12.4. <tt>string1.h</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// string1.h -- fixed and augmented string class definition

#ifndef STRING1_H_
#define STRING1_H_
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
using std::ostream;
using std::istream;

class String
{
private:
    char * str;             // pointer to string
    int len;                // length of string
    static int num_strings; // number of objects
    static const int CINLIM = 80;  // cin input limit
public:
// constructors and other methods
    String(const char * s); // constructor
    String();               // default constructor
    String(const String &amp;); // copy constructor
    ~String();              // destructor
    int length () const { return len; }
// overloaded operator methods
    String &amp; operator=(const String &amp;);
    String &amp; operator=(const char *);
    char &amp; operator[](int i);
    const char &amp; operator[](int i) const;
// overloaded operator friends
    friend bool operator&lt;(const String &amp;st, const String &amp;st2);
    friend bool operator&gt;(const String &amp;st1, const String &amp;st2);
    friend bool operator==(const String &amp;st, const String &amp;st2);
    friend ostream &amp; operator&lt;&lt;(ostream &amp; os, const String &amp; st);
    friend istream &amp; operator&gt;&gt;(istream &amp; is, String &amp; st);
// static function
    static int HowMany();
};
#endif

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Listing 12.5 presents the revised method definitions.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ED4CK">Listing 12.5. <tt>string1.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// string1.cpp -- String class methods
#include &lt;cstring&gt;                 // string.h for some
#include "string1.h"               // includes &lt;iostream&gt;
using std::cin;
using std::cout;

// initializing static class member

int String::num_strings = 0;

// static method
int String::HowMany()
{
    return num_strings;
}

// class methods
String::String(const char * s)     // construct String from C string
{
    len = std::strlen(s);          // set size
    str = new char[len + 1];       // allot storage
    std::strcpy(str, s);           // initialize pointer
    num_strings++;                 // set object count
}

String::String()                   // default constructor
{
    len = 4;
    str = new char[1];
    str[0] = '\0';                 // default string
    num_strings++;
}

String::String(const String &amp; st)
{
    num_strings++;             // handle static member update
    len = st.len;              // same length
    str = new char [len + 1];  // allot space
    std::strcpy(str, st.str);  // copy string to new location
}

String::~String()                     // necessary destructor
{
    --num_strings;                    // required
    delete [] str;                    // required
}

// overloaded operator methods

    // assign a String to a String
String &amp; String::operator=(const String &amp; st)
{
    if (this == &amp;st)
        return *this;
    delete [] str;
    len = st.len;
    str = new char[len + 1];
    std::strcpy(str, st.str);
    return *this;
}

    // assign a C string to a String
String &amp; String::operator=(const char * s)
{
    delete [] str;
    len = std::strlen(s);
    str = new char[len + 1];
    std::strcpy(str, s);
    return *this;
}

    // read-write char access for non-const String
char &amp; String::operator[](int i)
{
    return str[i];
}

    // read-only char access for const String
const char &amp; String::operator[](int i) const
{
    return str[i];
}

// overloaded operator friends

bool operator&lt;(const String &amp;st1, const String &amp;st2)
{
    return (std::strcmp(st1.str, st2.str) &lt; 0);
}

bool operator&gt;(const String &amp;st1, const String &amp;st2)
{
    return st2 &lt; st1;
}

bool operator==(const String &amp;st1, const String &amp;st2)
{
    return (std::strcmp(st1.str, st2.str) == 0);
}

    // simple String output
ostream &amp; operator&lt;&lt;(ostream &amp; os, const String &amp; st)
{
    os &lt;&lt; st.str;
    return os;
}

    // quick and dirty String input
istream &amp; operator&gt;&gt;(istream &amp; is, String &amp; st)
{
    char temp[String::CINLIM];
    is.get(temp, String::CINLIM);
    if (is)
        st = temp;
    while (is &amp;&amp; is.get() != '\n')
        continue;
    return is;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The overloaded <tt>&gt;&gt;</tt> operator provides a simple way to read a line of keyboard input into a <tt>String</tt> object. It assumes an input line of <tt>String::CINLIM</tt> or fewer characters and discards any characters beyond that limit. Keep in mind that the value of an <tt>istream</tt> object in an <tt>if</tt> condition evaluates to <tt>false</tt> if input fails for some reason, such as encountering an end-of-file condition, or in the case of <tt>get(char *, int)</tt>, reading an empty line.</p>
<p class="docText">Listing 12.6 exercises the <tt>String</tt> class with a short program that lets you enter a few strings. The program has the user enter sayings, puts the strings into <tt>String</tt> objects, displays them, and reports which string is the shortest and which comes first alphabetically.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ERADK">Listing 12.6. <tt>sayings1.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// sayings1.cpp -- using expanded String class
// compile with string1.cpp
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include "string1.h"
const int ArSize = 10;
const int MaxLen =81;
int main()
{
    using std::cout;
    using std::cin;
    using std::endl;
    String name;
    cout &lt;&lt;"Hi, what's your name?\n&gt;&gt; ";
    cin &gt;&gt; name;

    cout &lt;&lt; name &lt;&lt; ", please enter up to " &lt;&lt; ArSize
         &lt;&lt; " short sayings &lt;empty line to quit&gt;:\n";
    String sayings[ArSize];     // array of objects
    char temp[MaxLen];          // temporary string storage
    int i;
    for (i = 0; i &lt; ArSize; i++)
    {
        cout &lt;&lt; i+1 &lt;&lt; ": ";
        cin.get(temp, MaxLen);
        while (cin &amp;&amp; cin.get() != '\n')
            continue;
        if (!cin || temp[0] == '\0')    // empty line?
            break;              // i not incremented
        else
            sayings[i] = temp;  // overloaded assignment
    }
    int total = i;              // total # of lines read

    if ( total &gt; 0)
    {
        cout &lt;&lt; "Here are your sayings:\n";
        for (i = 0; i &lt; total; i++)
            cout &lt;&lt; sayings[i][0] &lt;&lt; ": " &lt;&lt; sayings[i] &lt;&lt; endl;

        int shortest = 0;
        int first = 0;
        for (i = 1; i &lt; total; i++)
        {
            if (sayings[i].length() &lt; sayings[shortest].length())
                shortest = i;
            if (sayings[i] &lt; sayings[first])
                first = i;
        }
        cout &lt;&lt; "Shortest saying:\n" &lt;&lt; sayings[shortest] &lt;&lt; endl;;
        cout &lt;&lt; "First alphabetically:\n" &lt;&lt; sayings[first] &lt;&lt; endl;
        cout &lt;&lt; "This program used "&lt;&lt; String::HowMany()
             &lt;&lt; " String objects. Bye.\n";
    }
    else
        cout &lt;&lt; "No input! Bye.\n";
     return 0;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<div class="docNote"><p class="docNoteTitle">Note</p>
<p class="docText">Older versions of <tt>get(char *, int)</tt> don’t evaluate to <tt>false</tt>
 upon reading an empty line. For those versions, however, the first 
character in the string is a null character if an empty line is entered.
 This example uses the following code:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>if (!cin || temp[0] == '\0')    // empty line?
    break;                      // i not incremented</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">If the implementation follows the current C++ Standard, the first test in the <tt>if</tt> statement detects an empty line, whereas the second test detects the empty line for older implementations.</p>
</div><br/>
<p class="docText">The program in Listing 12.6 asks the user to enter up to 10 sayings. Each saying is read into a temporary character array and then copied to a <tt>String</tt> object. If the user enters a blank line, a <tt>break</tt> statement terminates the input loop. After echoing the input, the program uses the <tt>length()</tt> and <tt>operator&lt;()</tt>
 member functions to locate the shortest string and the alphabetically 
earliest string. The program also uses the subscript operator (<tt>[]</tt>) to preface each saying with its initial character. Here’s a sample run:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedHeight">Hi, what's your name?
&gt;&gt; <span class="docEmphStrong">Misty Gutz</span>
Misty Gutz, please enter up to 10 short sayings &lt;empty line to quit&gt;:
1: <span class="docEmphStrong">a fool and his money are soon parted</span>
2: <span class="docEmphStrong">penny wise, pound foolish</span>
3: <span class="docEmphStrong">the love of money is the root of much evil</span>
4: <span class="docEmphStrong">out of sight, out of mind</span>
5: <span class="docEmphStrong">absence makes the heart grow fonder</span>
6: <span class="docEmphStrong">absinthe makes the hart grow fonder</span>
7:
Here are your sayings:
a: a fool and his money are soon parted
p: penny wise, pound foolish
t: the love of money is the root of much evil
o: out of sight, out of mind
a: absence makes the heart grow fonder
a: absinthe makes the hart grow fonder
Shortest saying:
penny wise, pound foolish
First alphabetically:
a fool and his money are soon parted
This program used 11 String objects. Bye.

					  </pre></div><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
