<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Things to Remember When Using new in Constructors</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Things to Remember When Using <tt>new</tt> in Constructors</h3>
<p class="docText">By now you’ve noticed that you must take special care when using <tt>new</tt> to initialize pointer members of an object. In particular, you should do the following:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">If you use <tt>new</tt> to initialize a pointer member in a constructor, you should use <tt>delete</tt> in the destructor.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The uses of <tt>new</tt> and <tt>delete</tt> should be compatible. You should pair <tt>new</tt> with <tt>delete</tt> and <tt>new []</tt> with <tt>delete []</tt>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">If there are multiple constructors, all should use <tt>new</tt>
 the same way—either all with brackets or all without brackets. There’s 
only one destructor, so all constructors have to be compatible with that
 destructor. However, it is permissible to initialize a pointer with <tt>new</tt> in one constructor and with the null pointer (<tt>0</tt>, or, with C++11, <tt>nullptr</tt>) in another constructor because it’s okay to apply the <tt>delete</tt> operation (with or without brackets) to the null pointer.</p><p></p><div class="box">
<h2 class="docSidebarTitle"><tt>NULL</tt> or <tt>0</tt> or <tt>nullptr</tt>?</h2>
<p class="docText">Historically, the null pointer can be represented by <tt>0</tt> or by <tt>NULL</tt>, a symbolic constant defined as <tt>0</tt> in several header files. C programmers often use <tt>NULL</tt> instead of <tt>0</tt> as a visual reminder that the value is a pointer value, just as they use <tt>'\0'</tt> instead of <tt>0</tt> for the null character as a visual reminder that this value is a character. The C++ tradition, however, has favored a simple <tt>0</tt> instead of the equivalent <tt>NULL</tt>. And, as mentioned earlier, C++11 offers the <tt>nullptr</tt> keyword as a better alternative.</p>
</div><p></p><br/></li><li><p class="docList">You
 should define a copy constructor that initializes one object to another
 by doing deep copying. Typically, the constructor should emulate the 
following example:</p><div class="docText"><pre>String::String(const String &amp; st)
{
     num_strings++;            // handle static member update if necessary
     len = st.len;             // same length as copied string
     str = new char [len + 1]; // allot space
     std::strcpy(str, st.str); // copy string to new location
}</pre></div><p class="docList">In particular, 
the copy constructor should allocate space to hold the copied data, and 
it should copy the data, not just the address of the data. Also it 
should update any static class members whose value would be affected by 
the process.</p></li><li><p class="docList">You
 should define an assignment operator that copies one object to another 
by doing deep copying. Typically, the class method should emulate the 
following example:</p><div class="docText"><pre>String &amp; String::operator=(const String &amp; st)
{
     if (this == &amp;st)            // object assigned to itself
          return *this;          // all done
     delete [] str;              // free old string
     len = st.len;
     str = new char [len + 1];   // get space for new string
     std::strcpy(str, st.str);   // copy the string
     return *this;               // return reference to invoking object
}</pre></div></li></ul>
<p class="docText">In particular, the method 
should check for self-assignment; it should free memory formerly pointed
 to by the member pointer; it should copy the data, not just the address
 of the data; and it should return a reference to the invoking object.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ENECK">Don’ts and Dos</h4>
<p class="docText">The following excerpt contains two examples of what not to do and one example of a good constructor:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>String::String()
{
   str = "default string";     // oops, no new []
   len = std::strlen(str);
}

String::String(const char * s)
{
   len = std::strlen(s);
   str = new char;             // oops, no []
   std::strcpy(str, s);        // oops, no room
}

String::String(const String &amp; st)
{
       len = st.len;
       str = new char[len + 1];      // good, allocate space
       std::strcpy(str, st.str);     // good, copy value
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The first constructor fails to use <tt>new</tt> to initialize <tt>str</tt>. The destructor, when called for a default object, applies <tt>delete</tt> to <tt>str</tt>. The result of applying <tt>delete</tt> to a pointer not initialized by <tt>new</tt> is undefined, but it is probably bad. Any of the following would be okay:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>String::String()
{
    len = 0;
    str = new char[1];  // uses new with []
    str[0] = '\0';
}

String::String()
{
    len = 0;
    str = 0;  // or, with C++11, str = nullptr;
}

String::String()
{
    static const char * s = "C++";     // initialized just once
    len = std::strlen(s);
    str = new char[len + 1];           // uses new with []
    std::strcpy(str, s);
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Next, the second constructor in the original excerpt applies <tt>new</tt>, but it fails to request the correct amount of memory; hence, <tt>new</tt>
 returns a block containing space for just one character. Attempting to 
copy a longer string to that location is asking for memory problems. 
Also the use of <tt>new</tt> without brackets is inconsistent with the correct form of the other constructors.</p>
<p class="docText">The third constructor is fine.</p>
<p class="docText">Finally, here’s a destructor that <span class="docEmphasis">doesn’t</span> work correctly with the previous constructors:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>String::~String()
{
    delete str;      // oops, should be delete [] str;
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The destructor uses <tt>delete</tt> incorrectly. Because the constructors request arrays of characters, the destructor should delete an array.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ERGCK">Memberwise Copying for Classes with Class Members</h4>
<p class="docText">Suppose you use the <tt>String</tt> class, or, for that matter, the standard <tt>string</tt> class as a type for class members:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>class Magazine
{
private:
    String title;
    string publisher;
...
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText"><tt>String</tt> and <tt>string</tt> both use dynamic memory allocation. Does that mean you need to write a copy constructor and assignment operator for the <tt>Magazine</tt>
 class? No—at least not in itself. The default memberwise copying and 
assignment behavior does have some smarts. If you copy or assign one <tt>Magazine</tt>
 object to another, memberwise copying uses the copy constructors and 
assignment operators defined for the member types. That is, the <tt>String</tt> copy constructor will be used to copy the <tt>title</tt> member from one <tt>Magazine</tt> object to another, the <tt>String</tt> assignment operator will be used to assign the <tt>title</tt> member of one <tt>Magazine</tt> object to another, and so on. Things get more complicated, however, if the <tt>Magazine</tt>
 class needs a copy constructor and assignment operator for some other 
class member. In that case, those functions have to call the <tt>String</tt> and <tt>string</tt> copy constructors and assignment operators explicitly. But that’s a tale for Chapter 13, “Class Inheritance.”</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
