<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Observations About Returning Objects</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Observations About Returning Objects</h3>
<p class="docText">When a member function or 
standalone function returns an object, you have choices. The function 
could return a reference to an object, a constant reference to an 
object, an object, or a constant object. By now, you’ve seen examples of
 all but the last, so it’s a good time to review these options.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EL6BK">Returning a Reference to a <tt>const</tt> Object</h4>
<p class="docText">The usual reason for using a <tt>const</tt>
 reference is efficiency, but there are restrictions on when this choice
 can be used. If a function returns an object that is passed to it, 
either by object invocation or as a method argument, you can increase 
the efficiency of the method by having it return a reference. For 
example, suppose you wanted to write a function <tt>Max()</tt> that returned the larger of two <tt>Vector</tt> objects, where <tt>Vector</tt> is the class developed in Chapter 11. The function would be used in this manner:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Vector force1(50,60);
Vector force2(10,70);
Vector max;
max = Max(force1, force2);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Either of the following two implementations would work:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>// version 1
Vector Max(const Vector &amp; v1, const Vector &amp; v2)
{
    if (v1.magval() &gt; v2.magval())
        return v1;
    else
        return v2;
}

// version 2
const Vector &amp; Max(const Vector &amp; v1, const Vector &amp; v2)
{
    if (v1.magval() &gt; v2.magval())
        return v1;
    else
        return v2;
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">There
 are three important points here. First, recall that returning an object
 invokes the copy constructor, whereas returning a reference doesn’t. 
Thus Version 2 does less work and is more efficient. Second, the 
reference should be to an object that exists when the calling function 
is executing. In this example, the reference is to either <tt>force1</tt> or <tt>force2</tt>, and both are objects defined in the calling function, so this requirement is met. Third, both <tt>v1</tt> and <tt>v2</tt> are declared as being <tt>const</tt> references, so the return type has to be <tt>const</tt> to match.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EYDCK">Returning a Reference to a Non-<tt>const</tt> Object</h4>
<p class="docText">Two common examples of returning a non-<tt>const</tt> object are overloading the assignment operator and overloading the <tt>&lt;&lt;</tt> operator for use with <tt>cout</tt>. The first is done for reasons of efficiency, and the second for reasons of necessity.</p>
<p class="docText">The return value of <tt>operator=()</tt> is used for chained assignment:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>String s1("Good stuff");
String s2, s3;
s3 = s2 = s1;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In this code, the return value of <tt>s2.operator=(s1)</tt> is assigned to <tt>s3</tt>. Returning either a <tt>String</tt> object or a reference to a <tt>String</tt> object would work, but, as with the <tt>Vector</tt> example, using a reference allows the function to avoid calling the <tt>String</tt> copy constructor to create a new <tt>String</tt> object. In this case, the return type is not <tt>const</tt> because the <tt>operator=()</tt> method returns a reference to <tt>s2</tt>, which it does modify.</p>
<p class="docText">The return value of <tt>operator&lt;&lt;()</tt> is used for chained output:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>String s1("Good stuff");
cout &lt;&lt; s1 &lt;&lt; "is coming!";</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here, the return value of <tt>operator&lt;&lt;(cout, s1)</tt> becomes the object used to display the string <tt>"is coming!"</tt>. Here, the return type has to be <tt>ostream &amp;</tt> and not just <tt>ostream</tt>. Using an <tt>ostream</tt> return type would require calling the <tt>ostream</tt> copy constructor, and, as it turns out, the <tt>ostream</tt> class does not have a public copy constructor. Fortunately, returning a reference to <tt>cout</tt> poses no problems because <tt>cout</tt> is already in scope in the calling function.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ERGCK">Returning an Object</h4>
<p class="docText">If the object being 
returned is local to the called function, then it should not be returned
 by reference because the local object has its destructor called when 
the function terminates. Thus, when control returns to the calling 
function, there is no object left to which the reference can refer. In 
these circumstances, you should return an object, not a reference. 
Typically, overloaded arithmetic operators fall into this category. 
Consider this example, which uses the <tt>Vector</tt> class again:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Vector force1(50,60);
Vector force2(10,70);
Vector net;
net = force1 + force2;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The value being returned is not <tt>force1</tt>, which should be left unaltered by the process, nor <tt>force2</tt>,
 which should also be unaltered. Thus the return value can’t be a 
reference to an object that is already present in the calling function. 
Instead, the sum is a new, temporary object computed in <tt>Vector::operator+()</tt>,
 and the function shouldn’t return a reference to a temporary object 
either. Instead, it should return an actual vector object, not a 
reference:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Vector Vector::operator+(const Vector &amp; b) const
{
    return Vector(x + b.x, y + b.y);
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">There is the added expense of calling the copy constructor to create the returned object, but that is unavoidable.</p>
<p class="docText">One more observation: In the <tt>Vector::operator+()</tt> example, the constructor call <tt>Vector(x + b.x, y + b.y)</tt> creates an object that is accessible to the <tt>operator+()</tt>
 method; the implicit call to the copy constructor produced by the 
return statement, however, creates an object that is accessible to the 
calling program.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EBICK">Returning a <tt>const</tt> Object</h4>
<p class="docText">The preceding definition of <tt>Vector::operator+()</tt> has a bizarre property. The intended use is this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedWidth">net = force1 + force2;                             // 1: three Vector objects

					  </pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">However, the definition also allows you to use the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedWidth">force1 + force2 = net;                            // 2: dyslectic programming
cout &lt;&lt; (force1 + force2 = net).magval() &lt;&lt; endl; // 3: demented programming

					  </pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Three questions immediately arise. Why would anyone write such statements? Why are they possible? What do they do?</p>
<p class="docText">First, there is no sensible 
reason for writing such code, but not all code is written for sensible 
reasons. People, even programmers, make mistakes. For instance, if the 
comparison <tt>operator==()</tt> were defined for the <tt>Vector</tt> class, you might mistakenly type</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>if (force1 + force2 = net)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">instead of this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>if (force1 + force2 == net)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Also programmers tend to be ingenious, and this can lead to ingeniously adventurous mistakes.</p>
<p class="docText">Second, this code is 
possible because the copy constructor constructs a temporary object to 
represent the return value. So in the preceding code, the expression <tt>force1 + force2</tt> stands for that temporary object. In Statement 1, the temporary object is assigned to <tt>net</tt>. In Statements 2 and 3, <tt>net</tt> is assigned to the temporary object.</p>
<p class="docText">Third, the temporary object is used and then discarded. For instance, in Statement 2, the program computes the sum of <tt>force1</tt> and <tt>force2</tt>, copies the answer into the temporary return object, overwrites the contents with the contents of <tt>net</tt>,
 and then discards the temporary object. The original vectors are all 
left unchanged. In Statement 3, the magnitude of the temporary object is
 displayed before the object is deleted.</p>
<p class="docText">If you are concerned about 
the potential for misuse and abuse created by this behavior, you have a 
simple recourse: Declare the return type as a <tt>const</tt> object. For instance, if <tt>Vector::operator+()</tt> is declared to have return type <tt>const Vector</tt>, then Statement 1 is still allowed but Statements 2 and 3 become invalid.</p>
<p class="docText">In summary, if a method or 
function returns a local object, it should return an object, not a 
reference. In this example, the program uses the copy constructor to 
generate the returned object. If a method or function returns an object 
of a class for which there is no public copy constructor, such as the <tt>ostream</tt>
 class, it must return a reference to an object. Finally, some methods 
and functions, such as the overloaded assignment operator, can return 
either an object or a reference to an object. In this example, the 
reference is preferred for reasons of efficiency.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
