<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Reviewing Techniques</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Reviewing Techniques</h3>
<p class="docText">By now, you’ve encountered 
several programming techniques for dealing with various class-related 
problems, and you may be having trouble keeping track of all of them. So
 the following sections summarize several techniques and when they are 
used.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EJFCK">Overloading the <tt>&lt;&lt;</tt> Operator</h4>
<p class="docText">To redefine the <tt>&lt;&lt;</tt> operator so that you use it with <tt>cout</tt> to display an object’s contents, you define a friend operator function that has the following form:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>ostream &amp; operator&lt;&lt;(ostream &amp; os, const <span class="docEmphasis">c_name</span> &amp; obj)
{
    os &lt;&lt; ... ;  // display object contents
    return os;
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>c_name</tt></span>
 represents the name of the class. If the class provides public methods 
that return the required contents, you can use those methods in the 
operator function and dispense with the friend status.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EMGCK">Conversion Functions</h4>
<p class="docText">To convert a single value to a class type, you create a class constructor that has the following prototype:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphasis">c_name</span>(<span class="docEmphasis">type_name</span> value);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>c_name</tt></span> represents the class name, and <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>type_name</tt></span> represents the name of the type you want to convert.</p>
<p class="docText">To convert a class type to some other type, you create a class member function that has the following prototype:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>operator <span class="docEmphasis">type_name()</span>;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Although this function has no declared return type, it should return a value of the desired type.</p>
<p class="docText">Remember to use conversion functions with care. You can use the keyword <tt>explicit</tt> when declaring a constructor to prevent it from being used for implicit conversions.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EGMCK">Classes Whose Constructors Use <tt>new</tt></h4>
<p class="docText">You need to take several precautions when designing classes that use the <tt>new</tt>
 operator to allocate memory pointed to by a class member (yes, we 
summarized these precautions recently, but the rules are very important 
to remember, particularly because the compiler does not know them and 
thus won’t catch your mistakes):</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">Any class member that points to memory allocated by <tt>new</tt> should have the <tt>delete</tt> operator applied to it in the class destructor. This frees the allocated memory.</p></li><li><p class="docList">If a destructor frees memory by applying <tt>delete</tt> to a pointer that is a class member, every constructor for that class should initialize that pointer, either by using <tt>new</tt> or by setting the pointer to the null pointer.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Constructors should settle on using either <tt>new []</tt> or <tt>new</tt>, but not a mixture of both. The destructor should use <tt>delete []</tt> if the constructors use <tt>new []</tt>, and it should use <tt>delete</tt> if the constructors use <tt>new</tt>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">You
 should define a copy constructor that allocates new memory rather than 
copying a pointer to existing memory. This enables a program to 
initialize one class object to another. The constructor should normally 
have the following prototype:</p><div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphasis">className</span>(const <span class="docEmphasis">className</span> &amp;)</pre></div></li><li><p class="docList">You
 should define a class member function that overloads the assignment 
operator and that has a function definition with the following prototype
 (where <tt>c_pointer</tt> is a member of the <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>c_name</tt></span> class and has the type pointer-to-<span class="docEmphasis"><tt>type_name</tt></span>). The following example assumes that the constructors initialize the variable <tt>c_pointer</tt> by using <tt>new []</tt>:</p><div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphasis">c_name</span> &amp; <span class="docEmphasis">c_name</span>::operator=(const <span class="docEmphasis">c_name</span> &amp; cn)
{
    if (this == &amp; cn)
        return *this;     // done if self-assignment
    delete [] c_pointer;
    // set size number of type_name units to be copied
    c_pointer = new type_name[size];
    // then copy data pointed to by cn.c_pointer to
    // location pointed to by c_pointer
    ...
    return *this;
}</pre></div></li></ul>
</div>
</body>
</html>
