<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Summary</h3>
<p class="docText">This chapter covers many 
important aspects of defining and using classes. Several of these 
aspects are subtle—even difficult—concepts. If some of them seem obscure
 or unusually complex to you, don’t feel bad; they affect most newcomers
 to C++ that way. Often the way you come to really appreciate concepts 
such as copy constructors is through getting into trouble by ignoring 
them. So some of the material in this chapter may seem vague to you 
until your own experiences enrich your understanding.</p>
<p class="docText">You can use <tt>new</tt>
 in a class constructor to allocate memory for data and then assign the 
address of the memory to a class member. This enables a class, for 
example, to handle strings of various sizes without committing the class
 design in advance to a fixed array size. Using <tt>new</tt>
 in class constructors also raises potential problems when an object 
expires. If an object has member pointers pointing to memory allocated 
by <tt>new</tt>, freeing the memory used to 
hold the object does not automatically free the memory pointed to by the
 object member pointers. Therefore, if you use <tt>new</tt> in a class constructor to allocate memory, you should use <tt>delete</tt>
 in the class destructor to free that memory. That way, the demise of an
 object automatically triggers the deletion of pointed-to memory.</p>
<p class="docText">Objects that have members pointing to memory allocated by <tt>new</tt>
 also have problems with initializing one object to another or assigning
 one object to another. By default, C++ uses memberwise initialization 
and assignment, which means that the initialized or the assigned-to 
object winds up with exact copies of the original object’s members. If 
an original member points to a block of data, the copy member points to 
the same block. When the program eventually deletes the two objects, the
 class destructor attempts to delete the same block of memory twice, 
which is an error. The solution is to define a special copy constructor 
that redefines initialization and to overload the assignment operator. 
In each case, the new definition should create duplicates of any 
pointed-to data and have the new object point to the copies. That way, 
both the old and the new objects refer to separate but identical data, 
with no overlap. The same reasoning applies to defining an assignment 
operator. In each case, the goal is to make a deep copy—that is, to copy
 the real data and not just pointers to the data.</p>
<p class="docText">When an object has 
automatic storage or external storage, the destructor for that object is
 called automatically when the object ceases to exist. If you allocate 
storage for an object by using <tt>new</tt> and assign its address to a pointer, the destructor for that object is called automatically when you apply <tt>delete</tt> to the pointer. However, if you allocate storage for class objects by using placement <tt>new</tt> instead of regular <tt>new</tt>,
 you also take on the responsibility of calling the destructor for that 
object explicitly by invoking the destructor method with a pointer to 
the object. C++ allows you to place structure, class, and enumeration 
definitions inside a class. Such nested types have class scope, meaning 
that they are local to the 
class and don’t conflict with structures, classes, and enumerations of 
the same name that are defined elsewhere.</p>
<p class="docText">C++ provides a special 
syntax for class constructors that can be used to initialize data 
members. This syntax consists of a colon followed by a comma-separated 
list of initializers. This is placed after the closing parenthesis of 
the constructor arguments and before the opening brace of the function 
body. Each initializer consists of the name of the member being 
initialized followed by parentheses containing the initialization value.
 Conceptually, these initializations take place when the object is 
created and before any statements in the function body are executed. The
 syntax looks like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>queue(int qs) : qsize(qs), items(0), front(NULL), rear(NULL) { }</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This form is obligatory if the data member is a nonstatic <tt>const</tt> member or a reference, except that C++11 in-class initialization can be used for nonstatic <tt>const</tt> members.</p>
<p class="docText">C++11 allows in-class initialization (that is, initialization in the class definition):</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>class Queue
{
private:
...
    Node * front = NULL;
    enum {Q_SIZE = 10};
    Node * rear = NULL;
    int items = 0;
    const int qsize = Q_SIZE;
...
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This is equivalent to 
using a member initialization list. However, any constructor using a 
membership initialization list will override the corresponding in-class 
initializations.</p>
<p class="docText">As you might have noticed, 
classes require much more care and attention to detail than do simple 
C-style structures. In return, they do much more for you.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
