<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter Review</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Chapter Review</h3>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1.</b></td><td class="docText">Suppose a <tt>String</tt> class has the following private members:
<div class="docText"><pre>class String
{
private:
    char * str;    // points to string allocated by new
    int len;       // holds length of string
//...
};</pre></div><br/>
<div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">What’s wrong with this default constructor?</p><div class="docText"><pre>String::String() {}</pre></div></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">What’s wrong with this constructor?</p><div class="docText"><pre>String::String(const char * s)
{
    str = s;
    len = strlen(s);
}</pre></div></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">What’s wrong with this constructor?</p><div class="docText"><pre>String::String(const char * s)
{
    strcpy(str, s);
    len = strlen(s);
}</pre></div></div></li></ol></div></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2.</b></td><td class="docText">Name three problems that may arise if you define a class in which a pointer member is initialized by using <tt>new</tt>. Indicate how they can be remedied.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3.</b></td><td class="docText">What
 class methods does the compiler generate automatically if you don’t 
provide them explicitly? Describe how these implicitly generated 
functions behave.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4.</b></td><td class="docText">Identify and correct the errors in the following class declaration:
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedHeight">class nifty
{
// data
    char personality[];
    int talents;
// methods
    nifty();
    nifty(char * s);
    ostream &amp; operator&lt;&lt;(ostream &amp; os, nifty &amp; n);
}

nifty:nifty()
{
    personality = NULL;
    talents = 0;
}

nifty:nifty(char * s)
{
    personality = new char [strlen(s)];
    personality = s;
    talents = 0;
}

ostream &amp; nifty:operator&lt;&lt;(ostream &amp; os, nifty &amp; n)
{
    os &lt;&lt; n;
}

					  </pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5.</b></td><td class="docText">Consider the following class declaration:
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedWidth">class Golfer
{
private:
    char * fullname;       // points to string containing golfer's name
    int games;             // holds number of golf games played
    int * scores;          // points to first element of array of golf scores
public:
    Golfer();
    Golfer(const char * name, int g= 0);
     // creates empty dynamic array of g elements if g &gt; 0
    Golfer(const Golfer &amp; g);
    ~Golfer();
};

					  </pre></div><br/>
<div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">What class methods would be invoked by each of the following statements?</p><div class="docText"><pre>Golfer nancy;                        // #1
Golfer lulu("Little Lulu");          // #2
Golfer roy("Roy Hobbs", 12);         // #3
Golfer * par = new Golfer;           // #4
Golfer next = lulu;                  // #5
Golfer hazzard = "Weed Thwacker";    // #6
*par = nancy;                        // #7
nancy = "Nancy Putter";              // #8</pre></div></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Clearly,
 the class requires several more methods to make it useful. What 
additional method does it require to protect against data corruption?</p></div></li></ol></div></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
