<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Programming Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Programming Exercises</h3>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1.</b></td><td class="docText">Consider the following class declaration:
<div class="docText"><pre>class Cow {
    char name[20];
    char * hobby;
    double weight;
public:
    Cow();
    Cow(const char * nm, const char * ho, double wt);
    Cow(const Cow c&amp;);
    ~Cow();
    Cow &amp; operator=(const Cow &amp; c);
    void ShowCow() const;  // display all cow data
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Provide the implementation for this class and write a short program that uses all the member functions.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2.</b></td><td class="docText">Enhance the <tt>String</tt> class declaration (that is, upgrade <tt>string1.h</tt> to <tt>string2.h</tt>) by doing the following:
<div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Overload the <tt>+</tt> operator to allow you to join two strings into one.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Provide a <tt>stringlow()</tt> member function that converts all alphabetic characters in a string to lowercase. (Don’t forget the <tt>cctype</tt> family of character functions.)</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Provide a <tt>stringup()</tt> member function that converts all alphabetic characters in a string to uppercase.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Provide a member function that takes a <tt>char</tt> argument and returns the number of times the character appears in the string.</p></div></li></ol></div>
<p class="docText">Test your work in the following program:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedHeight">// pe12_2.cpp
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
using namespace std;
#include "string2.h"
int main()
{
    String s1(" and I am a C++ student.");
    String s2 = "Please enter your name: ";
    String s3;
    cout &lt;&lt; s2;                 // overloaded &lt;&lt; operator
    cin &gt;&gt; s3;                  // overloaded &gt;&gt; operator
    s2 = "My name is " + s3;    // overloaded =, + operators
    cout &lt;&lt; s2 &lt;&lt; ".\n";
    s2 = s2 + s1;
    s2.stringup();              // converts string to uppercase
    cout &lt;&lt; "The string\n" &lt;&lt; s2 &lt;&lt; "\ncontains " &lt;&lt; s2.has('A')
         &lt;&lt; " 'A' characters in it.\n";
    s1 = "red";     // String(const char *),
                    // then String &amp; operator=(const String&amp;)
    String rgb[3] = { String(s1), String("green"), String("blue")};
    cout &lt;&lt; "Enter the name of a primary color for mixing light: ";
    String ans;
    bool success = false;
    while (cin &gt;&gt; ans)
    {
        ans.stringlow();        // converts string to lowercase
        for (int i = 0; i &lt; 3; i++)
        {
            if (ans == rgb[i])  // overloaded == operator
            {
                cout &lt;&lt; "That's right!\n";
                success = true;
                break;
            }
        }
        if (success)
            break;
        else
            cout &lt;&lt; "Try again!\n";
    }
    cout &lt;&lt; "Bye\n";
    return 0;
}

					  </pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Your output should look like this sample run:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Please enter your name: <span class="docEmphStrong">Fretta Farbo</span>
My name is Fretta Farbo.
The string
MY NAME IS FRETTA FARBO AND I AM A C++ STUDENT.
contains 6 'A' characters in it.
Enter the name of a primary color for mixing light: yellow
Try again!
<span class="docEmphStrong">BLUE</span>
That's right!
Bye</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3.</b></td><td class="docText">Rewrite the <tt>Stock</tt> class, as described in Listings 10.7 and 10.8 in Chapter 10 so that it uses dynamically allocated memory directly instead of using <tt>string</tt> class objects to hold the stock names. Also replace the <tt>show()</tt> member function with an overloaded <tt>operator&lt;&lt;()</tt> definition. Test the new definition program in Listing 10.9.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4.</b></td><td class="docText">Consider the following variation of the <tt>Stack</tt> class defined in Listing 10.10:
<div class="docText"><pre>// stack.h -- class declaration for the stack ADT
typedef unsigned long Item;

class Stack
{
private:
    enum {MAX = 10};      // constant specific to class
    Item  * pitems;       // holds stack items
    int size;             // number of elements in stack
    int top;              // index for top stack item
public:
    Stack(int n = MAX);    // creates stack with n elements
    Stack(const Stack &amp; st);
    ~Stack();
    bool isempty() const;
    bool isfull() const;
    // push() returns false if stack already is full, true otherwise
    bool push(const Item &amp; item); // add item to stack
    // pop() returns false if stack already is empty, true otherwise
    bool pop(Item &amp; item);  // pop top into item
    Stack &amp; operator=(const Stack &amp; st);
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">As the private 
members suggest, this class uses a dynamically allocated array to hold 
the stack items. Rewrite the methods to fit this new representation and 
write a program that demonstrates all the methods, including the copy 
constructor and assignment operator.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5.</b></td><td class="docText">The
 Bank of Heather has performed a study showing that ATM customers won’t 
wait more than one minute in line. Using the simulation from Listing 12.10,
 find a value for number of customers per hour that leads to an average 
wait time of one minute. (Use at least a 100-hour trial period.)</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6.</b></td><td class="docText">The
 Bank of Heather would like to know what would happen if it added a 
second ATM. Modify the simulation in this chapter so that it has two 
queues. Assume that a customer will join the first queue if it has fewer
 people in it than the second queue and that the customer will join the 
second queue otherwise. Again, find a value for number of customers per 
hour that leads to an average wait time of one minute. (Note: This is a 
nonlinear problem in that doubling the number of ATMs doesn’t double the
 number of customers who can be handled per hour with a one-minute wait 
maximum.)</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
<p class="docText"> </p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
