<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>13. Class Inheritance</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h2 class="docChapterTitle" id="title-ID0EMSCK">13. Class Inheritance</h2>
<p class="docText">In this chapter you’ll learn about the following:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">Inheritance as an <span class="docEmphasis">is-a</span> relationship</p></li><li><p class="docList">How to publicly derive one class from another</p></li><li><p class="docList">Protected access</p></li><li><p class="docList">Constructor member initializer lists</p></li><li><p class="docList">Upcasting and downcasting</p></li><li><p class="docList">Virtual member functions</p></li><li><p class="docList">Early (static) binding and late (dynamic) binding</p></li><li><p class="docList">Abstract base classes</p></li><li><p class="docList">Pure virtual functions</p></li><li><p class="docList">When and how to use public inheritance</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">One of the main goals of 
object-oriented programming is to provide reusable code. When you 
develop a new project, particularly if the project is large, it’s nice 
to be able to reuse proven code rather than to reinvent it. Employing 
old code saves time and because it has already been used and tested, can
 help suppress the introduction of bugs into a program. Also the less 
you have to concern yourself with details, the better you can 
concentrate on overall program strategy.</p>
<p class="docText">Traditional C function libraries provide reusability through predefined, precompiled functions, such as <tt>strlen()</tt> and <tt>rand()</tt>,
 that you can use in your programs. Many vendors furnish specialized C 
libraries that provide functions beyond those of the standard C library.
 For example, you can purchase libraries of database management 
functions and of screen control functions. However, function libraries 
have a limitation: Unless the vendor supplies the source code for its 
library functions (and often it doesn’t), you can’t extend or modify the
 functions to meet your particular needs. Instead, you have to shape 
your program to meet the workings of the library. Even if the vendor 
does supply the source code, you run the risk of unintentionally 
modifying how part of a function works or of altering the relationships 
among library functions as you add your changes.</p>
<p class="docText">C++
 classes bring a higher level of reusability. Many vendors now offer 
class libraries, which consist of class declarations and 
implementations. Because a class combines data representation with class
 methods, it provides a more integrated package than does a function 
library. A single class, for example, may provide all the resources for 
managing a dialog box. Often class libraries are available in source 
code, which means you can modify them to meet your needs. But C++ has a 
better method than code modification for extending and modifying 
classes. This method, called <span class="docEmphasis">class inheritance</span>,
 lets you derive new classes from old ones, with the derived class 
inheriting the properties, including the methods, of the old class, 
called a <span class="docEmphasis">base class</span>.
 Just as inheriting a fortune is usually easier than earning one from 
scratch, deriving a class through inheritance is usually easier than 
designing a new one. Here are some things you can do with inheritance:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">You can add functionality to an existing class. For example, given a basic array class, you could add arithmetic operations.</p></li><li><p class="docList">You
 can add to the data that a class represents. For example, given a basic
 string class, you could derive a class that adds a data member 
representing a color to be used when displaying the string.</p></li><li><p class="docList">You can modify how a class method behaves. For example, given a <tt>Passenger</tt> class that represents the services provided to an airline passenger, you can derive a <tt>FirstClassPassenger</tt> class that provides a higher level of services.</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">Of course, you could 
accomplish the same aims by duplicating the original class code and 
modifying it, but the inheritance mechanism allows you to proceed by 
just providing the new features. You don’t even need access to the 
source code to derive a class. Thus, if you purchase a class library 
that provides only the header files and the compiled code for class 
methods, you can still derive new classes based on the library classes. 
Conversely, you can distribute your own classes to others, keeping parts
 of your implementation secret, yet still giving your clients the option
 of adding features to your classes.</p>
<p class="docText">Inheritance is a 
splendid concept, and its basic implementation is quite simple. But 
managing inheritance so that it works properly in all situations 
requires some adjustments. This chapter looks at both the simple and the
 subtle aspects of inheritance.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
