<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Polymorphic Public Inheritance</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Polymorphic Public Inheritance</h3>
<p class="docText">The <tt>RatedPlayer</tt>
 example of inheritance is a simple one. Objects of the derived class 
use the base-class methods without change. But you can encounter 
situations in which you want a method to behave differently for the 
derived class than it does for the base class. That is, the way a 
particular method behaves may depend on the object that invokes it. This
 more sophisticated behavior is termed <span class="docEmphasis">polymorphic</span>
 (“having many forms”) because you can have multiple behaviors for a 
method, depending on the context. There are two key mechanisms for 
implementing polymorphic public inheritance:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">Redefining base-class methods in a derived class</p></li><li><p class="docList">Using virtual methods</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">It’s time for another example.
 You have leveraged your experience with the Webtown Social Club to 
become head programmer for the Pontoon National Bank. The first thing 
the bank asks you to do is develop two classes. One class will represent
 its basic checking plan, the Brass Account, and the second class will 
represent the Brass Plus checking account, which adds an overdraft 
protection feature. That is, if a user writes a check larger (but not 
too much larger) than his or her balance, the bank will cover the check,
 charging the user for the excess payment and adding a surcharge. You 
can characterize the two accounts in terms of data to be stored and 
operations to be allowed.</p>
<p class="docText">First, here is the information for a Brass Account checking plan:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">Client name</p></li><li><p class="docList">Account number</p></li><li><p class="docList">Current balance</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">And here are the operations to be represented:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">Creating an account</p></li><li><p class="docList">Depositing money into the account</p></li><li><p class="docList">Withdrawing money from the account</p></li><li><p class="docList">Displaying the account information</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">For the Brass Plus 
Account checking plan, the Pontoon National Bank wants all the features 
of the Brass Account as well as the following additional items of 
information:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">An upper limit to the overdraft protection</p></li><li><p class="docList">An interest rate charged for overdraft loans</p></li><li><p class="docList">The overdraft amount currently owed to the bank</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">No additional operations are needed, but two operations need to be implemented differently:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">The withdrawing money operation has to incorporate overdraft protection for the Brass Plus Account</p></li><li><p class="docList">The display operation has to show the additional information required by the Brass Plus Account</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">Suppose you call one class <tt>Brass</tt><a name="second class"></a> and the second class <tt>BrassPlus</tt>. Should you derive <tt>BrassPlus</tt> publicly from <tt>Brass</tt>? To answer this question, first answer another: Does the <tt>BrassPlus</tt> class meet the <span class="docEmphasis">is-a</span> test? Sure. Everything that is true of a <tt>Brass</tt> object will be true for a <tt>BrassPlus</tt>
 object. Both store a client name, an account number, and a balance. 
With both, you can make deposits and withdrawals and display account 
information. Note that the <span class="docEmphasis">is-a</span> relationship is not, in general, symmetric. A fruit, in general, is not a banana; similarly, a <tt>Brass</tt> object won’t have all the capabilities of a <tt>BrassPlus</tt> object.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E1ADK">Developing the <tt>Brass</tt> and <tt>BrassPlus</tt> Classes</h4>
<p class="docText">The Brass Account class 
information is pretty straightforward, but the bank hasn’t told you 
enough details about how the overdraft system works. In response to your
 request for further information, the friendly Pontoon National Bank 
representative tells you the following:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">A Brass Plus Account
 limits how much money the bank will lend you to cover overdrafts. The 
default value is $500, but some customers may start with a different 
limit.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The bank may change a customer’s overdraft limit.</p></li><li><p class="docList">A
 Brass Plus Account charges interest on the loan. The default value is 
11.125%, but some customers may start with a different rate.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The bank may change a customer’s interest rate.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The
 account keeps track of how much the customer owes the bank (overdraft 
loans plus interest). The user cannot pay off this amount through a 
regular deposit or through
 a transfer from another account. Instead, he or she must pay in cash to
 a special bank officer, who will, if necessary, seek out the customer. 
When the debt is paid, the account can reset the amount owed to 0.</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">The last feature is an unusual 
way for a bank to do business, but it has the fortunate side effect of 
keeping the programming problem simpler.</p>
<p class="docText">This list suggests that 
the new class needs constructors that provide account information and 
that include a debt limit with a default value of $500 and an interest 
rate with a default value of 10%. Also there should be methods for 
resetting the debt limit, interest rate, and current debt. These are all
 things to be added to the <tt>Brass</tt> class, and they will be declared in the <tt>BrassPlus</tt> class declaration.</p>
<p class="docText">The information about the two classes suggests class declarations like those in Listing 13.7.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EHDDK">Listing 13.7. <tt>brass.h</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// brass.h  -- bank account classes
#ifndef BRASS_H_
#define BRASS_H_
#include &lt;string&gt;
// Brass Account Class
class Brass
{
private:
    std::string fullName;
    long acctNum;
    double balance;
public:
    Brass(const std::string &amp; s = "Nullbody", long an = -1,
                double bal = 0.0);
    void Deposit(double amt);
    virtual void Withdraw(double amt);
    double Balance() const;
    virtual void ViewAcct() const;
    virtual ~Brass() {}
};

//Brass Plus Account Class
class BrassPlus : public Brass
{
private:
    double maxLoan;
    double rate;
    double owesBank;
public:
    BrassPlus(const std::string &amp; s = "Nullbody", long an = -1,
            double bal = 0.0, double ml = 500,
            double r = 0.11125);
    BrassPlus(const Brass &amp; ba, double ml = 500,
                                double r = 0.11125);
    virtual void ViewAcct()const;
    virtual void Withdraw(double amt);
    void ResetMax(double m) { maxLoan = m; }
    void ResetRate(double r) { rate = r; };
    void ResetOwes() { owesBank = 0; }
};

#endif

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">There are several points to notice in Listing 13.7:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">The <tt>BrassPlus</tt> class adds three new private data members and three new public member functions to the <tt>Brass</tt> class.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Both the <tt>Brass</tt> class and the <tt>BrassPlus</tt> class declare the <tt>ViewAcct()</tt> and <tt>Withdraw()</tt> methods; these are the methods that will behave differently for a <tt>BrassPlus</tt> object than they do with a <tt>Brass</tt> object.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>Brass</tt> class uses the new keyword <tt>virtual</tt> in declaring <tt>ViewAcct()</tt> and <tt>Withdraw()</tt>. These methods are now termed <span class="docEmphasis">virtual methods</span>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>Brass</tt> class also declares a virtual destructor, even though the destructor does nothing.</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">The first point in the list is nothing new. The <tt>RatedPlayer</tt> class did something similar when it added a new data member and two new methods to the <tt>TableTennisPlayer</tt> class.</p>
<p class="docText">The second point in the list
 is how the declarations specify that methods are to behave differently 
for the derived class. The two <tt>ViewAcct()</tt> prototypes indicate that there will be two separate method definitions. The qualified name for the base-class version is <tt>Brass::ViewAcct()</tt>, and the qualified name for the derived-class version is <tt>BrassPlus::ViewAcct()</tt>. A program will use the object type to determine which version to use:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Brass dom("Dominic Banker", 11224, 4183.45);
BrassPlus dot("Dorothy Banker", 12118, 2592.00);
dom.ViewAcct();      // use Brass::ViewAcct()
dot.ViewAcct();      // use BrassPlus::ViewAcct()</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Similarly, there will be two versions of <tt>Withdraw()</tt>: one that’s used by <tt>Brass</tt> objects and one that’s used by <tt>BrassPlus</tt> objects. Methods that behave the same for both classes, such as <tt>Deposit()</tt> and <tt>Balance()</tt>, are declared only in the base class.</p>
<p class="docText">The third point (the use of <tt>virtual</tt>)
 is more involved than the first two points. It determines which method 
is used if the method is invoked by a reference or a pointer instead of 
by an object. If you don’t use the keyword <tt>virtual</tt>, the program chooses a method based on the reference type or pointer type. If you do use the keyword <tt>virtual</tt>, the program chooses a method based on the type of object the reference or pointer refers to. Here is how a program behaves if <tt>ViewAcct()</tt> is not virtual:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>// behavior with non-virtual ViewAcct()
// method chosen according to reference type
Brass dom("Dominic Banker", 11224, 4183.45);
BrassPlus dot("Dorothy Banker", 12118, 2592.00);
Brass &amp; b1_ref = dom;
Brass &amp; b2_ref = dot;
b1_ref.ViewAcct();      // use Brass::ViewAcct()
b2_ref.ViewAcct();      // use Brass::ViewAcct()</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The reference variables are type <tt>Brass</tt>, so <tt>Brass::ViewAccount()</tt> is chosen. Using pointers to <tt>Brass</tt> instead of references results in similar behavior.</p>
<p class="docText">In contrast, here is the behavior if <tt>ViewAcct()</tt> is virtual:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>// behavior with virtual ViewAcct()
// method chosen according to object type
Brass dom("Dominic Banker", 11224, 4183.45);
BrassPlus dot("Dorothy Banker", 12118, 2592.00);
Brass &amp; b1_ref = dom;
Brass &amp; b2_ref = dot;
b1_ref.ViewAcct();      // use Brass::ViewAcct()
b2_ref.ViewAcct();      // use BrassPlus::ViewAcct()</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In this case, both references are type <tt>Brass</tt>, but <tt>b2_ref</tt> refers to a <tt>BrassPlus</tt> object, so <tt>BrassPlus::ViewAcct()</tt> is used for it. Using pointers to <tt>Brass</tt> instead of references results in similar behavior.</p>
<p class="docText">It turns out, as you’ll 
see in a bit, that this behavior of virtual functions is very handy. 
Therefore, it is the common practice to declare as virtual in the base 
class those methods that might be redefined in a derived class. When a 
method is declared virtual in a base class, it is automatically virtual 
in the derived class, but it is a good idea to document which functions 
are virtual by using the keyword <tt>virtual</tt> in the derived class declarations, too.</p>
<p class="docText">The fourth point is that the 
base class declares a virtual destructor. This is to make sure that the 
correct sequence of destructors is called when a derived object is 
destroyed. We’ll discuss this point in more detail later in this 
chapter.</p>
<div class="docNote"><p class="docNoteTitle">Note</p>
<p class="docText">If you redefine a base-class 
method in a derived class, the usual practice is to declare the 
base-class method as virtual. This makes the program choose the method 
version based on object type instead of the type of a reference or 
pointer. It’s also the usual practice to declare a virtual destructor 
for the base class.</p>
</div><br/>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E5IDK">Class Implementations</h5>
<p class="docText">The
 next step is to prepare the class implementation. Part of this has been
 done already by the inline function definitions in the header file. Listing 13.8 provides the remaining method definitions. Note that the keyword <tt>virtual</tt> is used just in the method prototypes in the class declaration, not in the method definitions in Listing 13.8.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EFODK">Listing 13.8. <tt>brass.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// brass.cpp -- bank account class methods
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include "brass.h"
using std::cout;
using std::endl;
using std::string;

// formatting stuff
typedef std::ios_base::fmtflags format;
typedef std::streamsize precis;
format setFormat();
void restore(format f, precis p);

// Brass methods

Brass::Brass(const string &amp; s, long an, double bal)
{
    fullName = s;
    acctNum = an;
    balance = bal;
}

void Brass::Deposit(double amt)
{
    if (amt &lt; 0)
        cout &lt;&lt; "Negative deposit not allowed; "
             &lt;&lt; "deposit is cancelled.\n";
    else
        balance += amt;
}

void Brass::Withdraw(double amt)
{
    // set up ###.## format
    format initialState = setFormat();
    precis prec = cout.precision(2);

    if (amt &lt; 0)
        cout &lt;&lt; "Withdrawal amount must be positive; "

             &lt;&lt; "withdrawal canceled.\n";
    else if (amt &lt;= balance)
        balance -= amt;
    else
        cout &lt;&lt; "Withdrawal amount of $" &lt;&lt; amt
             &lt;&lt; " exceeds your balance.\n"
             &lt;&lt; "Withdrawal canceled.\n";
    restore(initialState, prec);
}
double Brass::Balance() const
{
    return balance;
}

void Brass::ViewAcct() const
{
     // set up ###.## format
    format initialState = setFormat();
    precis prec = cout.precision(2);
    cout &lt;&lt; "Client: " &lt;&lt; fullName &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Account Number: " &lt;&lt; acctNum &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Balance: $" &lt;&lt; balance &lt;&lt; endl;
    restore(initialState, prec); // restore original format
}

// BrassPlus Methods
BrassPlus::BrassPlus(const string &amp; s, long an, double bal,
           double ml, double r) : Brass(s, an, bal)
{
    maxLoan = ml;
    owesBank = 0.0;
    rate = r;
}

BrassPlus::BrassPlus(const Brass &amp; ba, double ml, double r)
           : Brass(ba)   // uses implicit copy constructor
{
    maxLoan = ml;
    owesBank = 0.0;
    rate = r;
}

// redefine how ViewAcct() works
void BrassPlus::ViewAcct() const
{
    // set up ###.## format
    format initialState = setFormat();
    precis prec = cout.precision(2);

    Brass::ViewAcct();   // display base portion
    cout &lt;&lt; "Maximum loan: $" &lt;&lt; maxLoan &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Owed to bank: $" &lt;&lt; owesBank &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout.precision(3);  // ###.### format
    cout &lt;&lt; "Loan Rate: " &lt;&lt; 100 * rate &lt;&lt; "%\n";
    restore(initialState, prec);
}

// redefine how Withdraw() works
void BrassPlus::Withdraw(double amt)
{
    // set up ###.## format
    format initialState = setFormat();
    precis prec = cout.precision(2);

    double bal = Balance();
    if (amt &lt;= bal)
        Brass::Withdraw(amt);
    else if ( amt &lt;= bal + maxLoan - owesBank)
    {
        double advance = amt - bal;
        owesBank += advance * (1.0 + rate);
        cout &lt;&lt; "Bank advance: $" &lt;&lt; advance &lt;&lt; endl;
        cout &lt;&lt; "Finance charge: $" &lt;&lt; advance * rate &lt;&lt; endl;
        Deposit(advance);
        Brass::Withdraw(amt);
    }
    else
        cout &lt;&lt; "Credit limit exceeded. Transaction cancelled.\n";
    restore(initialState, prec);
}

format setFormat()
{
    // set up ###.## format
    return cout.setf(std::ios_base::fixed,
                std::ios_base::floatfield);
}

void restore(format f, precis p)
{
    cout.setf(f, std::ios_base::floatfield);
    cout.precision(p);
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Before looking at details of Listing 13.8,
 such as handling of formatting in some of the methods, let’s examine 
the aspects that relate directly to inheritance. Keep in mind that the 
derived class does not have direct access to private base-class data; 
the derived class has to use base-class public methods to access that 
data. The means of access depends on the method. Constructors use one 
technique, and other member functions use a different technique.</p>
<p class="docText">The technique that 
derived-class constructors use to initialize base-class private data is 
the member initializer list syntax. The <tt>RatedPlayer</tt> class constructors use that technique, and so do the <tt>BrassPlus</tt> constructors:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>BrassPlus::BrassPlus(const string &amp; s, long an, double bal,
           double ml, double r) : Brass(s, an, bal)
{
    maxLoan = ml;
    owesBank = 0.0;
    rate = r;
}

BrassPlus::BrassPlus(const Brass &amp; ba, double ml, double r)
           : Brass(ba)   // uses implicit copy constructor
{
    maxLoan = ml;
    owesBank = 0.0;
    rate = r;
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Each of these constructors 
uses the member initializer list syntax to pass base-class information 
to a base-class constructor and then uses the constructor body to 
initialize the new data items added by the <tt>BrassPlus</tt> class.</p>
<p class="docText">Non-constructors can’t use 
the member initializer list syntax. But a derived-class method can call a
 public base-class method. For instance, ignoring the formatting aspect,
 the core of the <tt>BrassPlus</tt> version of <tt>ViewAcct()</tt> is this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>// redefine how ViewAcct() works
void BrassPlus::ViewAcct() const
{
...
    Brass::ViewAcct();   // display base portion
    cout &lt;&lt; "Maximum loan: $" &lt;&lt; maxLoan &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Owed to bank: $" &lt;&lt; owesBank &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Loan Rate: " &lt;&lt; 100 * rate &lt;&lt; "%\n";
...
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In other words, <tt>BrassPlus::ViewAcct()</tt> displays the added <tt>BrassPlus</tt> data members and calls on the base-class method <tt>Brass::ViewAcct()</tt>
 to display the base-class data members. Using the scope-resolution 
operator in a derived-class method to invoke a base-class method is a 
standard technique.</p>
<p class="docText">It’s vital that the code use the scope-resolution operator. Suppose that, instead, you wrote the code this way:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>// redefine erroneously how ViewAcct() works
void BrassPlus::ViewAcct() const
{
...
    ViewAcct();   // oops! recursive call
...
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">If the code doesn’t use the scope-resolution operator, the compiler assumes that <tt>ViewAcct()</tt> is <tt>BrassPlus::ViewAcct()</tt>, and this creates a recursive function that has no termination—not a good thing.</p>
<p class="docText">Next, consider the <tt>BrassPlus::Withdraw()</tt> method. If the client withdraws an amount larger than the balance, the method should arrange for a loan. It can use <tt>Brass::Withdraw()</tt> to access the balance member, but <tt>Brass::Withdraw()</tt> issues an error message if the withdrawal amount exceeds the balance. This implementation avoids the message by using the <tt>Deposit()</tt> method to make the loan and then calling <tt>Brass::Withdraw()</tt> when sufficient funds are available:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>// redefine how Withdraw() works
void BrassPlus::Withdraw(double amt)
{
...
    double bal = Balance();
    if (amt &lt;= bal)
        Brass::Withdraw(amt);
    else if ( amt &lt;= bal + maxLoan - owesBank)
    {
        double advance = amt - bal;
        owesBank += advance * (1.0 + rate);
        cout &lt;&lt; "Bank advance: $" &lt;&lt; advance &lt;&lt; endl;
        cout &lt;&lt; "Finance charge: $" &lt;&lt; advance * rate &lt;&lt; endl;
        Deposit(advance);
        Brass::Withdraw(amt);
    }
    else
        cout &lt;&lt; "Credit limit exceeded. Transaction cancelled.\n";
...
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Note that the method uses the base-class <tt>Balance()</tt> function to determine the original balance. The code doesn’t have to use the scope-resolution operator for <tt>Balance()</tt> because this method has not been redefined in the derived class.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>ViewAcct()</tt> and the <tt>Withdraw()</tt> methods use the <tt>setf()</tt> and <tt>precision()</tt> formatting methods to set the output mode for floating-point values to fixed-point, two places
 to the right of the decimal. When these modes are set, output stays in 
that mode, so the polite thing for these methods to do is to reset the 
formatting mode to its state prior to calling the methods. Listings 8.8 and 10.5 use similar approaches. To avoid some code duplication, the program moves some of the formatting actions to helper functions:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>// formatting stuff
typedef std::ios_base::fmtflags format;
typedef std::streamsize precis;
format setFormat();
void restore(format f, precis p);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>setFormat()</tt> function sets fixed-point notation and returns the previous flag setting:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>format setFormat()
{
    // set up ###.## format
    return cout.setf(std::ios_base::fixed,
                std::ios_base::floatfield);
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">And the <tt>restore()</tt> function resets the format and the precision:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>void restore(format f, precis p)
{
    cout.setf(f, std::ios_base::floatfield);
    cout.precision(p);
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">You can find more details about formatting in Chapter 17, “Input, Output, and Files.”</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EI2DK">Using the <tt>Brass</tt> and <tt>BrassPlus</tt> Classes</h5>
<p class="docText">Listing 13.9 shows the class definitions with a <tt>Brass</tt> object and a <tt>BrassPlus</tt> object.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ED3DK">Listing 13.9. <tt>usebrass1.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// usebrass1.cpp -- testing bank account classes
// compile with brass.cpp
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include "brass.h"

int main()
{
    using std::cout;
    using std::endl;

    Brass Piggy("Porcelot Pigg", 381299, 4000.00);
    BrassPlus Hoggy("Horatio Hogg", 382288, 3000.00);
    Piggy.ViewAcct();
    cout &lt;&lt; endl;
    Hoggy.ViewAcct();
    cout &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Depositing $1000 into the Hogg Account:\n";
    Hoggy.Deposit(1000.00);
    cout &lt;&lt; "New balance: $" &lt;&lt; Hoggy.Balance() &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Withdrawing $4200 from the Pigg Account:\n";
    Piggy.Withdraw(4200.00);
    cout &lt;&lt; "Pigg account balance: $" &lt;&lt; Piggy.Balance() &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Withdrawing $4200 from the Hogg Account:\n";
    Hoggy.Withdraw(4200.00);
    Hoggy.ViewAcct();

    return 0;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">In the following output of the program in Listing 13.9, note that Hogg gets overdraft protection and Pigg does not:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedHeight">Client: Porcelot Pigg
Account Number: 381299
Balance: $4000.00

Client: Horatio Hogg
Account Number: 382288
Balance: $3000.00
Maximum loan: $500.00
Owed to bank: $0.00
Loan Rate: 11.125%

Depositing $1000 into the Hogg Account:
New balance: $4000
Withdrawing $4200 from the Pigg Account:
Withdrawal amount of $4200.00 exceeds your balance.
Withdrawal canceled.
Pigg account balance: $4000
Withdrawing $4200 from the Hogg Account:
Bank advance: $200.00
Finance charge: $22.25
Client: Horatio Hogg
Account Number: 382288
Balance: $0.00
Maximum loan: $500.00
Owed to bank: $222.25
Loan Rate: 11.125%

					  </pre></div><br/>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EB4DK">Showing Virtual Method Behavior</h5>
<p class="docText">In Listing 13.9
 the methods are invoked by objects, not pointers or references, so this
 program doesn’t use the virtual method feature. Let’s look at an 
example for which the virtual methods do come into play. Suppose you 
would like to manage a mixture of <tt>Brass</tt> and <tt>BrassPlus</tt> accounts. It would be nice if you could have a single array that holds a mixture of <tt>Brass</tt> and <tt>BrassPlus</tt> objects, but that’s not possible. Every item in an array has to be of the same type, and <tt>Brass</tt> and <tt>BrassPlus</tt> are two separate types. However, you can create an array of pointers-to-<tt>Brass</tt>. In that case, every element is of the same type, but because of the public inheritance model, a pointer-to-<tt>Brass</tt> can point to either a <tt>Brass</tt> or a <tt>BrassPlus</tt>
 object. Thus, in effect, you have a way of representing a collection of
 more than one type of object with a single array. This is polymorphism,
 and Listing 13.10 shows a simple example.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ERCEK">Listing 13.10. <tt>usebrass2.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// usebrass2.cpp -- polymorphic example
// compile with brass.cpp
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;
#include "brass.h"
const int CLIENTS = 4;

int main()
{
   using std::cin;
   using std::cout;
   using std::endl;

   Brass * p_clients[CLIENTS];
   std::string temp;
   long tempnum;
   double tempbal;
   char kind;

   for (int i = 0; i &lt; CLIENTS; i++)
   {
       cout &lt;&lt; "Enter client's name: ";
       getline(cin,temp);
       cout &lt;&lt; "Enter client's account number: ";
       cin &gt;&gt; tempnum;
       cout &lt;&lt; "Enter opening balance: $";
       cin &gt;&gt; tempbal;
       cout &lt;&lt; "Enter 1 for Brass Account or "
            &lt;&lt; "2 for BrassPlus Account: ";
       while (cin &gt;&gt; kind &amp;&amp; (kind != '1' &amp;&amp; kind != '2'))
           cout &lt;&lt;"Enter either 1 or 2: ";
       if (kind == '1')
           p_clients[i] = new Brass(temp, tempnum, tempbal);
       else
       {
           double tmax, trate;
           cout &lt;&lt; "Enter the overdraft limit: $";
           cin &gt;&gt; tmax;
           cout &lt;&lt; "Enter the interest rate "
                &lt;&lt; "as a decimal fraction: ";
           cin &gt;&gt; trate;
           p_clients[i] = new BrassPlus(temp, tempnum, tempbal,
                                        tmax, trate);
        }
        while (cin.get() != '\n')
            continue;
   }
   cout &lt;&lt; endl;
   for (int i = 0; i &lt; CLIENTS; i++)
   {
       p_clients[i]-&gt;ViewAcct();
       cout &lt;&lt; endl;
   }

   for (int i = 0; i &lt; CLIENTS; i++)
   {
       delete p_clients[i];  // free memory
   }
   cout &lt;&lt; "Done.\n";
   return 0;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The program in Listing 13.10 lets user input determine the type of account to be added and then uses <tt>new</tt> to create and initialize an object of the proper type. You may recall that <tt>getline(cin,temp)</tt> reads a line of input from <tt>cin</tt> and stores it in the <tt>string</tt> object <tt>temp</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Here is a sample run of the program in Listing 13.10:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedHeight">Enter client's name: <span class="docEmphStrong">Harry Fishsong</span>
Enter client's account number: <span class="docEmphStrong">112233</span>
Enter opening balance: $<span class="docEmphStrong">1500</span>
Enter 1 for Brass Account or 2 for BrassPlus Account: <span class="docEmphStrong">1</span>
Enter client's name: <span class="docEmphStrong">Dinah Otternoe</span>
Enter client's account number: <span class="docEmphStrong">121213</span>
Enter opening balance: $<span class="docEmphStrong">1800</span>
Enter 1 for Brass Account or 2 for BrassPlus Account: <span class="docEmphStrong">2</span>
Enter the overdraft limit: <span class="docEmphStrong">$350</span>
Enter the interest rate as a decimal fraction: <span class="docEmphStrong">0.12</span>
Enter client's name: <span class="docEmphStrong">Brenda Birdherd</span>
Enter client's account number: <span class="docEmphStrong">212118</span>
Enter opening balance: $<span class="docEmphStrong">5200</span>
Enter 1 for Brass Account or 2 for BrassPlus Account: <span class="docEmphStrong">2</span>
Enter the overdraft limit: $<span class="docEmphStrong">800</span>
Enter the interest rate as a decimal fraction: <span class="docEmphStrong">0.10</span>
Enter client's name: <span class="docEmphStrong">Tim Turtletop</span>
Enter client's account number: <span class="docEmphStrong">233255</span>
Enter opening balance: $<span class="docEmphStrong">688</span>
Enter 1 for Brass Account or 2 for BrassPlus Account: <span class="docEmphStrong">1</span>

Client: Harry Fishsong
Account Number: 112233
Balance: $1500.00

Client: Dinah Otternoe
Account Number: 121213
Balance: $1800.00
Maximum loan: $350.00
Owed to bank: $0.00
Loan Rate: 12.00%

Client: Brenda Birdherd
Account Number: 212118
Balance: $5200.00
Maximum loan: $800.00
Owed to bank: $0.00
Loan Rate: 10.00%

Client: Tim Turtletop
Account Number: 233255
Balance: $688.00

Done.

					  </pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The polymorphic aspect is provided by the following code:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>for (i = 0; i &lt; CLIENTS; i++)
{
    p_clients[i]-&gt;ViewAcct();
    cout &lt;&lt; endl;
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">If the array member points to a <tt>Brass</tt> object, <tt>Brass::ViewAcct()</tt> is invoked; if the array member points to a <tt>BrassPlus</tt> object, <tt>BrassPlus::ViewAcct()</tt> is invoked. If <tt>Brass::ViewAcct()</tt> were been declared as virtual, <tt>Brass:ViewAcct()</tt> would be invoked in all cases.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EWGEK">The Need for Virtual Destructors</h5>
<p class="docText">The code in Listing 13.10 that uses <tt>delete</tt> to free the objects allocated by <tt>new</tt>
 illustrates why the base class should have a virtual destructor, even 
if no destructor appears to be needed. If the destructors are not 
virtual, then just the destructor corresponding to the pointer type is 
called. In Listing 13.10, this means that only the <tt>Brass</tt> destructor would be called, even if the pointer pointed to a <tt>BrassPlus</tt> object. If the destructors are virtual, the destructor corresponding to the object type is called. So if a pointer points to a <tt>BrassPlus</tt> object, the <tt>BrassPlus</tt> destructor is called. And when a <tt>BrassPlus</tt>
 destructor finishes, it automatically calls the base-class constructor.
 Thus, using virtual destructors ensures that the correct sequence of 
destructors is called. In Listing 13.10, this correct behavior isn’t essential because the destructors do nothing. But if, say, <tt>BrassPlus</tt> had a do-something destructor, it would be vital for <tt>Brass</tt> to have a virtual destructor, even if it did nothing.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
