<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Access Control: protected</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Access Control: <tt>protected</tt></h3>
<p class="docText">So far the class examples in this book have used the keywords <tt>public</tt> and <tt>private</tt> to control access to class members. There is one more access category, denoted with the keyword <tt>protected</tt>. The <tt>protected</tt> keyword is like <tt>private</tt> in that the outside world can access class members in a <tt>protected</tt> section only by using public class members. The difference between <tt>private</tt> and <tt>protected</tt>
 comes into play only within classes derived from the base class. 
Members of a derived class can access protected members of a base class 
directly, but they cannot directly access private members of the base 
class. So members in the protected category behave like private members 
as far as the outside world is concerned but behave like public members 
as far as derived classes are concerned.</p>
<p class="docText">For example, suppose the <tt>Brass</tt> class declared the <tt>balance</tt> member as protected:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>class Brass
{
protected:
    double balance;
...
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In this case, the <tt>BrassPlus</tt> class could access <tt>balance</tt> directly without using <tt>Brass</tt> methods. For example, the core of <tt>BrassPlus::Withdraw()</tt> could be written this way:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>void BrassPlus::Withdraw(double amt)
{
    if (amt &lt; 0)
        cout &lt;&lt; "Withdrawal amount must be positive; "

             &lt;&lt; "withdrawal canceled.\n";
    else if (amt &lt;= balance)       // access balance directly
        balance -= amt;
    else if ( amt &lt;= balance + maxLoan - owesBank)
    {
        double advance = amt - balance;
        owesBank += advance * (1.0 + rate);
        cout &lt;&lt; "Bank advance: $" &lt;&lt; advance &lt;&lt; endl;
        cout &lt;&lt; "Finance charge: $" &lt;&lt; advance * rate &lt;&lt; endl;
        Deposit(advance);
        balance -= amt;
    }
    else
        cout &lt;&lt; "Credit limit exceeded. Transaction cancelled.\n";
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Using protected data members may simplify writing the code, but it has a design defect. For example, continuing with the <tt>BrassPlus</tt> example, if <tt>balance</tt> were protected, you could write code like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>void BrassPlus::Reset(double amt)
{
    balance = amt;
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>Brass</tt> class was designed so that the <tt>Deposit()</tt> and <tt>Withdraw()</tt> interface provides the only means for altering <tt>balance</tt>. But the <tt>Reset()</tt> method essentially makes <tt>balance</tt> a public variable as far as <tt>BrassPlus</tt> objects are concerned, ignoring, for example, the safeguards found in <tt>Withdraw()</tt>.</p>
<div class="docNote"><p class="docNoteTitle">Caution</p>
<p class="docText">You should prefer private 
to protected access control for class data members, and you should use 
base-class methods to provide derived classes access to base-class data.</p>
</div><br/>
<p class="docText">However, protected 
access control can be quite useful for member functions, giving derived 
classes access to internal functions that are not available publicly.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
