<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Abstract Base Classes</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Abstract Base Classes</h3>
<p class="docText">So far you’ve seen simple 
inheritance and the more intricate polymorphic inheritance. The next 
step in increasing sophistication is the abstract base class (ABC). 
Let’s look at some programming situations that provide the background 
for ABCs.</p>
<p class="docText">Sometimes applying the <span class="docEmphasis">is-a</span>
 rule is not as simple as it might appear. Suppose, for example, you are
 developing a graphics program that is supposed to represent, among 
other things, circles and ellipses. A circle is a special case of an 
ellipse: It’s an ellipse whose long axis is the same as its short axis. 
Therefore, all circles are ellipses, and it is tempting to derive a <tt>Circle</tt> class from an <tt>Ellipse</tt> class. But when you get to the details, you may find problems.</p>
<p class="docText">To see this, first consider what you might include as part of an <tt>Ellipse</tt>
 class. Data members could include the coordinates of the center of the 
ellipse, the semimajor axis (half the long diameter), the semiminor axis
 (half the short diameter), and an orientation angle that gives the 
angle from the horizontal coordinate axis to the semimajor axis. Also 
the class could include methods to move the ellipse, to return the area 
of the ellipse, to rotate the ellipse, and to scale the semimajor and 
semiminor axes:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>class Ellipse
{
private:
    double x;     // x-coordinate of the ellipse's center
    double y;     // y-coordinate of the ellipse's center
    double a;     // semimajor axis
    double b;     // semiminor axis
    double angle; // orientation angle in degrees
    ...
public:
    ...
    void Move(int nx, ny) { x = nx; y = ny; }
    virtual double Area() const { return 3.14159 * a * b; }
    virtual void Rotate(double nang) { angle += nang; }
    virtual void Scale(double sa, double sb)  { a *= sa; b *= sb; }
    ...
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Now suppose you derive a <tt>Circle</tt> class from the <tt>Ellipse</tt> class:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>class Circle : public Ellipse
{
    ...
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Although a circle is an 
ellipse, this derivation is awkward. For example, a circle needs only a 
single value, its radius, to describe its size and shape instead of 
having a semimajor axis (<tt>a</tt>) and semiminor axis (<tt>b</tt>). The <tt>Circle</tt> constructors can take care of that by assigning the same value to both the <tt>a</tt> and <tt>b</tt> members, but then you have redundant representation of the same information. The <tt>angle</tt> parameter and the <tt>Rotate()</tt> method don’t really make sense for a circle, and the <tt>Scale()</tt>
 method, as it stands, can change a circle to a non-circle by scaling 
the two axes differently. You can try fixing things with tricks, such as
 putting a redefined <tt>Rotate()</tt> method in the private section of the <tt>Circle</tt> class so that <tt>Rotate()</tt> can’t be used publicly with a circle, but, on the whole, it seems simpler to define a <tt>Circle</tt> class without using inheritance:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>class Circle      // no inheritance
{
private:
    double x;     // x-coordinate of the circle's center
    double y;     // y-coordinate of the circle's center
    double r;     // radius
    ...
public:
    ...
    void Move(int nx, ny) { x = nx; y = ny; }
    double Area() const { return 3.14159 * r * r; }
    void Scale(double sr)  { r *= sr; }
    ...
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Now the class has only the members it needs. Yet this solution also seems weak. The <tt>Circle</tt> and <tt>Ellipse</tt> classes have a lot in common, but defining them separately ignores that fact.</p>
<p class="docText">There is another solution: You can abstract from the <tt>Ellipse</tt> and <tt>Circle</tt> classes what they have in common and place those features in an ABC. Next, you derive both the <tt>Circle</tt> and <tt>Ellipse</tt> classes from the ABC. Then, for example, you can use an array of base-class pointers to manage a mixture of <tt>Ellipse</tt> and <tt>Circle</tt>
 objects—that is, you can use a polymorphic approach. In this case, what
 the two classes have in common are the coordinates of the center of the
 shape; a <tt>Move()</tt> method, which is the same for both; and an <tt>Area()</tt> method, which works differently for the two classes. Indeed, the <tt>Area()</tt>
 method can’t even be implemented for the ABC because it doesn’t have 
the necessary data members. C++ has a way to provide an unimplemented 
function by using a <span class="docEmphasis">pure virtual function</span>. A pure virtual function has <tt>= 0</tt> at the end of its declaration, as shown for the <tt>Area()</tt> method:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>class BaseEllipse  // abstract base class
{
private:
    double x;   // x-coordinate of center
    double y;   // y-coordinate of center
    ...
public:
    BaseEllipse(double x0 = 0, double y0 = 0) : x(x0),y(y0) {}
    virtual ~BaseEllipse() {}
    void Move(int nx, ny) { x = nx; y = ny; }
    virtual double Area() const = 0; // a pure virtual function
   ...
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">When
 a class declaration contains a pure virtual function, you can’t create 
an object of that class. The idea is that classes with pure virtual 
functions exist solely to serve as base classes. For a class to be a 
genuine ABC, it has to have at least one pure virtual function. It is 
the <tt>= 0</tt> in the prototype that makes a virtual function a pure virtual function. In the case of the <tt>Area()</tt>
 method, the function has no definition, but C++ allows even a pure 
virtual function to have a definition. For example, perhaps all the base
 methods are like <tt>Move()</tt> in that they 
can be defined for the base class, but you still need to make the class 
abstract. You could then make the prototype virtual:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>void Move(int nx, ny) = 0;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This makes the base class abstract. But then you could still provide a definition in the implementation file:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>void BaseEllipse::Move(int nx, ny) { x = nx; y = ny; }</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In short, the <tt>= 0</tt> in the
 prototype indicates that the class is an abstract base class and that 
the class doesn’t necessarily have to define the function.</p>
<p class="docText">Now you can derive the <tt>Ellipse</tt> class and <tt>Circle</tt> class from the <tt>BaseEllipse</tt> class, adding the members needed to complete each class. One point to note is that the <tt>Circle</tt> class always represents circles, whereas the <tt>Ellipse</tt> class represents ellipses that can also be circles. However, an <tt>Ellipse</tt> class circle can be rescaled to a non-circle, whereas a <tt>Circle</tt> class circle must remain a circle.</p>
<p class="docText">A program using these classes would be able to create <tt>Ellipse</tt> objects and <tt>Circle</tt> objects but no <tt>BaseEllipse</tt> objects. Because <tt>Circle</tt> and <tt>Ellipse</tt> objects have the same base class, a collection of such objects can be managed with an array of <tt>BaseEllipse</tt> pointers. Classes such as <tt>Circle</tt> and <tt>Ellipse</tt> are sometimes termed <span class="docEmphasis">concrete</span> classes to indicate that you can create objects of those types.</p>
<p class="docText">In short, an ABC describes an
 interface that uses a least one pure virtual function, and classes 
derived from an ABC use regular virtual functions to implement the 
interface in terms of the properties of the particular derived class.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EANDK">Applying the ABC Concept</h4>
<p class="docText">You’d probably like to see a complete example of an ABC, so let’s apply the concept to representing the <tt>Brass</tt> and <tt>BrassPlus</tt> accounts, starting with an ABC called <tt>AcctABC</tt>. This class should contain all methods and data members that are common to both the <tt>Brass</tt> and the <tt>BrassPlus</tt> classes. The methods that are to work differently for the <tt>BrassPlus</tt> class than they do for the <tt>Brass</tt>
 class should be declared as virtual functions. At least one virtual 
function should be a pure virtual function in order to make the <tt>AcctABC</tt> class abstract.</p>
<p class="docText">Listing 13.11 is a header file that declares the <tt>AcctABC</tt> class (an ABC) and the <tt>Brass</tt> and <tt>BrassPlus</tt> classes (both concrete classes). To facilitate derived class access to base class data, <tt>AcctABC</tt>
 provides some protected methods. Recall that protected methods are 
methods that derived-class methods can call but that are not part of the
 public interface for derived-class objects. <tt>AcctABC</tt> also provides a protected member function to handle the formatting previously handled by nonmember functions. Also the <tt>AcctABC</tt> class has two pure virtual functions, so it is, indeed, an abstract class.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EGPDK">Listing 13.11. <tt>acctabc.h</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// acctabc.h  -- bank account classes
#ifndef ACCTABC_H_
#define ACCTABC_H_
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;

// Abstract Base Class
class AcctABC
{
private:
    std::string fullName;
    long acctNum;
    double balance;
protected:
    struct Formatting
    {
         std::ios_base::fmtflags flag;
         std::streamsize pr;
    };
    const std::string &amp; FullName() const {return fullName;}
    long AcctNum() const {return acctNum;}
    Formatting SetFormat() const;
    void Restore(Formatting &amp; f) const;
public:
    AcctABC(const std::string &amp; s = "Nullbody", long an = -1,
                double bal = 0.0);
    void Deposit(double amt) ;
    virtual void Withdraw(double amt) = 0; // pure virtual function
    double Balance() const {return balance;};
    virtual void ViewAcct() const = 0;     // pure virtual function
    virtual ~AcctABC() {}
};

// Brass Account Class
class Brass :public AcctABC
{
public:
    Brass(const std::string &amp; s = "Nullbody", long an = -1,
           double bal = 0.0) : AcctABC(s, an, bal) { }
    virtual void Withdraw(double amt);
    virtual void ViewAcct() const;
    virtual ~Brass() {}
};

//Brass Plus Account Class
class BrassPlus : public AcctABC
{
private:
    double maxLoan;
    double rate;
    double owesBank;
public:
    BrassPlus(const std::string &amp; s = "Nullbody", long an = -1,
            double bal = 0.0, double ml = 500,
            double r = 0.10);
    BrassPlus(const Brass &amp; ba, double ml = 500, double r = 0.1);
    virtual void ViewAcct()const;
    virtual void Withdraw(double amt);
    void ResetMax(double m) { maxLoan = m; }
    void ResetRate(double r) { rate = r; };
    void ResetOwes() { owesBank = 0; }
};
#endif

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The next step is to implement the methods that don’t already have inline definitions. Listing 13.12 does that.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ETQDK">Listing 13.12. <tt>acctabc.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// acctabc.cpp -- bank account class methods
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include "acctabc.h"
using std::cout;
using std::ios_base;
using std::endl;
using std::string;

// Abstract Base Class
AcctABC::AcctABC(const string &amp; s, long an, double bal)
{
    fullName = s;
    acctNum = an;
    balance = bal;
}

void AcctABC::Deposit(double amt)
{
    if (amt &lt; 0)
        cout &lt;&lt; "Negative deposit not allowed; "
             &lt;&lt; "deposit is cancelled.\n";
    else
        balance += amt;
}

void AcctABC::Withdraw(double amt)
{
    balance -= amt;
}

// protected methods for formatting
AcctABC::Formatting AcctABC::SetFormat() const
{
 // set up ###.## format
    Formatting f;
    f.flag =
        cout.setf(ios_base::fixed, ios_base::floatfield);
    f.pr = cout.precision(2);
    return f;
}

void AcctABC::Restore(Formatting &amp; f) const
{
    cout.setf(f.flag, ios_base::floatfield);
    cout.precision(f.pr);
}

// Brass methods
void Brass::Withdraw(double amt)
{
    if (amt &lt; 0)
        cout &lt;&lt; "Withdrawal amount must be positive; "
             &lt;&lt; "withdrawal canceled.\n";
    else if (amt &lt;= Balance())
        AcctABC::Withdraw(amt);
    else
        cout &lt;&lt; "Withdrawal amount of $" &lt;&lt; amt
             &lt;&lt; " exceeds your balance.\n"
             &lt;&lt; "Withdrawal canceled.\n";
}

void Brass::ViewAcct() const
{

    Formatting f = SetFormat();
    cout &lt;&lt; "Brass Client: " &lt;&lt; FullName() &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Account Number: " &lt;&lt; AcctNum() &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Balance: $" &lt;&lt; Balance() &lt;&lt; endl;
    Restore(f);
}

// BrassPlus Methods
BrassPlus::BrassPlus(const string &amp; s, long an, double bal,
           double ml, double r) : AcctABC(s, an, bal)
{
    maxLoan = ml;
    owesBank = 0.0;
    rate = r;
}

BrassPlus::BrassPlus(const Brass &amp; ba, double ml, double r)
           : AcctABC(ba)   // uses implicit copy constructor
{
    maxLoan = ml;
    owesBank = 0.0;
    rate = r;
}

void BrassPlus::ViewAcct() const
{
    Formatting f = SetFormat();

    cout &lt;&lt; "BrassPlus Client: " &lt;&lt; FullName() &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Account Number: " &lt;&lt; AcctNum() &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Balance: $" &lt;&lt; Balance() &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Maximum loan: $" &lt;&lt; maxLoan &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Owed to bank: $" &lt;&lt; owesBank &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout.precision(3);
    cout &lt;&lt; "Loan Rate: " &lt;&lt; 100 * rate &lt;&lt; "%\n";
    Restore(f);
}

void BrassPlus::Withdraw(double amt)
{
    Formatting f = SetFormat();

    double bal = Balance();
    if (amt &lt;= bal)
        AcctABC::Withdraw(amt);
    else if ( amt &lt;= bal + maxLoan - owesBank)
    {
        double advance = amt - bal;
        owesBank += advance * (1.0 + rate);
        cout &lt;&lt; "Bank advance: $" &lt;&lt; advance &lt;&lt; endl;
        cout &lt;&lt; "Finance charge: $" &lt;&lt; advance * rate &lt;&lt; endl;
        Deposit(advance);
        AcctABC::Withdraw(amt);
    }
    else
        cout &lt;&lt; "Credit limit exceeded. Transaction cancelled.\n";
    Restore(f);
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>FullName()</tt> and <tt>AcctNum()</tt> protected methods provide read-only access to the <tt>fullName</tt> and <tt>acctNum</tt> data members and make it possible to customize <tt>ViewAcct()</tt> a little more individually for each derived class.</p>
<p class="docText">This version makes a
 couple of improvements in the implementation of the formatting. The 
previous version used two function calls to set the formatting and one 
to restore it:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>format initialState = setFormat();
precis prec = cout.precision(2);
...
restore(initialState, prec); // restore original format</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The new version defines a 
structure to hold the two formatting values and uses that structure to 
set and restore formats with just two calls:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>struct Formatting
{
     std::ios_base::fmtfglas flag;
     std::streamsize pr;
};
...
Formatting f = SetFormat();
...
Restore(f);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">It’s a neater look.</p>
<p class="docText">A problem with the older version was that the original <tt>setFormat()</tt> and <tt>restore()</tt>
 were standalone functions, so those function names would conflict with 
client-defined functions of the same name. There are several ways to 
solve that problem. One is to declare both functions <tt>static</tt>, making them private to the <tt>brass.cpp</tt> file or to its successor, <tt>acctabc.cpp</tt>. A second is to place both functions and the <tt>struct Formatting</tt>
 definition into a namespace. But one of the topics for this example is 
protected access, so this example places the structure definition and 
the functions in the protected part of the class definition. This makes 
them available to the base class and the derived class while hiding them
 from the outside world.</p>
<p class="docText">This new implementation of the <tt>Brass</tt> and <tt>BrassPlus</tt>
 accounts can be used in the same manner as the old one because the 
class methods have the same names and interfaces as before. For example,
 to convert Listing 13.10 to use the new implementation, you just need to take these steps to convert <tt>usebrass2.cpp</tt> to a <tt>usebrass3.cpp</tt> file:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">Link <tt>usebrass2.cpp</tt> with <tt>acctabc.cpp</tt> instead of with <tt>brass.cpp</tt>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Include <tt>acctabc.h</tt> instead of <tt>brass.h</tt>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Replace</p><div class="docText"><pre>Brass * p_clients[CLIENTS];</pre></div><p class="docList">with</p><div class="docText"><pre>AcctABC * p_clients[CLIENTS];</pre></div></li></ul>
<p class="docText">Listing 13.13 shows the resulting file, renamed <tt>usebrass3.cpp</tt>.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EXWDK">Listing 13.13. <tt>usebrass3.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// usebrass3.cpp -- polymorphic example using an abstract base class
// compile with acctacb.cpp
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;
#include "acctabc.h"
const int CLIENTS = 4;

int main()
{
   using std::cin;
   using std::cout;
   using std::endl;

   AcctABC * p_clients[CLIENTS];
   std::string temp;
   long tempnum;
   double tempbal;
   char kind;

   for (int i = 0; i &lt; CLIENTS; i++)
   {
       cout &lt;&lt; "Enter client's name: ";
       getline(cin,temp);
       cout &lt;&lt; "Enter client's account number: ";
       cin &gt;&gt; tempnum;
       cout &lt;&lt; "Enter opening balance: $";
       cin &gt;&gt; tempbal;
       cout &lt;&lt; "Enter 1 for Brass Account or "
            &lt;&lt; "2 for BrassPlus Account: ";
       while (cin &gt;&gt; kind &amp;&amp; (kind != '1' &amp;&amp; kind != '2'))
           cout &lt;&lt;"Enter either 1 or 2: ";
       if (kind == '1')
           p_clients[i] = new Brass(temp, tempnum, tempbal);
       else
       {
           double tmax, trate;
           cout &lt;&lt; "Enter the overdraft limit: $";
           cin &gt;&gt; tmax;
           cout &lt;&lt; "Enter the interest rate "
                &lt;&lt; "as a decimal fraction: ";
           cin &gt;&gt; trate;
           p_clients[i] = new BrassPlus(temp, tempnum, tempbal,
                                        tmax, trate);
        }
        while (cin.get() != '\n')
            continue;
   }
   cout &lt;&lt; endl;
   for (int i = 0; i &lt; CLIENTS; i++)
   {
       p_clients[i]-&gt;ViewAcct();
       cout &lt;&lt; endl;
   }

   for (int i = 0; i &lt; CLIENTS; i++)
   {
       delete p_clients[i];  // free memory
   }
   cout &lt;&lt; "Done.\n";

   return 0;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The program itself behaves the same as the non-abstract base class version, so given the same input as for Listing 13.10, the output would be the same.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EIZDK">ABC Philosophy</h4>
<p class="docText">The ABC methodology is a
 much more systematic, disciplined way to approach inheritance than the 
more ad hoc, spur-of-the-moment approach used by the <tt>RatedPlayer</tt>
 example. Before designing an ABC, you first have to develop a model of 
what classes are needed to represent a programming problem and how they 
relate to one another. One school of thought holds that if you design an
 inheritance hierarchy of classes, the only concrete classes should be 
those that never serve as a base class. This approach tends to produce 
cleaner designs with fewer complications.</p>
<p class="docText">One
 way of thinking about ABCs is to consider them an enforcement of 
interface. An ABC demands that its pure virtual functions be overridden 
in any concrete derived classes—forcing the derived class to obey the 
rules of interface the ABC has set. This model is common in 
component-based programming paradigms, in which the use of ABCs allows 
the component designer to create an “interface contract” where all 
components derived from the ABC are guaranteed to uphold <span class="docEmphasis">at least</span> the common functionality specified by the ABC.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
