<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Class Design Review</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Class Design Review</h3>
<p class="docText">C++ can be applied to a wide 
variety of programming problems, and you can’t reduce class design to 
some paint-by-numbers routine. However, there are some guidelines that 
often apply, and this is as good a time as any to go over them by 
reviewing and amplifying earlier discussions.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ERLDK">Member Functions That the Compiler Generates for You</h4>
<p class="docText">As first discussed in Chapter 12, the compiler automatically generates certain public member functions, termed <span class="docEmphasis">special member functions</span>.
 The fact that it does so suggests that these special member functions 
are particularly important. Let’s look again at some of them now.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EEMDK">Default Constructors</h5>
<p class="docText">A default constructor is one 
that has no arguments, or else one for which all the arguments have 
default arguments. If you don’t define any constructors, the compiler 
defines a default constructor for you. Its existence allows you to 
create objects. For example, suppose <tt>Star</tt> is a class. You need a default constructor to use the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Star rigel;        // create an object without explicit initialization
Star pleiades[6];  // create an array of objects</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">One
 more thing an automatic default constructor does is call the default 
constructors for any base classes and for any members that are objects 
of another class.</p>
<p class="docText">Also if you write a 
derived-class constructor without explicitly invoking a base-class 
constructor in the member initializer list, the compiler uses the base 
class default constructor to construct the base class portion of the new
 object. If there is no base-class default constructor, you get a 
compile-time error in this situation.</p>
<p class="docText">If you define a 
constructor of any kind, the compiler does not define a default 
constructor for you. In that case, it’s up to you to provide a default 
constructor if one is needed.</p>
<p class="docText">Note that one of the motivations 
for having constructors is to ensure that objects are always properly 
initialized. Also if a class has any pointer members, they certainly 
should be initialized. Thus, it’s a good idea to supply an explicit 
default constructor that initializes all class data members to 
reasonable values.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EQPDK">Copy Constructors</h5>
<p class="docText">A copy constructor for a class 
is a constructor that takes an object of the class type as its argument.
 Typically, the declared parameter is a constant reference to the class 
type. For example, the copy constructor for a <tt>Star</tt> class would have this prototype:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Star(const Star &amp;);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">A class copy constructor is used in the following situations:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">When a new object is initialized to an object of the same class</p></li><li><p class="docList">When an object is passed to a function by value</p></li><li><p class="docList">When a function returns an object by value</p></li><li><p class="docList">When the compiler generates a temporary object</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">If a program doesn’t use a
 copy constructor (explicitly or implicitly), the compiler provides a 
prototype but not a function definition. Otherwise, the program defines a
 copy constructor that performs memberwise initialization. That is, each
 member of the new object is initialized to the value of the 
corresponding member of the original object. If a member is itself a 
class object, then memberwise initialization uses the copy constructor 
defined for that particular class.</p>
<p class="docText">In some cases, memberwise initialization is undesirable. For example, member pointers initialized with <tt>new</tt> generally require that you institute deep copying, as with the <tt>baseDMA</tt>
 class example. Or a class may have a static variable that needs to be 
modified. In such cases, you need to define your own copy constructor.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EBRDK">Assignment Operators</h5>
<p class="docText">A default assignment 
operator handles assigning one object to another object of the same 
class. Don’t confuse assignment with initialization. If a statement 
creates a new object, it’s using initialization, and if a statement 
alters the value of an existing object, it’s assignment:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Star sirius;
Star alpha = sirius;     // initialization (one notation)
Star dogstar;
dogstar = sirius;        // assignment</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Default
 assignment uses memberwise assignment. If a member is itself a class 
object, then default memberwise assignment uses the assignment operator 
defined for that particular class. If you need to define a copy 
constructor explicitly, you also need, for the same reasons, to define 
the assignment operator explicitly. The prototype for a <tt>Star</tt> class assignment operator is this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Star &amp; Star::operator=(const Star &amp;);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Note that the assignment operator function returns a reference to a <tt>Star</tt> object. The <tt>baseDMA</tt> class shows a typical example of an explicit assignment operator function.</p>
<p class="docText">The compiler doesn’t generate 
assignment operators for assigning one type to another. Suppose you want
 to be able to assign a string to a <tt>Star</tt> object. One approach is to define such an operator explicitly:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Star &amp; Star::operator=(const char *) {...}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">A second approach is to rely on a conversion function (see “Conversion Considerations” in the next section) to convert a string to a <tt>Star</tt> object and use the <tt>Star</tt>-to-<tt>Star</tt>
 assignment function. The first approach runs more quickly but requires 
more code. The conversion function approach can lead to 
compiler-befuddling situations.</p>
<p class="docText">Chapter 18,
 “Visiting with the New C++ Standard,” discusses two more special 
methods added by C++11: the move constructor and the move assignment 
operator.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ETUDK">Other Class Method Considerations</h4>
<p class="docText">There are several other points to keep in mind as you define a class. The following sections list some of them.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E4UDK">Constructor Considerations</h5>
<p class="docText">Constructors are different 
from other class methods in that they create new objects, whereas other 
methods are invoked by existing objects. This is one reason constructors
 aren’t inherited. Inheritance means a derived object can use a 
base-class method, but, in the case of constructors, the object doesn’t 
exist until after the constructor has done its work.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EIVDK">Destructor Considerations</h5>
<p class="docText">You need to remember to define an explicit destructor that deletes any memory allocated by <tt>new</tt>
 in the class constructors and takes care of any other special 
bookkeeping that destroying a class object requires. If the class is to 
be used as a base class, you should provide a virtual destructor even if
 the class doesn’t require a destructor.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EWVDK">Conversion Considerations</h5>
<p class="docText">Any
 constructor that can be invoked with exactly one argument defines 
conversion from the argument type to the class type. For example, 
consider the following constructor prototypes for a <tt>Star</tt> class:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Star(const char *);                       // converts char * to Star
Star(const Spectral &amp;, int members = 1); // converts Spectral to Star</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Conversion constructors are 
used, for example, when a convertible type is passed to a function that 
is defined as taking a class argument. For instance, suppose you have 
the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Star north;
north = "polaris";</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The second statement would invoke the <tt>Star::operator=(const Star &amp;)</tt> function, using <tt>Star::Star(const char *)</tt> to generate a <tt>Star</tt> object to be used as an argument for the assignment operator function. This assumes that you haven’t defined a <tt>(char *)</tt>-to-<tt>Star</tt> assignment operator.</p>
<p class="docText">Using <tt>explicit</tt> in the prototype for a one-argument constructor disables implicit conversions but still allows explicit conversions:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>class Star
{
...
public:
    explicit Star(const char *);
...
};
...
Star north;
north = "polaris";        // not allowed
north = Star("polaris");  // allowed</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">To convert from a class object to some other type, you define a conversion function (see Chapter 11,
 “Working with Classes”). A conversion function is a class member 
function with no arguments or declared return type that has the name of 
the type to be converted to. Despite having no declared return type, the
 function should return the desired conversion value. Here are some 
examples:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Star::Star double() {...}          // converts star to double
Star::Star const char * () {...}   // converts to const char</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">You should be judicious with
 such functions, only using them if they make good sense. Also with some
 class designs, having conversion functions increases the likelihood of 
writing ambiguous code. For example, suppose you define a <tt>double</tt> conversion for the <tt>Vector</tt> type of Chapter 11, and suppose you have the following code:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Vector ius(6.0, 0.0);
Vector lux = ius + 20.2;        // ambiguous</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The compiler could convert <tt>ius</tt> to <tt>double</tt> and use <tt>double</tt> addition, or else it could convert <tt>20.2</tt> to <tt>vector</tt> (using one of the constructors) and use <tt>vector</tt> addition. Instead, it would do neither and inform you of an ambiguous construction.</p>
<p class="docText">C++11 provides the option of using the keyword <tt>explicit</tt> with conversion functions. As with constructors, <tt>explicit</tt> allows explicit conversions using type casts, but disallows implicit conversions.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EF4DK">Passing an Object by Value Versus Passing a Reference</h5>
<p class="docText">In general, if you 
write a function using an object argument, you should pass the object by
 reference rather than by value. One reason for this is efficiency. 
Passing an object by value involves generating a temporary copy, which 
means calling the copy constructor and then later calling the 
destructor. Calling these functions takes time, and copying a large 
object can be quite a bit slower than passing a reference. If the 
function doesn’t modify the object, you should declare the argument as a
 <tt>const</tt> reference.</p>
<p class="docText">Another reason for passing
 objects by reference is that, in the case of inheritance using virtual 
functions, a function defined as accepting a base-class reference 
argument can also be used successfully with derived classes, as you saw 
earlier in this chapter. (Also see the section “Virtual Methods,” later in this chapter.)</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E24DK">Returning an Object Versus Returning a Reference</h5>
<p class="docText">Some class methods return 
objects. You’ve probably noticed that some members return objects 
directly whereas others return references. Sometimes a method must 
return an object, but if it isn’t necessary, you should use a reference 
instead. Let’s look at this more closely.</p>
<p class="docText">First, the only coding 
difference between returning an object directly and returning a 
reference is in the function prototype and header:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Star nova1(const Star &amp;);     // returns a Star object
Star &amp; nova2(const Star &amp;);   // returns a reference to a Star</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Next, the reason you should 
return a reference rather than an object is that returning an object 
involves generating a temporary copy of the returned object. It’s the 
copy that is made available to the calling program. Thus, returning an 
object involves the time cost of calling a copy constructor to generate 
the copy and the time cost of calling the destructor to get rid of the 
copy. Returning a reference saves time and memory use. Returning an 
object directly is analogous to passing an object by value: Both 
processes generate temporary copies. Similarly, returning a reference is
 analogous to passing an object by reference: Both the calling and the 
called function operate on the same object.</p>
<p class="docText">However, it’s not always 
possible to return a reference. A function shouldn’t return a reference 
to a temporary object created in the function because the reference 
becomes invalid when the function terminates and the object disappears. 
In this case, the code should return an object in order to generate a 
copy that will be available to the calling program.</p>
<p class="docText">As
 a rule of thumb, if a function returns a temporary object created in 
the function, you shouldn’t use a reference. For example, the following 
method uses a constructor to create a new object, and it then returns a 
copy of that object:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Vector Vector::operator+(const Vector &amp; b) const
{
    return Vector(x + b.x, y + b.y);
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">If a function returns 
an object that was passed to it via a reference or pointer, you should 
return the object by reference. For example, the following code returns,
 by reference, either the object that invokes the function or else the 
object passed as an argument:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>const Stock &amp; Stock::topval(const Stock &amp; s) const
{
    if (s.total_val &gt; total_val)
       return s;           // argument object
    else
       return *this;       // invoking object
}</pre></div><br/>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E26DK">Using <tt>const</tt></h5>
<p class="docText">You need to be alert to opportunities to use <tt>const</tt>. You can use it to guarantee that a method doesn’t modify an argument:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedWidth">Star::Star(const char * s) {...} // won't change the string to which s points

					  </pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">You can use <tt>const</tt> to guarantee that a method won’t modify the object that invokes it:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>void Star::show() const {...} // won't change invoking object</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here <tt>const</tt> means <tt>const Star * this</tt>, where <tt>this</tt> points to the invoking object.</p>
<p class="docText">Normally, a function that 
returns a reference can be on the left side of an assignment statement, 
which really means you can assign a value to the object referred to. But
 you can use <tt>const</tt> to ensure that a reference or pointer return value can’t be used to modify data in an object:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>const Stock &amp; Stock::topval(const Stock &amp; s) const
{
    if (s.total_val &gt; total_val)
       return s;           // argument object
    else
       return *this;       // invoking object
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here the method returns a reference either to <tt>this</tt> or to <tt>s</tt>. Because <tt>this</tt> and <tt>s</tt> are both declared <tt>const</tt>, the function is not allowed to change them, which means the returned reference also must be declared <tt>const</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Note that if a function declares an argument as a reference or pointer to a <tt>const</tt>, it cannot pass along that argument to another function unless that function also guarantees not to change the argument.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EYGEK">Public Inheritance Considerations</h4>
<p class="docText">Naturally, adding inheritance to a program brings up a number of considerations. Let’s look at a few.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ECHEK"><span class="docEmphasis">Is-a</span> Relationship Considerations</h5>
<p class="docText">You should be guided by the <span class="docEmphasis">is-a</span>
 relationship. If your proposed derived class is not a particular kind 
of the base class, you shouldn’t use public derivation. For example, you
 shouldn’t derive a <tt>Programmer</tt> class from a <tt>Brain</tt> class. If you want to represent the belief that a programmer has a brain, you should use a <tt>Brain</tt> class object as a member of the <tt>Programmer</tt> class.</p>
<p class="docText">In some cases the best 
approach may be to create an abstract data class with pure virtual 
functions and to derive other classes from it.</p>
<p class="docText">Remember that one expression of the <span class="docEmphasis">is-a</span>
 relationship is that a base class pointer can point to a derived-class 
object and that a base-class reference can refer to a derived-class 
object without an explicit type cast. Also remember that the reverse is 
not true; thus, you cannot have a derived-class pointer or reference 
refer to a base-class object without an explicit type cast. Depending on
 the class declarations, such an explicit type cast (a downcast) may or 
may not make sense. (You might want to review Figure 13.4.)</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EHIEK">What’s Not Inherited</h5>
<p class="docText">Constructors are not 
inherited. That is, creating a derived object requires calling a 
derived-class constructor. However, derived-class constructors typically
 use the member-initializer list syntax to call on base-class 
constructors to construct the base class portion of a derived object. If
 the derived-class constructor doesn’t explicitly call a base-class 
constructor by using the member-initializer list syntax, it uses the 
base class’s default constructor. In an inheritance chain, each class 
can use a member initializer list to pass back information to its 
immediate base class. C++11 adds a mechanism that enables the inheriting
 of constructors. However, the default behavior is still that 
constructors are not inherited.</p>
<p class="docText">Destructors are not 
inherited either. However, when an object is destroyed, the program 
first calls the derived destructor and then the base destructor. If 
there is a default base class destructor, the compiler generates a 
default derived class destructor. Generally speaking, if a class serves 
as a base class, its destructor should be virtual.</p>
<p class="docText">Assignment 
operators are not inherited. The reason is simple. An inherited method 
has the same function signature in a derived class as it does in the 
base class. However, an assignment operator has a function signature 
that changes from class to class because it has a formal parameter that 
is the class type. Assignment operators do have some interesting 
properties, which we’ll look at next.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EWIEK">Assignment Operator Considerations</h5>
<p class="docText">If the compiler detects 
that a program assigns one object to another of the same class, it 
automatically supplies that class with an assignment operator. The 
default, or implicit, version of this operator uses memberwise 
assignment, with each member of the target object being assigned the 
value of the corresponding member of the source object. However, if the 
object belongs to a derived class, the compiler uses the base-class 
assignment operator to handle assignment for the base-class portion of 
the derived-class object. If you’ve explicitly provided an assignment 
operator for the base class, that operator is used. Similarly, if a 
class contains a member that is an object of another class, the 
assignment operator for that class is used for that member.</p>
<p class="docText">As you’ve seen several times, you need to provide an explicit assignment operator if class constructors use <tt>new</tt>
 to initialize pointers. Because C++ uses the base-class assignment 
operator for the base part of derived objects, you don’t need to 
redefine the assignment operator for a derived class <span class="docEmphasis">unless</span> it adds data members that require special care. For example, the <tt>baseDMA</tt> class defines assignment explicitly, but the derived <tt>lacksDMA</tt> class uses the implicit assignment operator generated for that class.</p>
<p class="docText">Suppose, however, that a derived class does use <tt>new</tt>,
 and you have to provide an explicit assignment operator. The operator 
must provide for every member of the class, not just the new members. 
The <tt>hasDMA</tt> class illustrates how this can be done:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>hasDMA &amp; hasDMA::operator=(const hasDMA &amp; hs)
{
    if (this == &amp;hs)
        return *this;
    baseDMA::operator=(hs);  // copy base portion
    delete [] style;         // prepare for new style
    style = new char[std::strlen(hs.style) + 1];
    std::strcpy(style, hs.style);
    return *this;
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">What about assigning a 
derived-class object to a base-class object? (Note that this is not the 
same as initializing a base-class reference to a derived-class object.) 
Take a look at this example:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Brass blips;                                                  // base class
BrassPlus snips("Rafe Plosh", 91191,3993.19, 600.0, 0.12); // derived class
blips = snips;                      // assign derived object to base object</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Which assignment 
operator is used? Remember that the assignment statement is translated 
into a method that is invoked by the left-hand object:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>blips.operator=(snips);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here the left-hand object is a <tt>Brass</tt> object, so it invokes the <tt>Brass::operator=(const Brass &amp;)</tt> function. The <span class="docEmphasis">is-a</span> relationship allows the <tt>Brass</tt> reference to refer to a derived-class object, such as <tt>snips</tt>. The assignment operator only deals with base-class members, so the <tt>maxLoan</tt> member and other <tt>BrassPlus</tt> members of <tt>snips</tt>
 are ignored in the assignment. In short, you can assign a derived 
object to a base object, and only the base-class members are involved.</p>
<p class="docText">What about the reverse? Can you assign a base-class object to a derived object? Take a look at this example:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Brass gp("Griff Hexbait", 21234, 1200);   // base class
BrassPlus temp;                           // derived class
temp = gp;   // possible?</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here the assignment statement would be translated as follows:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>temp.operator=(gp);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The left-hand object is a <tt>BrassPlus</tt> object, so it invokes the <tt>BrassPlus::operator=(const BrassPlus &amp;)</tt> function. However, a derived-class reference cannot automatically refer to a base-class object, so this code <span class="docEmphasis">won’t</span> run unless there is <span class="docEmphasis">also</span> a conversion constructor:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>BrassPlus(const Brass &amp;);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">It could be, as is the case for the <tt>BrassPlus</tt>
 class, that the conversion constructor is a constructor with a 
base-class argument plus additional arguments, provided that the 
additional arguments have default values:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>BrassPlus(const Brass &amp; ba, double ml = 500, double r = 0.1);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">If there is a conversion constructor, the program uses this constructor to create a temporary <tt>BrassPlus</tt> object from <tt>gp</tt>, which is then used as an argument to the assignment operator.</p>
<p class="docText">Alternatively, you could define an assignment operator for assigning a base class to a derived class:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>BrassPlus &amp; BrassPlus ::operator=(const Brass &amp;) {...}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here the types match the assignment statement exactly, and no type conversions are needed.</p>
<p class="docText">In short, the answer to the 
question “Can you assign a base-class object to a derived object?” is 
“Maybe.” You can if the derived class has a constructor that defines the
 conversion of a base-class object to a derived-class object. And you 
can if the derived class defines an assignment operator for assigning a 
base-class object to a derived object. If neither of these two 
conditions holds, then you can’t make the assignment unless you use an 
explicit type cast.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ESQEK">Private Versus Protected Members</h5>
<p class="docText">Remember that 
protected members act like public members as far as a derived class is 
concerned, but they act like private members for the world at large. A 
derived class can access protected members of a base class directly, but
 it can access private members only via base-class member functions. 
Thus, making base-class members private offers more security, whereas 
making them protected simplifies coding and speeds up access. 
Stroustrup, in his book <span class="docEmphasis">The Design and Evolution of C++</span>, indicates that it’s better to use private data members than protected data members but that protected methods are useful.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ECREK">Virtual Method Considerations</h5>
<p class="docText">When you design a base class,
 you have to decide whether to make class methods virtual. If you want a
 derived class to be able to redefine a method, you define the method as
 virtual in the base class. This enables late, or dynamic, binding. If 
you don’t want the method to be redefined, you don’t make it virtual. 
This doesn’t prevent someone from redefining the method, but it should 
be interpreted as meaning that you don’t want it redefined.</p>
<p class="docText">Note that inappropriate code can circumvent dynamic binding. Consider, for example, the following two functions:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>void show(const Brass &amp; rba)
{
    rba.ViewAcct();
    cout &lt;&lt; endl;
}

void inadequate(Brass ba)
{
    ba.ViewAcct();
    cout &lt;&lt; endl;
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The first function passes an object by reference, and the second passes an object by value.</p>
<p class="docText">Now suppose you use each with a derived class argument:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>BrassPlus buzz("Buzz Parsec", 00001111, 4300);
show(buzz);
inadequate(buzz);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>show()</tt> function call results in the <tt>rba</tt> argument being a reference to the <tt>BrassPlus</tt> object <tt>buzz</tt>, so <tt>rba.ViewAcct()</tt> is interpreted as the <tt>BrassPlus</tt> version, as it should be. But in the <tt>inadequate()</tt> function, which passes an object by value, <tt>ba</tt> is a <tt>Brass</tt> object constructed by the <tt>Brass(const Brass &amp;)</tt> constructor. (Automatic upcasting allows the constructor argument to refer to a <tt>BrassPlus</tt> object.) Thus, in <tt>inadequate()</tt>, <tt>ba.ViewAcct()</tt> is the <tt>Brass</tt> version, so only the <tt>Brass</tt> component of <tt>buzz</tt> is displayed.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ELWEK">Destructor Considerations</h5>
<p class="docText">As mentioned earlier, a base 
class destructor should be virtual. That way, when you delete a derived 
object via a base-class pointer or reference to the object, the program 
uses the derived-class destructor followed by the base-class destructor 
rather than using only the base-class destructor.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EWWEK">Friend Considerations</h5>
<p class="docText">Because a friend function is 
not actually a class member, it’s not inherited. However, you might 
still want a friend to a derived class to use a friend to the base 
class. The way to accomplish this is to type cast a derived-class 
reference or pointer to the base-class equivalent and to then use the 
type cast reference or pointer to invoke the base-class friend:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>ostream &amp; operator&lt;&lt;(ostream &amp; os, const hasDMA &amp; hs)
{
//  type cast to match operator&lt;&lt;(ostream &amp; , const baseDMA &amp;)
    os &lt;&lt; (const baseDMA &amp;) hs;
    os &lt;&lt; "Style: " &lt;&lt; hs.style &lt;&lt; endl;
    return os;
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">You can also use the <tt>dynamic_cast&lt;&gt;</tt> operator, discussed in Chapter 15, “Friends, Exceptions, and More,” for the type cast:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>os &lt;&lt; dynamic_cast&lt;const baseDMA &amp;&gt; (hs);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">For reasons discussed in Chapter 15, this would be the preferred form of type cast.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EDYEK">Observations on Using Base-Class Methods</h5>
<p class="docText">Publicly derived objects can use base-class methods in many ways:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">A derived object automatically uses inherited base-class methods if the derived class hasn’t redefined the method.</p></li><li><p class="docList">A derived-class destructor automatically invokes the base-class constructor.</p></li><li><p class="docList">A
 derived-class constructor automatically invokes the base-class default 
constructor if you don’t specify another constructor in a 
member-initialization list.</p></li><li><p class="docList">A derived-class constructor explicitly invokes the base-class constructor specified in a member-initialization list.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Derived-class methods can use the scope-resolution operator to invoke public and protected base-class methods.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Friends
 to a derived class can type cast a derived-class reference or pointer 
to a base-class reference or pointer and then use that reference or 
pointer to invoke a friend to the base class.</p></li></ul>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EN3EK">Class Function Summary</h4>
<p class="docText">C++ class functions come in 
many variations. Some can be inherited, and some can’t. Some operator 
functions can be either member functions or friends, and others can only
 be member functions. Table 13.1, based on a similar table from <span class="docEmphasis">The Annotated C++ Reference Manual</span>, summarizes these properties. In it, the notation <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>op</tt></span><tt>=</tt> stands for assignment operators of the form <tt>+=</tt>, <tt>*=</tt>, and so on. Note that the properties for the <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>op</tt></span><tt>=</tt> operators are no different from those of the “other operators” category. The reason for listing <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>op</tt></span><tt>=</tt> separately is to point out that these operators don’t behave like the <tt>=</tt> operator.</p>
<p></p><table cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0" frame="hsides" rules="none"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 13.1. Member Function Properties</h5></caption><colgroup align="left" span="6"><col width="100"></col><col width="100"></col><col width="100"></col><col width="100"></col><col width="100"></col><col width="100"></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Function</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Inherited</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Member or Friend</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Generated by Default</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Can Be Virtual</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Can Have a Return Type</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Constructor</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">No</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Member</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Yes</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">No</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">No</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Destructor</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">No</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Member</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Yes</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Yes</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">No</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>=</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">No</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Member</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Yes</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Yes</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Yes</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>&amp;</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Yes</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Either</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Yes</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Yes</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Yes</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Conversion</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Yes</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Member</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">No</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Yes</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">No</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Yes</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Member</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">No</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Yes</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Yes</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>[]</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Yes</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Member</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">No</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Yes</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Yes</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>-&gt;</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Yes</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Member</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">No</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Yes</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Yes</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>op=</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Yes</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Either</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">No</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Yes</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Yes</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>new</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Yes</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Static member</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">No</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">No</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>void *</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>delete</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Yes</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Static member</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">No</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">No</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>void</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Other operators</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Yes</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Either</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">No</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Yes</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Yes</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Other members</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Yes</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Member</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">No</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Yes</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Yes</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Friends</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">No</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Friend</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">No</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">No</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Yes</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
