<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Summary</h3>
<p class="docText">Inheritance enables
 you to adapt programming code to your particular needs by defining a 
new class (a derived class) from an existing class (the base class). 
Public inheritance models an <span class="docEmphasis">is-a</span> relationship, meaning that a derived-class object should also be a kind of base-class object. As part of the <span class="docEmphasis">is-a</span>
 model, a derived class inherits the data members and most methods of 
the base class. However, a derived class doesn’t inherit the base-class 
constructors, destructors, and assignment operators. A derived class can
 access the public and protected members of the base class directly and 
the private base-class members via the public and protected base-class 
methods. You can then add new data members and methods to the class, and
 you can use the derived class as a base class for further development. 
Each derived class requires its own constructors. When a program creates
 a derived-class object, it first calls a base-class constructor and 
then the derived-class constructor. When a program deletes an object, it
 first calls the derived-class destructor and then the base-class 
destructor.</p>
<p class="docText">If a class is meant to be a 
base class, you may choose to use protected members instead of private 
members so that derived classes can access those members directly. 
However, using private members, in general, reduces the scope for 
programming bugs. If you intend that a derived class can redefine a 
base-class method, you should make it a virtual function by declaring it
 with the keyword <tt>virtual</tt>. This enables 
objects accessed by pointers or references to be handled on the basis of
 the object type rather than on the basis of the reference type or 
pointer type. In particular, the destructor for a base class should 
normally be virtual.</p>
<p class="docText">You might want to define 
an ABC that defines an interface without getting into implementation 
matters. For example, you could define an abstract <tt>Shape</tt> class from which particular shape classes, such as <tt>Circle</tt> and <tt>Square</tt>, will be derived. An ABC must include at least one pure virtual method. You declare a pure virtual method by placing <tt>= 0</tt> before the closing semicolon of the declaration:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>virtual double area() const = 0;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">You 
don’t have to define pure virtual methods, and you can’t create an 
object of a class that contains pure virtual members. Instead, pure 
virtual methods serve to define a common interface to be used by derived
 classes.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
