<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter Review</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Chapter Review</h3>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1.</b></td><td class="docText">What does a derived class inherit from a base class?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2.</b></td><td class="docText">What doesn’t a derived class inherit from a base class?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3.</b></td><td class="docText">Suppose the return type for the <tt>baseDMA::operator=()</tt> function were defined as <tt>void</tt> instead of <tt>baseDMA &amp;</tt>. What effect, if any, would that have? What if the return type were <tt>baseDMA</tt> instead of <tt>baseDMA &amp;</tt>?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4.</b></td><td class="docText">In what order are class constructors and class destructors called when a derived-class object is created and deleted?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5.</b></td><td class="docText">If a derived class doesn’t add any data members to the base class, does the derived class require constructors?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6.</b></td><td class="docText">Suppose
 a base class and a derived class both define a method with the same 
name and a derived-class object invokes the method. What method is 
called?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>7.</b></td><td class="docText">When should a derived class define an assignment operator?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>8.</b></td><td class="docText">Can
 you assign the address of an object of a derived class to a pointer to 
the base class? Can you assign the address of an object of a base class 
to a pointer to the derived class?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9.</b></td><td class="docText">Can
 you assign an object of a derived class to an object of the base class?
 Can you assign an object of a base class to an object of the derived 
class?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>10.</b></td><td class="docText">Suppose
 you define a function that takes a reference to a base-class object as 
an argument. Why can this function also use a derived-class object as an
 argument?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11.</b></td><td class="docText">Suppose
 you define a function that takes a base-class object as an argument 
(that is, the function passes a base-class object by value). Why can 
this function also use a derived-class object as an argument?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>12.</b></td><td class="docText">Why is it usually better to pass objects by reference than by value?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>13.</b></td><td class="docText">Suppose <tt>Corporation</tt> is a base class and <tt>PublicCorporation</tt> is a derived class. Also suppose that each class defines a <tt>head()</tt> member function, that <tt>ph</tt> is a pointer to the <tt>Corporation</tt> type, and that <tt>ph</tt> is assigned the address of a <tt>PublicCorporation</tt> object. How is <tt>ph-&gt;head()</tt> interpreted if the base class defines <tt>head()</tt> as a
<div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Regular nonvirtual method</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Virtual method</p></div></li></ol></div></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>14.</b></td><td class="docText">What’s wrong, if anything, with the following code?
<div class="docText"><pre>class Kitchen
{
private:
    double kit_sq_ft;
public:
    Kitchen() {kit_sq_ft = 0.0; }
    virtual double area() const { return kit_sq_ft * kit_sq_ft; }
};
class House : public Kitchen
{
private:
    double all_sq_ft;
public:
    House() {all_sq_ft += kit_sq_ft;}
    double area(const char *s) const { cout &lt;&lt; s; return all_sq_ft; }
};</pre></div><br/></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
