<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Programming Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Programming Exercises</h3>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1.</b></td><td class="docText">Start with the following class declaration:
<div class="docText"><pre>// base class
class Cd {  // represents a CD disk
private:
    char performers[50];
    char label[20];
    int selections;   // number of selections
    double playtime;  // playing time in minutes
public:
    Cd(char * s1, char * s2, int n, double x);
    Cd(const Cd &amp; d);
    Cd();
    ~Cd();
    void Report() const;  // reports all CD data
    Cd &amp; operator=(const Cd &amp; d);
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Derive a <tt>Classic</tt> class that adds an array of <tt>char</tt>
 members that will hold a string identifying the primary work on the CD.
 If the base class requires that any functions be virtual, modify the 
base-class declaration to make it so. If a declared method is not 
needed, remove it from the definition. Test your product with the 
following program:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
using namespace std;
#include "classic.h"     // which will contain #include cd.h
void Bravo(const Cd &amp; disk);
int main()
{
    Cd c1("Beatles", "Capitol", 14, 35.5);
    Classic c2 = Classic("Piano Sonata in B flat, Fantasia in C",
                     "Alfred Brendel", "Philips", 2, 57.17);
    Cd *pcd = &amp;c1;

    cout &lt;&lt; "Using object directly:\n";
    c1.Report();    // use Cd method
    c2.Report();    // use Classic method

    cout &lt;&lt; "Using type cd * pointer to objects:\n";
    pcd-&gt;Report();  // use Cd method for cd object
    pcd = &amp;c2;
    pcd-&gt;Report();  // use Classic method for classic object

    cout &lt;&lt; "Calling a function with a Cd reference argument:\n";
    Bravo(c1);
    Bravo(c2);

    cout &lt;&lt; "Testing assignment: ";
    Classic copy;
    copy = c2;
    copy.Report()

    return 0;
}

void Bravo(const Cd &amp; disk)
{
    disk.Report();
}

					  </pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2.</b></td><td class="docText">Do
 Programming Exercise 1 but use dynamic memory allocation instead of 
fixed-size arrays for the various strings tracked by the two classes.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3.</b></td><td class="docText">Revise the <tt>baseDMA</tt>-<tt>lacksDMA</tt>-<tt>hasDMA</tt> class hierarchy so that all three classes are derived from an ABC. Test the result with a program similar to the one in Listing 13.10.
 That is, it should feature an array of pointers to the ABC and allow 
the user to make runtime decisions as to what types of objects are 
created. Add virtual <tt>View()</tt> methods to the class definitions to handle displaying the data.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4.</b></td><td class="docText">The Benevolent Order of Programmers maintains a collection of bottled port. To describe it, the BOP Portmaster has devised a <tt>Port</tt> class, as declared here:
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedWidth">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
using namespace std;
class Port
{
private:
    char * brand;
    char style[20]; // i.e., tawny, ruby, vintage
    int bottles;
public:
    Port(const char * br = "none", const char * st = "none", int b = 0);
    Port(const Port &amp; p);                // copy constructor
    virtual ~Port() { delete [] brand; }
    Port &amp; operator=(const Port &amp; p);
    Port &amp; operator+=(int b);            // adds b to bottles
    Port &amp; operator-=(int b);            // subtracts b from bottles, if available
    int BottleCount() const { return bottles; }
    virtual void Show() const;
    friend ostream &amp; operator&lt;&lt;(ostream &amp; os, const Port &amp; p);
};

					  </pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>Show()</tt> method presents information in the following format:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Brand: Gallo
Kind: tawny
Bottles: 20</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>operator&lt;&lt;()</tt> function presents information in the following format (with no newline character at the end):</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Gallo, tawny, 20</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The Portmaster completed the method definitions for the <tt>Port</tt> class and then derived the <tt>VintagePort</tt>
 class as follows before being relieved of his position for accidentally
 routing a bottle of ‘45 Cockburn to someone preparing an experimental 
barbecue sauce:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>class VintagePort : public Port // style necessarily = "vintage"
{
private:
    char * nickname;           // i.e., "The Noble" or "Old Velvet", etc.
    int year;                  // vintage year
public:
    VintagePort();
    VintagePort(const char * br, int b, const char * nn, int y);
    VintagePort(const VintagePort &amp; vp);
    ~VintagePort() { delete [] nickname; }
    VintagePort &amp; operator=(const VintagePort &amp; vp);
    void Show() const;
    friend ostream &amp; operator&lt;&lt;(ostream &amp; os, const VintagePort &amp; vp);
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">You get the job of completing the <tt>VintagePort</tt> work.</p>
<div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Your first task is to re-create the <tt>Port</tt> method definitions because the former Portmaster immolated his upon being relieved.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Your second task is to explain why certain methods are redefined and others are not.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Your third task is to explain why <tt>operator=()</tt> and <tt>operator&lt;&lt;()</tt> are not virtual.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Your fourth task is to provide definitions for the <tt>VintagePort</tt> methods.</p></div></li></ol></div></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
<p class="docText"> </p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
