<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>14. Reusing Code in C++</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h2 class="docChapterTitle" id="title-ID0EZTDK">14. Reusing Code in C++</h2>
<p class="docText">In this chapter you’ll learn about the following:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Has-a</span> relationships</p></li><li><p class="docList">Classes with member objects (containment)</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>valarray</tt> template class</p></li><li><p class="docList">Private and protected inheritance</p></li><li><p class="docList">Multiple inheritance</p></li><li><p class="docList">Virtual base classes</p></li><li><p class="docList">Creating class templates</p></li><li><p class="docList">Using class templates</p></li><li><p class="docList">Template specializations</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">One of the main goals of C++ 
is to facilitate the reuse of code. Public inheritance is one mechanism 
for achieving this goal, but it’s not the only one. This chapter 
investigates other choices. One technique is to use class members that 
are themselves objects of another class. This is referred to as <span class="docEmphasis">containment</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">composition</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">layering</span>.
 Another option is to use private or protected inheritance. Containment,
 private inheritance, and protected inheritance are typically used to 
implement <span class="docEmphasis">has-a</span> relationships—that is, relationships for which the new class has an object of another class. For example, a <tt>HomeTheater</tt> class might have a <tt>BluRayPlayer</tt> object. Multiple inheritance lets you create classes that inherit from two or more base classes, combining their functionality.</p>
<p class="docText">Chapter 10,
 “Objects and Classes,” introduces function templates. In this chapter 
we’ll look at class templates, which provide another way of reusing 
code. A class template lets you define a class in generic terms. Then 
you can use the template to create specific classes defined for specific
 types. For example, you could define a general stack template and then 
use the template to create one class that represents a stack of <tt>int</tt> values and another class that represents a stack of <tt>double</tt> values. You could even generate a class that represents a stack of stacks.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
