<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Class Templates</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Class Templates</h3>
<p class="docText">Inheritance (public, 
private, or protected) and containment aren’t always the solution when 
you want to reuse code. Consider, for example, the <tt>Stack</tt> class (see Chapter 10) and the <tt>Queue</tt> class (see Chapter 12). These are examples of <span class="docEmphasis">container classes</span>, which are classes designed to hold other objects or data types. The <tt>Stack</tt> class from Chapter 10, for example, stores <tt>unsigned long</tt> values. You could just as easily define a stack class for storing <tt>double</tt> values or <tt>string</tt>
 objects. The code would be identical except for the type of object 
stored. However, rather than write new class declarations, it would be 
nice if you could define a stack in a generic (that is, 
type-independent) fashion and then provide a specific type as a 
parameter to the class. Then you could use the same generic code to 
produce stacks of different kinds of values. In Chapter 10, the <tt>Stack</tt> example uses <tt>typedef</tt>
 as a first pass at dealing with this desire. However, that approach has
 a couple drawbacks. First, you have to edit the header file each time 
you change the type. Second, you can use the technique to generate just 
one kind of stack per program. That is, you can’t have a <tt>typedef</tt> represent two different types simultaneously, so you can’t use the method to define a stack of <tt>int</tt>s and a stack of <tt>string</tt>s in the same program.</p>
<p class="docText">C++’s class templates 
provide a better way to generate generic class declarations. (C++ 
originally did not support templates, and since their introduction, 
templates have continued to evolve, so it is possible that your 
compiler, if old, may not support all the features presented here.) 
Templates provide <span class="docEmphasis">parameterized</span>
 types—that is, they are capable of passing a type name as an argument 
to a recipe for building a class or a function. By feeding the type name <tt>int</tt> to a <tt>Queue</tt> template, for example, you can get the compiler to construct a <tt>Queue</tt> class for queuing <tt>int</tt>s.</p>
<p class="docText">The C++ library provides several template classes. Earlier in this chapter, you worked with the <tt>valarray</tt> template class, and Chapter 4 introduced the <tt>vector</tt> and <tt>array</tt> template classes. C++’s Standard Template Library (STL), which Chapter 16
 discusses in part, provides powerful and flexible template 
implementations of several container classes. This chapter explores 
designs of a more elementary nature.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ESLEK">Defining a Class Template</h4>
<p class="docText">Let’s use the <tt>Stack</tt> class from Chapter 10 as a model from which to build a template. Here’s the original class declaration:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>typedef unsigned long Item;


class Stack
{
private:
    enum {MAX = 10};    // constant specific to class
    Item items[MAX];    // holds stack items
    int top;            // index for top stack item
public:
    Stack();
    bool isempty() const;
    bool isfull() const;
    // push() returns false if stack already is full, true otherwise
    bool push(const Item &amp; item);   // add item to stack
    // pop() returns false if stack already is empty, true otherwise
    bool pop(Item &amp; item);          // pop top into item
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The template approach will replace the <tt>Stack</tt> definition with a template definition and the <tt>Stack</tt>
 member functions with template member functions. As with template 
functions, you preface a template class with code that has the following
 form:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template &lt;class <span class="docEmphasis">Type</span>&gt;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The keyword <tt>template</tt>
 informs the compiler that you’re about to define a template. The part 
in angle brackets is analogous to an argument list to a function. You 
can think of the keyword <tt>class</tt> as serving as a type name for a variable that accepts a type as a value, and of <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>Type</tt></span> as representing a name for this variable.</p>
<p class="docText">Using <tt>class</tt> here doesn’t mean that <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>Type</tt></span> must be a class; it just means that <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>Type</tt></span>
 serves as a generic type specifier for which a real type will be 
substituted when the template is used. Newer C++ implementations allow 
you to use the less confusing keyword <tt>typename</tt> instead of <tt>class</tt> in this context:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template &lt;typename <span class="docEmphasis">Type</span>&gt;  // newer choice</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">You can use your choice of generic type name in the <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>Type</tt></span> position; the name rules are the same as those for any other identifier. Popular choices include <tt>T</tt> and <tt>Type</tt>; in this case, we’ll use the latter. When a template is invoked, <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>Type</tt></span> will be replaced with a specific type value, such as <tt>int</tt> or <tt>string</tt>. Within the template definition, you can use the generic type name to identify the type to be stored in the stack. For the <tt>Stack</tt> case, that would mean using <tt>Type</tt> wherever the old declaration formerly used the <tt>typedef</tt> identifier <tt>Item</tt>. For example,</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Item items[MAX];  // holds stack items</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">becomes the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Type items[MAX];  // holds stack items</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Similarly, you can 
replace the class methods of the original class with template member 
functions. Each function heading will be prefaced with the same template
 announcement:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template &lt;class Type&gt;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Again, you should replace the <tt>typedef</tt> identifier <tt>Item</tt> with the generic type name <tt>Type</tt>. One more change is that you need to change the class qualifier from <tt>Stack::</tt> to <tt>Stack&lt;Type&gt;::</tt>. For example,</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>bool Stack::push(const Item &amp; item)
{
...
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">becomes the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template &lt;class Type&gt;                     // or template &lt;typename Type&gt;
bool Stack&lt;Type&gt;::push(const Type &amp; item)
{
...
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">If you define a method 
within the class declaration (an inline definition), you can omit the 
template preface and the class qualifier.</p>
<p class="docText">Listing 14.13
 shows the combined class and member function templates. It’s important 
to realize that these templates are not class and member function 
definitions. Rather, they are instructions to the C++ compiler about how
 to generate class and member function definitions. A particular 
actualization of a template, such as a stack class for handling <tt>string</tt> objects, is called an <span class="docEmphasis">instantiation</span> or a <span class="docEmphasis">specialization</span>.
 Placing the template member functions in a separate implementation file
 won’t work. (For a while, the standard did provide the keyword <tt>export</tt> to allow such a separate implementation file. But not many vendors implemented it. C++11 discontinues that use of <tt>export</tt> but reserves the <tt>export</tt>
 keyword for possible future use.) Because the templates aren’t 
functions, they can’t be compiled separately. Templates have to be used 
in conjunction with requests for particular instantiations of templates.
 The simplest way to make this work is to place all the template information in a header file and to include the header file in the file that will use the templates.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E5REK">Listing 14.13. <tt>stacktp.h</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// stacktp.h -- a stack template
#ifndef STACKTP_H_
#define STACKTP_H_
template &lt;class Type&gt;
class Stack
{
private:
    enum {MAX = 10};    // constant specific to class
    Type items[MAX];    // holds stack items
    int top;            // index for top stack item
public:
    Stack();
    bool isempty();
    bool isfull();
    bool push(const Type &amp; item); // add item to stack
    bool pop(Type &amp; item);        // pop top into item
};

template &lt;class Type&gt;
Stack&lt;Type&gt;::Stack()
{
    top = 0;
}

template &lt;class Type&gt;
bool Stack&lt;Type&gt;::isempty()
{
    return top == 0;
}

template &lt;class Type&gt;
bool Stack&lt;Type&gt;::isfull()
{
    return top == MAX;
}

template &lt;class Type&gt;
bool Stack&lt;Type&gt;::push(const Type &amp; item)
{
    if (top &lt; MAX)
    {
        items[top++] = item;
        return true;
    }
    else
        return false;
}

template &lt;class Type&gt;
bool Stack&lt;Type&gt;::pop(Type &amp; item)
{
    if (top &gt; 0)
    {
        item = items[--top];
        return true;
    }
    else
        return false;
}

#endif

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ENSEK">Using a Template Class</h4>
<p class="docText">Merely
 including a template in a program doesn’t generate a template class. 
You have to ask for an instantiation. To do this, you declare an object 
of the template class type, replacing the generic type name with the 
particular type you want. For example, here’s how you would create two 
stacks, one for stacking <tt>int</tt>s and one for stacking <tt>string</tt> objects:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Stack&lt;int&gt; kernels;      // create a stack of ints
Stack&lt;string&gt; colonels;  // create a stack of string objects</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Seeing these two declarations, the compiler will follow the <tt>Stack&lt;Type&gt;</tt> template to generate two separate class declarations and two separate sets of class methods. The <tt>Stack&lt;int&gt;</tt> class declaration will replace <tt>Type</tt> throughout with <tt>int</tt>, and the <tt>Stack&lt;string&gt;</tt> class declaration will replace <tt>Type</tt> throughout with <tt>string</tt>. Of course, the algorithms you use have to be consistent with the types. The <tt>Stack</tt>
 class, for example, assumes that you can assign one item to another. 
This assumption is true for basic types, structures, and classes (unless
 you make the assignment operator private) but not for arrays.</p>
<p class="docText">Generic type identifiers such as <tt>Type</tt> in the example are called <span class="docEmphasis">type parameters</span>,
 meaning that they act something like variables, but instead of 
assigning a numeric value to a type parameter, you assign a type to it. 
So in the <tt>kernel</tt> declaration, the type parameter <tt>Type</tt> has the value <tt>int</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Notice that you have to 
provide the desired type explicitly. This is different from ordinary 
function templates, for which the compiler can use the argument types to
 a function to figure out what kind of function to generate:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template &lt;class T&gt;
void simple(T t) { cout &lt;&lt; t &lt;&lt; '\n';}
...
simple(2);       // generate void simple(int)
simple("two");   // generate void simple(const char *)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Listing 14.14 modifies the original stack-testing program (Listing 10.12) to use string purchase order IDs instead of <tt>unsigned long</tt> values.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EQWEK">Listing 14.14. <tt>stacktem.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// stacktem.cpp -- testing the template stack class
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;cctype&gt;
#include "stacktp.h"
using std::cin;
using std::cout;

int main()
{
    Stack&lt;std::string&gt; st;   // create an empty stack
    char ch;
    std::string po;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Please enter A to add a purchase order,\n"
         &lt;&lt; "P to process a PO, or Q to quit.\n";
    while (cin &gt;&gt; ch &amp;&amp; std::toupper(ch) != 'Q')
    {
        while (cin.get() != '\n')
            continue;
        if (!std::isalpha(ch))
        {
            cout &lt;&lt; '\a';
            continue;
        }
        switch(ch)
        {
            case 'A':
            case 'a': cout &lt;&lt; "Enter a PO number to add: ";
                      cin &gt;&gt; po;
                      if (st.isfull())
                          cout &lt;&lt; "stack already full\n";
                      else
                          st.push(po);
                      break;
            case 'P':
            case 'p': if (st.isempty())
                          cout &lt;&lt; "stack already empty\n";
                      else {
                          st.pop(po);
                          cout &lt;&lt; "PO #" &lt;&lt; po &lt;&lt; " popped\n";
                          break;
                      }
        }
        cout &lt;&lt; "Please enter A to add a purchase order,\n"
             &lt;&lt; "P to process a PO, or Q to quit.\n";
    }
    cout &lt;&lt; "Bye\n";
    return 0;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here’s a sample run of the program in Listing 14.14:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedHeight">Please enter A to add a purchase order,
P to process a PO, or Q to quit.
<span class="docEmphStrong">A</span>
Enter a PO number to add: <span class="docEmphStrong">red911porsche</span>
Please enter A to add a purchase order,
P to process a PO, or Q to quit.
<span class="docEmphStrong">A</span>
Enter a PO number to add: <span class="docEmphStrong">blueR8audi</span>
Please enter A to add a purchase order,
P to process a PO, or Q to quit.
<span class="docEmphStrong">A</span>
Enter a PO number to add: <span class="docEmphStrong">silver747boeing</span>
Please enter A to add a purchase order,
P to process a PO, or Q to quit.
<span class="docEmphStrong">P</span>
PO #silver747boeing popped
Please enter A to add a purchase order,
P to process a PO, or Q to quit.
<span class="docEmphStrong">P</span>
PO #blueR8audi popped
Please enter A to add a purchase order,
P to process a PO, or Q to quit.
<span class="docEmphStrong">P</span>
PO #red911porsche popped
Please enter A to add a purchase order,
P to process a PO, or Q to quit.
<span class="docEmphStrong">P</span>
stack already empty
Please enter A to add a purchase order,
P to process a PO, or Q to quit.
<span class="docEmphStrong">Q</span>
Bye

					  </pre></div><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EQYEK">A Closer Look at the Template Class</h4>
<p class="docText">You can use a built-in type or a class object as the type for the <tt>Stack&lt;Type&gt;</tt> class template. What about a pointer? For example, can you use a pointer to a <tt>char</tt> instead of a <tt>string</tt> object in Listing 14.14?
 After all, such pointers are the built-in way for handling C-style 
strings. The answer is that you can create a stack of pointers, but it 
won’t work very well without major modifications in the program. The 
compiler can create the class, but it’s your task to see that it’s used 
sensibly. Let’s see why such a stack of pointers doesn’t work very well 
with Listing 14.14, and then let’s look at an example where a stack of pointers is useful.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E32EK">Using a Stack of Pointers Incorrectly</h5>
<p class="docText">Let’s quickly look at three simple, but flawed, attempts to adapt Listing 14.14
 to use a stack of pointers. These attempts illustrate the lesson that 
you should keep the design of a template in mind and not just use it 
blindly. All three examples begin with this perfectly valid invocation 
of the <tt>Stack&lt;Type&gt;</tt> template:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Stack&lt;char *&gt; st; // create a stack for pointers-to-char</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Version 1 then replaces</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>string po;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">in listing 14.14 with</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>char * po;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The idea is to use a <tt>char</tt> pointer instead of a <tt>string</tt>
 object to receive the keyboard input. This approach fails immediately 
because merely creating a pointer doesn’t create space to hold the input
 strings. (The program would compile, but it would quite possibly crash 
after <tt>cin</tt> tried to store input in some inappropriate location.)</p>
<p class="docText">Version 2 replaces</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>string po;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">with</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>char po[40];</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This allocates space for an input string. Furthermore, <tt>po</tt> is of type <tt>char *</tt>, so it can be placed on the stack. But an array is fundamentally at odds with the assumptions made for the <tt>pop()</tt> method:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template &lt;class Type&gt;
bool Stack&lt;Type&gt;::pop(Type &amp; item)
{
    if (top &gt; 0)
    {
        item = items[--top];
        return true;
    }
    else
        return false;
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">First, the reference variable <tt>item</tt> has to refer to an lvalue of some sort, not to an array name. Second, the code assumes that you can assign to <tt>item</tt>. Even if <tt>item</tt> could refer to an array, you can’t assign to an array name. So this approach fails, too.</p>
<p class="docText">Version 3 replaces</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>string po;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">with</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>char * po = new char[40];</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This allocates space for an input string. Furthermore, <tt>po</tt> is a variable and hence compatible with the code for <tt>pop()</tt>. Here, however, you come up against the most fundamental problem: There is only one <tt>po</tt>
 variable, and it always points to the same memory location. True, the 
contents of the memory change each time a new string is read, but every 
push operation puts exactly the same address onto the stack. So when you
 pop the stack, you always get the same address back, and it always 
refers to the last string read into memory. In particular, the stack is 
not storing each new string separately as it comes in, and it serves no 
useful purpose.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EAAFK">Using a Stack of Pointers Correctly</h5>
<p class="docText">One way to use a stack of 
pointers is to have the calling program provide an array of pointers, 
with each pointer pointing to a different string. Putting these pointers
 on a stack then makes sense because each pointer will refer to a 
different string. Note that it is the responsibility of the calling 
program, not the stack, to create the separate pointers. The stack’s job
 is to manage the pointers, not create them.</p>
<p class="docText">For example, suppose you have 
to simulate the following situation. Someone has delivered a cart of 
folders to Plodson. If Plodson’s in-basket is empty, he removes the top 
folder from the cart and places it in his in-basket. If his in-basket is
 full, Plodson removes the top file from the basket, processes it, and 
places it in his out-basket. If the in-basket is neither empty nor full,
 Plodson may process the top file in the in-basket, or he may take the 
next file from the cart and put it into his in-basket. In what he 
secretly regards as a bit of madcap self-expression, he flips a coin to 
decide which of these actions to take. You’d like to investigate the 
effects of his method on the original file order.</p>
<p class="docText">You can model this with an 
array of pointers to strings representing the files on the cart. Each 
string will contain the name of the person described by the file. You 
can use a stack to represent the in-basket, and you can use a second 
array of pointers to represent the out-basket. Adding a file to the 
in-basket is represented by pushing a pointer from the input array onto 
the stack, and processing a file is represented by popping an item from 
the stack and adding it to the out-basket.</p>
<p class="docText">Given the importance of examining all aspects of this problem, it would be useful to be able to try different stack sizes. Listing 14.15 redefines the <tt>Stack&lt;Type&gt;</tt> class slightly so that the <tt>Stack</tt>
 constructor accepts an optional size argument. This involves using a 
dynamic array internally, so the class now needs a destructor, a copy 
constructor, and an assignment operator. Also the definition shortens 
the code by making several of the methods inline.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ESBFK">Listing 14.15. <tt>stcktp1.h</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// stcktp1.h -- modified Stack template
#ifndef STCKTP1_H_
#define STCKTP1_H_

template &lt;class Type&gt;
class Stack
{
private:
    enum {SIZE = 10};    // default size
    int stacksize;
    Type * items;       // holds stack items
    int top;            // index for top stack item
public:
    explicit Stack(int ss = SIZE);
    Stack(const Stack &amp; st);
    ~Stack() { delete [] items; }
    bool isempty() { return top == 0; }
    bool isfull() { return top == stacksize; }
    bool push(const Type &amp; item);   // add item to stack
    bool pop(Type &amp; item);          // pop top into item
    Stack &amp; operator=(const Stack &amp; st);
};

template &lt;class Type&gt;
Stack&lt;Type&gt;::Stack(int ss) : stacksize(ss), top(0)
{
    items = new Type [stacksize];
}

template &lt;class Type&gt;
Stack&lt;Type&gt;::Stack(const Stack &amp; st)
{
    stacksize = st.stacksize;
    top = st.top;
    items = new Type [stacksize];
    for (int i = 0; i &lt; top; i++)
        items[i] = st.items[i];
}

template &lt;class Type&gt;
bool Stack&lt;Type&gt;::push(const Type &amp; item)
{
    if (top &lt; stacksize)
    {
        items[top++] = item;
        return true;
    }
    else
        return false;
}

template &lt;class Type&gt;
bool Stack&lt;Type&gt;::pop(Type &amp; item)
{
    if (top &gt; 0)
    {
        item = items[--top];
        return true;
    }
    else
        return false;
}

template &lt;class Type&gt;
Stack&lt;Type&gt; &amp; Stack&lt;Type&gt;::operator=(const Stack&lt;Type&gt; &amp; st)
{
    if (this == &amp;st)
        return *this;
    delete [] items;
    stacksize = st.stacksize;
    top = st.top;
    items = new Type [stacksize];
    for (int i = 0; i &lt; top; i++)
        items[i] = st.items[i];
    return *this;
}

#endif

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Notice that the prototype declares the return type for the assignment operator function to be a reference to <tt>Stack</tt>, and the actual template function definition identifies the type as <tt>Stack&lt;Type&gt;</tt>. The former is an abbreviation for the latter, but it can be used only within the class scope. That is, you can use <tt>Stack</tt>
 inside the template declaration and inside the template function 
definitions, but outside the class, as when identifying return types and
 when using the scope-resolution operator, you need to use the full <tt>Stack&lt;Type&gt;</tt> form.</p>
<p class="docText">The program in Listing 14.16 uses the new stack template to implement the Plodson simulation. It uses <tt>rand()</tt>, <tt>srand()</tt>, and <tt>time()</tt>
 in the same way previous simulations have used them to generate random 
numbers. In this case, randomly generating a 0 or a 1 simulates the coin
 toss.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ERDFK">Listing 14.16. <tt>stkoptr1.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// stkoptr1.cpp -- testing stack of pointers
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;cstdlib&gt;     // for rand(), srand()
#include &lt;ctime&gt;       // for time()
#include "stcktp1.h"
const int Num = 10;
int main()
{
    std::srand(std::time(0)); // randomize rand()
    std::cout &lt;&lt; "Please enter stack size: ";
    int stacksize;
    std::cin &gt;&gt; stacksize;
// create an empty stack with stacksize slots
    Stack&lt;const char *&gt; st(stacksize);

// in basket
    const char * in[Num] = {
            " 1: Hank Gilgamesh", " 2: Kiki Ishtar",
            " 3: Betty Rocker", " 4: Ian Flagranti",
            " 5: Wolfgang Kibble", " 6: Portia Koop",
            " 7: Joy Almondo", " 8: Xaverie Paprika",
            " 9: Juan Moore", "10: Misha Mache"
            };
 // out basket
    const char * out[Num];

    int processed = 0;
    int nextin = 0;
    while (processed &lt; Num)
    {
        if (st.isempty())
            st.push(in[nextin++]);
        else if (st.isfull())
            st.pop(out[processed++]);
        else if (std::rand() % 2  &amp;&amp; nextin &lt; Num)   // 50-50 chance
            st.push(in[nextin++]);
        else
            st.pop(out[processed++]);
    }
    for (int i = 0; i &lt; Num; i++)
        std::cout &lt;&lt; out[i] &lt;&lt; std::endl;

    std::cout &lt;&lt; "Bye\n";
    return 0;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Two sample runs of the program in Listing 14.16
 follow (note that, thanks to the randomizing feature, the final file 
ordering can differ quite a bit from one trial to the next, even when 
the stack size is kept unaltered):</p>
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedHeight">Please enter stack size: <span class="docEmphStrong">5</span>
 2: Kiki Ishtar
 1: Hank Gilgamesh
 3: Betty Rocker
 5: Wolfgang Kibble
 4: Ian Flagranti
 7: Joy Almondo
 9: Juan Moore
 8: Xaverie Paprika
 6: Portia Koop
10: Misha Mache
Bye

Please enter stack size: <span class="docEmphStrong">5</span>
 3: Betty Rocker
 5: Wolfgang Kibble
 6: Portia Koop
 4: Ian Flagranti
 8: Xaverie Paprika
 9: Juan Moore
10: Misha Mache
 7: Joy Almondo
 2: Kiki Ishtar
 1: Hank Gilgamesh
Bye

					  </pre></div><br/>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0EVEFK">Program Notes</h5>
<p class="docText">The strings in Listing 14.16
 never move. Pushing a string onto the stack really creates a new 
pointer to an existing string. That is, it creates a pointer whose value
 is the address of an existing string. And popping a string off the 
stack copies that address value into the <tt>out</tt> array.</p>
<p class="docText">The program uses <tt>const char *</tt> as a type because the array of pointers is initialized to a set of string constants.</p>
<p class="docText">What effect does the stack destructor have on the strings? None. The class constructor uses <tt>new</tt>
 to create an array for holding pointers. The class destructor 
eliminates that array, not the strings to which the array elements 
pointed.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EWHFK">An Array Template Example and Non-Type Arguments</h4>
<p class="docText">Templates are frequently used 
for container classes because the idea of type parameters matches well 
with the need to apply a common storage plan to a variety of types. 
Indeed, the desire to provide reusable code for container classes was 
the main motivation for introducing templates, so let’s look at another 
example and explore a few more facets of template design and use. In 
particular, let’s look at non-type, or expression, arguments and at 
using an array to handle an inheritance family.</p>
<p class="docText">Let’s begin with a simple array template that lets you specify an array size. One technique, which the last version of the <tt>Stack</tt>
 template uses, is to use a dynamic array within the class and a 
constructor argument to provide the number of elements. Another approach
 is to use a template argument to provide the size for a regular array. 
That is what the new C++11 <tt>array</tt> template does. Listing 14.17 shows a more modest version of how this can be done.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EOIFK">Listing 14.17. <tt>arraytp.h</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">//arraytp.h  -- Array Template
#ifndef ARRAYTP_H_
#define ARRAYTP_H_

#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;cstdlib&gt;

template &lt;class T, int n&gt;
class ArrayTP
{
private:
    T ar[n];
public:
    ArrayTP() {};
    explicit ArrayTP(const T &amp; v);
    virtual T &amp; operator[](int i);
    virtual T operator[](int i) const;
};

template &lt;class T, int n&gt;
ArrayTP&lt;T,n&gt;::ArrayTP(const T &amp; v)
{
    for (int i = 0; i &lt; n; i++)
        ar[i] = v;
}

template &lt;class T, int n&gt;
T &amp; ArrayTP&lt;T,n&gt;::operator[](int i)
{
    if (i &lt; 0 || i &gt;= n)
    {
        std::cerr &lt;&lt; "Error in array limits: " &lt;&lt; i
            &lt;&lt; " is out of range\n";
        std::exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
    }
    return ar[i];
}

template &lt;class T, int n&gt;
T ArrayTP&lt;T,n&gt;::operator[](int i) const
{
    if (i &lt; 0 || i &gt;= n)
    {
        std::cerr &lt;&lt; "Error in array limits: " &lt;&lt; i
            &lt;&lt; " is out of range\n";
        std::exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
    }
    return ar[i];
}

#endif

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Note the template heading in Listing 14.17:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template &lt;class T, int n&gt;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The keyword <tt>class</tt> (or, equivalently in this context, <tt>typename</tt>) identifies <tt>T</tt> as a type parameter, or type argument. <tt>int</tt> identifies <tt>n</tt> as being an <tt>int</tt>
 type. This second kind of parameter, one that specifies a particular 
type instead of acting as a generic name for a type, is called a <span class="docEmphasis">non-type</span>, or <span class="docEmphasis">expression</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">argument</span>. Suppose you have the following declaration:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>ArrayTP&lt;double, 12&gt; eggweights;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This causes the compiler to define a class called <tt>ArrayTP&lt;double,12&gt;</tt> and to create an <tt>eggweights</tt> object of that class. When defining the class, the compiler replaces <tt>T</tt> with <tt>double</tt> and <tt>n</tt> with <tt>12</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Expression arguments have 
some restrictions. An expression argument can be an integer type, an 
enumeration type, a reference, or a pointer. Thus, <tt>double m</tt> is ruled out, but <tt>double &amp; rm</tt> and <tt>double * pm</tt> are allowed. Also the template code can’t alter the value of the argument or take its address. Thus, in the <tt>ArrayTP</tt> template, expressions such as <tt>n++</tt> or <tt>&amp;n</tt>
 would not be allowed. Also when you instantiate a template, the value 
used for the expression argument should be a constant expression.</p>
<p class="docText">This approach for sizing an array has one advantage over the constructor approach used in <tt>Stack</tt>. The constructor approach uses heap memory managed by <tt>new</tt> and <tt>delete</tt>,
 whereas the expression argument approach uses the memory stack 
maintained for automatic variables. This provides faster execution time,
 particularly if you have a lot of small arrays.</p>
<p class="docText">The main drawback to the 
expression argument approach is that each array size generates its own 
template. That is, the following declarations generate two separate 
class declarations:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>ArrayTP&lt;double, 12&gt; eggweights;
ArrayTP&lt;double, 13&gt; donuts;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">But the following declarations 
generate just one class declaration, and the size information is passed 
to the constructor for that class:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Stack&lt;int&gt; eggs(12);
Stack&lt;int&gt; dunkers(13);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Another difference is that the 
constructor approach is more versatile because the array size is stored 
as a class member rather than being hard-coded into the definition. This
 makes it possible, for example, to define assignment from an array of 
one size to an array of another size or to build a class that allows 
resizable arrays.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ENNFK">Template Versatility</h4>
<p class="docText">You can apply the same 
techniques to template classes as you do to regular classes. Template 
classes can serve as base classes, and they can be component classes. 
They can themselves be type arguments to other templates. For example, 
you can implement a stack template by using an array template. Or you 
can have an array template that is used to construct an array whose 
elements are stacks based on a stack template. That is, you can have 
code along the following lines:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template &lt;typename T&gt;   // or &lt;class T&gt;
class Array
{
private:
    T entry;
    ...
};

template &lt;typename Type&gt;
class GrowArray : public Array&lt;Type&gt; {...};  // inheritance

template &lt;typename Tp&gt;
class Stack
{
       Array&lt;Tp&gt; ar;       // use an Array&lt;&gt; as a component
      ...
};
...
Array &lt; Stack&lt;int&gt; &gt; asi;  // an array of stacks of int</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In the last statement, C++98 required separating the two <tt>&gt;</tt> symbols by at least one white space character in order to avoid confusion with the <tt>&gt;&gt;</tt> operator. C++11 removes this requirement.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EBQFK">Using a Template Recursively</h5>
<p class="docText">Another example of 
template versatility is that you can use templates recursively. For 
example, given the earlier definition of an array template, you can use 
it as follows:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>ArrayTP&lt; ArrayTP&lt;int,5&gt;, 10&gt; twodee;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This makes <tt>twodee</tt> an array of 10 elements, each of which is an array of five <tt>int</tt>s. The equivalent ordinary array would have this declaration:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int twodee[10][5];</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Note that the syntax for 
templates presents the dimensions in the opposite order from that of the
 equivalent ordinary two-dimensional array. The program in Listing 14.18 tries this idea. It also uses the <tt>ArrayTP</tt>
 template to create one-dimensional arrays to hold the sum and average 
value of each of the 10 sets of five numbers. The method call <tt>cout.width(2)</tt>
 causes the next item to be displayed to use a field width of two 
characters, unless a larger width is needed to show the whole number.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EPRFK">Listing 14.18. <tt>twod.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// twod.cpp -- making a 2-d array
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include "arraytp.h"
int main(void)
{
    using std::cout;
    using std::endl;
    ArrayTP&lt;int, 10&gt; sums;
    ArrayTP&lt;double, 10&gt; aves;
    ArrayTP&lt; ArrayTP&lt;int,5&gt;, 10&gt; twodee;


    int i, j;

    for (i = 0; i &lt; 10; i++)
    {
        sums[i] = 0;
        for (j = 0; j &lt; 5; j++)
        {
            twodee[i][j] = (i + 1) * (j + 1);
            sums[i] += twodee[i][j];
        }
        aves[i] = (double) sums[i] / 10;
    }
    for (i = 0; i &lt; 10; i++)
    {
        for (j = 0; j &lt; 5; j++)
        {
            cout.width(2);
            cout &lt;&lt; twodee[i][j] &lt;&lt; ' ';
        }
        cout &lt;&lt; ": sum = ";
        cout.width(3);
        cout  &lt;&lt; sums[i] &lt;&lt; ", average = " &lt;&lt; aves[i] &lt;&lt; endl;
    }

    cout &lt;&lt; "Done.\n";

    return 0;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The output of the program in Listing 14.18 has one line for each of the 10 elements of <tt>twodee</tt>, each of which is a five-element array. Each line shows the values, sum, and average of an element of <tt>twodee</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre> 1  2  3  4  5 : sum =  15, average = 1.5
 2  4  6  8 10 : sum =  30, average = 3
 3  6  9 12 15 : sum =  45, average = 4.5
 4  8 12 16 20 : sum =  60, average = 6
 5 10 15 20 25 : sum =  75, average = 7.5
 6 12 18 24 30 : sum =  90, average = 9
 7 14 21 28 35 : sum = 105, average = 10.5
 8 16 24 32 40 : sum = 120, average = 12
 9 18 27 36 45 : sum = 135, average = 13.5
10 20 30 40 50 : sum = 150, average = 15
Done.</pre></div><br/>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EYTFK">Using More Than One Type Parameter</h5>
<p class="docText">You can have a template with 
more than one type parameter. For example, suppose you want a class that
 holds two kinds of values. You can create and use a <tt>Pair</tt> template class for holding two disparate values. (Incidentally, the STL provides a similar template called <tt>pair</tt>.) The short program in Listing 14.19 shows an example. In it, the <tt>first() const</tt> and <tt>second() const</tt> methods report the stored values, and the <tt>first()</tt> and <tt>second()</tt> methods, by virtue of returning references to the <tt>Pair</tt> data members, allow you to reset the stored values by using assignment.</p>
<p class="docText"></p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E1UFK">Listing 14.19. <tt>pairs.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// pairs.cpp -- defining and using a Pair template
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;
template &lt;class T1, class T2&gt;
class Pair
{
private:
    T1 a;
    T2 b;
public:
    T1 &amp; first();
    T2 &amp; second();
    T1 first() const { return a; }
    T2 second() const { return b; }
    Pair(const T1 &amp; aval, const T2 &amp; bval) : a(aval), b(bval) { }
    Pair() {}
};

template&lt;class T1, class T2&gt;
T1 &amp; Pair&lt;T1,T2&gt;::first()
{
    return a;
}
template&lt;class T1, class T2&gt;
T2 &amp; Pair&lt;T1,T2&gt;::second()
{
    return b;
}

int main()
{
    using std::cout;
    using std::endl;
    using std::string;
    Pair&lt;string, int&gt; ratings[4] =
    {
        Pair&lt;string, int&gt;("The Purpled Duck", 5),
        Pair&lt;string, int&gt;("Jaquie's Frisco Al Fresco", 4),
        Pair&lt;string, int&gt;("Cafe Souffle", 5),
        Pair&lt;string, int&gt;("Bertie's Eats", 3)
    };

    int joints = sizeof(ratings) / sizeof (Pair&lt;string, int&gt;);
    cout &lt;&lt; "Rating:\t Eatery\n";
    for (int i = 0; i &lt; joints; i++)
        cout &lt;&lt; ratings[i].second() &lt;&lt; ":\t "
             &lt;&lt; ratings[i].first() &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Oops! Revised rating:\n";
    ratings[3].first() = "Bertie's Fab Eats";
    ratings[3].second() = 6;
    cout &lt;&lt; ratings[3].second() &lt;&lt; ":\t "
         &lt;&lt; ratings[3].first() &lt;&lt; endl;
   return 0;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">One thing to note about Listing 14.19 is that in <tt>main()</tt>, you have to use <tt>Pair&lt;string,int&gt;</tt> to invoke the constructors and as an argument for <tt>sizeof</tt>. That’s because <tt>Pair&lt;string,int&gt;</tt> and not <tt>Pair</tt> is the class name. Also <tt>Pair&lt;char *,double&gt;</tt> would be the name of an entirely different class.</p>
<p class="docText">Here’s the output of the program in Listing 14.19:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Rating:  Eatery
5:       The Purpled Duck
4:       Jaquie's Frisco Al Fresco
5:       Cafe Souffle
3:       Bertie's Eats
Oops! Revised rating:
6:       Bertie's Fab Eats</pre></div><br/>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EIYFK">Default Type Template Parameters</h5>
<p class="docText">Another new class template feature is that you can provide default values for type parameters:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template &lt;class T1, class T2 = int&gt; class Topo {...};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This causes the compiler to use <tt>int</tt> for the type <tt>T2</tt> if a value for <tt>T2</tt> is omitted:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Topo&lt;double, double&gt; m1; // T1 is double, T2 is double
Topo&lt;double&gt; m2;         // T1 is double, T2 is int</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The STL (discussed in Chapter 16) often uses this feature, with the default type being a class.</p>
<p class="docText">Although you can provide
 default values for class template type parameters, you can’t do so for 
function template parameters. However, you can provide default values 
for non-type parameters for both class and function templates.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EWZFK">Template Specializations</h4>
<p class="docText">Class templates are like 
function templates in that you can have implicit instantiations, 
explicit instantiations, and explicit specializations, collectively 
known as <span class="docEmphasis">specializations</span>. That
 is, a template describes a class in terms of a general type, whereas a 
specialization is a class declaration generated by using a specific 
type.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ED6FK">Implicit Instantiations</h5>
<p class="docText">The template examples you have seen so far in this chapter use <span class="docEmphasis">implicit instantiations</span>.
 That is, they declare one or more objects indicating the desired type, 
and the compiler generates a specialized class definition, using the 
recipe provided by the general template:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>ArrayTP&lt;int, 100&gt; stuff; // implicit instantiation</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The compiler doesn’t generate an implicit instantiation of the class until it needs an object:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>ArrayTP&lt;double, 30&gt; * pt;     // a pointer, no object needed yet
pt = new ArrayTP&lt;double, 30&gt;; // now an object is needed</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The second statement causes the
 compiler to generate a class definition and also an object that is 
created according to that definition.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EDAGK">Explicit Instantiations</h5>
<p class="docText">The compiler generates an <span class="docEmphasis">explicit instantiation</span> of a class declaration when you declare a class by using the keyword <tt>template</tt>
 and indicating the desired type or types. The declaration should be in 
the same namespace as the template definition. For example, the 
following declaration declares <tt>ArrayTP&lt;string, 100&gt;</tt> to be a class:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template class ArrayTP&lt;string, 100&gt;; // generate ArrayTP&lt;string, 100&gt; class</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In this case, the 
compiler generates the class definition, including method definitions, 
even though no object of the class has yet been created or mentioned. 
Just as with the implicit instantiation, the general template is used as
 a guide to generate the specialization.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E5AGK">Explicit Specializations</h5>
<p class="docText">An <span class="docEmphasis">explicit specialization</span>
 is a definition for a particular type or types that is to be used 
instead of the general template. Sometimes you might need or want to 
modify a template to behave differently when instantiated for a 
particular type; in that case, you can create an explicit 
specialization. Suppose, for example, that you’ve defined a template for
 a class that represents a sorted array for which items are sorted as 
they are added to the array:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template &lt;typename T&gt;
class SortedArray
{
     ...// details omitted
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Also suppose the template uses the <tt>&gt;</tt> operator to compare values. This works well for numbers. It will work if <tt>T</tt> represents a class type, too, provided that you’ve defined a <tt>T::operator&gt;()</tt> method. But it won’t work if <tt>T</tt> is a string represented by type <tt>const char *</tt>. Actually, the template will work, but the strings will wind up sorted by address rather than alphabetically. What is needed is a class definition that uses <tt>strcmp()</tt> instead of <tt>&gt;</tt>.
 In such a case, you can provide an explicit template specialization. 
This takes the form of a template defined for one specific type instead 
of for a general type. When faced with the choice of a specialized 
template and a general template that both match an instantiation 
request, the compiler uses the specialized version.</p>
<p class="docText">A specialized class template definition has the following form:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template &lt;&gt; class <span class="docEmphasis">Classname</span>&lt;<span class="docEmphasis">specialized-type-name</span>&gt; { ... };</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Older compilers may only recognize the older form, which dispenses with the <tt>template &lt;&gt;</tt> prefix:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>class <span class="docEmphasis">Classname</span>&lt;<span class="docEmphasis">specialized-type-name</span>&gt; { ... };</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">To provide a <tt>SortedArray</tt> template specialized for the <tt>const char *</tt> type, using the current notation, you would use code like the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template &lt;&gt; class SortedArray&lt;const char char *&gt;
{
     ...// details omitted
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here the implementation code would use <tt>strcmp()</tt> instead of <tt>&gt;</tt> to compare array values. Now, requests for a <tt>SortedArray</tt> template of <tt>const char *</tt> will use this specialized definition instead of the more general template definition:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>SortedArray&lt;int&gt; scores;          // use general definition
SortedArray&lt;const char *&gt; dates;  // use specialized definition</pre></div><br/>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ERFGK">Partial Specializations</h5>
<p class="docText">C++ allows for <span class="docEmphasis">partial specializations</span>,
 which partially restrict the generality of a template. For example, a 
partial specialization can provide a specific type for one of the type 
parameters:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>// general template
    template &lt;class T1, class T2&gt; class Pair {...};
// specialization with T2 set to int
    template &lt;class T1&gt; class Pair&lt;T1, int&gt; {...};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>&lt;&gt;</tt> following the keyword <tt>template</tt> declares the type parameters that are still unspecialized. So the second declaration specializes <tt>T2</tt> to <tt>int</tt> but leaves <tt>T1</tt> open. Note that specifying all the types leads to an empty bracket pair and a complete explicit specialization:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>// specialization with T1 and T2 set to int
    template &lt;&gt; class Pair&lt;int, int&gt; {...};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The compiler uses the most 
specialized template if there is a choice. Here’s what would happen 
given the preceding three templates:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Pair&lt;double, double&gt; p1; // use general Pair template
Pair&lt;double, int&gt; p2;    // use Pair&lt;T1, int&gt; partial specialization
Pair&lt;int, int&gt; p3;       // use Pair&lt;int, int&gt; explicit specialization</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Or you can partially specialize an existing template by providing a special version for pointers:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template&lt;class T&gt;        // general version
class Feeb { ... };
template&lt;class T*&gt;       // pointer partial specialization
class Feeb { ... };      // modified code</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">If you provide a 
non-pointer type, the compiler uses the general version; if you provide a
 pointer, the compiler uses the pointer specialization:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Feeb&lt;char&gt; fb1;          // use general Feeb template, T is char
Feeb&lt;char *&gt; fb2;        // use Feeb T* specialization, T is char</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Without the partial specialization, the second declaration would use the general template, interpreting <tt>T</tt> as type <tt>char *</tt>. With the partial specialization, it uses the specialized template, interpreting <tt>T</tt> as <tt>char</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">The partial specialization feature allows for making a variety of restrictions. For example, you can use the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>// general template
    template &lt;class T1, class T2, class T3&gt; class Trio{...};
// specialization with T3 set to T2
    template &lt;class T1, class T2&gt; class Trio&lt;T1, T2, T2&gt; {...};
// specialization with T3 and T2 set to T1*
    template &lt;class T1&gt; class Trio&lt;T1, T1*, T1*&gt; {...};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Given these declarations, the compiler would make the following choices:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Trio&lt;int, short, char *&gt; t1; // use general template
Trio&lt;int, short&gt; t2; // use Trio&lt;T1, T2, T2&gt;
Trio&lt;char, char *, char *&gt; t3; use Trio&lt;T1, T1*, T1*&gt;</pre></div><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EJJGK">Member Templates</h4>
<p class="docText">A template can be a 
member of a structure, class, or template class. The STL requires this 
feature to fully implement its design. Listing 14.20 provides a short example of a template class with a nested template class and a template function as members.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E2JGK">Listing 14.20. <tt>tempmemb.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// tempmemb.cpp -- template members
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
using std::cout;
using std::endl;

template &lt;typename T&gt;
class beta
{
private:
    template &lt;typename V&gt;  // nested template class member
    class hold
    {
    private:
        V val;
    public:
        hold(V v  = 0) : val(v) {}
        void show() const { cout &lt;&lt; val &lt;&lt; endl; }
        V Value() const { return val; }
    };
    hold&lt;T&gt; q;             // template object
    hold&lt;int&gt; n;           // template object
public:
    beta( T t, int i) : q(t), n(i) {}
    template&lt;typename U&gt;   // template method
    U blab(U u, T t) { return (n.Value() + q.Value()) * u / t; }
    void Show() const { q.show(); n.show();}
};

int main()
{
    beta&lt;double&gt; guy(3.5, 3);
    cout &lt;&lt; "T was set to double\n";
    guy.Show();
    cout &lt;&lt; "V was set to T, which is double, then V was set to int\n";
    cout &lt;&lt; guy.blab(10, 2.3) &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "U was set to int\n";
    cout &lt;&lt; guy.blab(10.0, 2.3) &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "U was set to double\n";
    cout &lt;&lt; "Done\n";
    return 0;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>hold</tt> template is declared in the private section in Listing 14.20, so it is accessible only within the <tt>beta</tt> class scope. The <tt>beta</tt> class uses the <tt>hold</tt> template to declare two data members:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>hold&lt;T&gt; q;             // template object
hold&lt;int&gt; n;           // template object</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText"><tt>n</tt> is a <tt>hold</tt> object based on the <tt>int</tt> type, and the <tt>q</tt> member is a <tt>hold</tt> object based on the <tt>T</tt> type (the <tt>beta</tt> template parameter). In <tt>main()</tt>, the following declaration makes <tt>T</tt> represent <tt>double</tt>, making <tt>q</tt> type <tt>hold&lt;double&gt;</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>beta&lt;double&gt; guy(3.5, 3);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>blab()</tt> method has one type (<tt>U</tt>) that is determined implicitly by the argument value when the method is called and one type (<tt>T</tt>) that is determined by the instantiation type of the object. In this example, the declaration for <tt>guy</tt> sets <tt>T</tt> to type <tt>double</tt>, and the first argument in the method call in the following sets <tt>U</tt> to type <tt>int</tt>, matching the value <tt>10</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>cout &lt;&lt; guy.blab(10, 2.5) &lt;&lt; endl;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Thus, although the automatic type conversions brought about by mixed types cause the calculation in <tt>blab()</tt> to be done as type <tt>double</tt>, the return value, being type <tt>U</tt>, is an <tt>int</tt>. Hence, it is truncated to <tt>28</tt>, as the following program output shows:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>T was set to double
3.5
3
V was set to T, which is double, then V was set to int
28
U was set to int
28.2609
U was set to double
Done</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Note that replacing <tt>10</tt> with <tt>10.0</tt> in the call to <tt>guy.blab()</tt> causes <tt>U</tt> to be set to <tt>double</tt>, making the return type <tt>double</tt>, which is reflected in <tt>28.2609</tt> being displayed.</p>
<p class="docText">As mentioned previously, the type of the second parameter is set to <tt>double</tt> by the declaration of the <tt>guy</tt>
 object. Unlike the first parameter, then, the type of the second 
parameter is not set by the function call. For instance, the following 
statement would still implement <tt>blah()</tt> as <tt>blah(int, double)</tt>, and the <tt>3</tt> would be converted to type <tt>double</tt> by the usual function prototype rules:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>cout &lt;&lt; guy.blab(10, 3) &lt;&lt; endl;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">You can declare the <tt>hold</tt> class and <tt>blah</tt> method in the <tt>beta</tt> template and define them outside the <tt>beta</tt> template. However, sufficiently old compilers won’t accept template members at all, and others that accept them as shown in Listing 14.20
 don’t accept definitions outside the class. However, if your compiler 
is willing and able, here’s how defining the template methods outside 
the <tt>beta</tt> template would look:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedHeight">template &lt;typename T&gt;
class beta
{
private:
    template &lt;typename V&gt;  // declaration
    class hold;
    hold&lt;T&gt; q;
    hold&lt;int&gt; n;
public:
    beta( T t, int i) : q(t), n(i) {}
    template&lt;typename U&gt;   // declaration
    U blab(U u, T t);
    void Show() const { q.show(); n.show();}
};

// member definition
template &lt;typename T&gt;
  template&lt;typename V&gt;
    class beta&lt;T&gt;::hold
    {
    private:
        V val;
    public:
        hold(V v  = 0) : val(v) {}
        void show() const { std::cout &lt;&lt; val &lt;&lt; std::endl; }
        V Value() const { return val; }
    };

// member definition
template &lt;typename T&gt;
  template &lt;typename U&gt;
    U beta&lt;T&gt;::blab(U u, T t)
    {
       return (n.Value() + q.Value()) * u / t;
    }

					  </pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The definitions have to identify <tt>T</tt>, <tt>V</tt>, and <tt>U</tt> as template parameters. Because the templates are nested, you have to use the</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template &lt;typename T&gt;
  template &lt;typename V&gt;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">syntax instead of this syntax:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template&lt;typename T, typename V&gt;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The definitions also must indicate that <tt>hold</tt> and <tt>blab</tt> are members of the <tt>beta&lt;T&gt;</tt> class, and they use the scope-resolution operator to do so.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E1SGK">Templates As Parameters</h4>
<p class="docText">You’ve seen that a template can have type parameters, such as <tt>typename T</tt>, and non-type parameters, such as <tt>int n</tt>. A template can also have a parameter that is itself a template. Such parameters are yet another template feature addition that is used to implement the STL.</p>
<p class="docText">Listing 14.21 shows an example that begins with these lines:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template &lt;template &lt;typename T&gt; class Thing&gt;
class Crab</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The template parameter is <tt>template &lt;typename T&gt; class Thing</tt>. Here <tt>template &lt;typename T&gt; class</tt> is the type, and <tt>Thing</tt> is the parameter. What does this imply? Suppose you have this declaration:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Crab&lt;King&gt; legs;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">For this to be accepted, the template argument <tt>King</tt> has to be a template class whose declaration matches that of the template parameter <tt>Thing</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template &lt;typename T&gt;
class King {...};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>Crab</tt> declaration in Listing 14.21 declares two objects:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Thing&lt;int&gt; s1;
Thing&lt;double&gt; s2;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The previous declaration for <tt>legs</tt> would then result in substituting <tt>King&lt;int&gt;</tt> for <tt>Thing&lt;int&gt;</tt> and <tt>King&lt;double&gt;</tt> for <tt>Thing&lt;double&gt;</tt>. However, Listing 14.21 has this declaration:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Crab&lt;Stack&gt; nebula;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Hence, in this case, <tt>Thing&lt;int&gt;</tt> is instantiated as <tt>Stack&lt;int&gt;</tt>, and <tt>Thing&lt;double&gt;</tt> is instantiated as <tt>Stack&lt;double&gt;</tt>. In short, the template parameter <tt>Thing</tt> is replaced by whatever template type is used as a template argument in declaring a <tt>Crab</tt> object.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>Crab</tt> class declaration makes three further assumptions about the template class represented by <tt>Thing</tt>. The class should have a <tt>push()</tt> method, the class should have a <tt>pop()</tt> method, and these methods should have a particular interface. The <tt>Crab</tt> class can use any template class that matches the <tt>Thing</tt> type declaration and that has the prerequisite <tt>push()</tt> and <tt>pop()</tt> methods. This chapter happens to have one such class, the <tt>Stack</tt> template defined in <tt>stacktp.h</tt>, so the example uses that class.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E4XGK">Listing 14.21. <tt>tempparm.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// tempparm.cpp – templates as parameters
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include "stacktp.h"

template &lt;template &lt;typename T&gt; class Thing&gt;
class Crab
{
private:
    Thing&lt;int&gt; s1;
    Thing&lt;double&gt; s2;
public:
    Crab() {};
    // assumes the thing class has push() and pop() members
    bool push(int a, double x) { return s1.push(a) &amp;&amp; s2.push(x); }
    bool pop(int &amp; a, double &amp; x){ return s1.pop(a) &amp;&amp; s2.pop(x); }
};

int main()
{
    using std::cout;
    using std::cin;
    using std::endl;
    Crab&lt;Stack&gt; nebula;
// Stack must match template &lt;typename T&gt; class thing
    int ni;
    double nb;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Enter int double pairs, such as 4 3.5 (0 0 to end):\n";
    while (cin&gt;&gt; ni &gt;&gt; nb &amp;&amp; ni &gt; 0 &amp;&amp; nb &gt; 0)
    {
        if (!nebula.push(ni, nb))
            break;
    }

    while (nebula.pop(ni, nb))
           cout &lt;&lt; ni &lt;&lt; ", " &lt;&lt; nb &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Done.\n";

    return 0;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here is a sample run of the program in Listing 14.21:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Enter int double pairs, such as 4 3.5 (0 0 to end):
<span class="docEmphStrong">50 22.48</span>
<span class="docEmphStrong">25 33.87</span>
<span class="docEmphStrong">60 19.12</span>
<span class="docEmphStrong">0 0</span>
60, 19.12
25, 33.87
50, 22.48
Done.</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">You can mix template parameters with regular parameters. For example, the <tt>Crab</tt> class declaration could start out like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template &lt;template &lt;typename T&gt; class Thing, typename U, typename V&gt;
class Crab
{
private:
    Thing&lt;U&gt; s1;
    Thing&lt;V&gt; s2;
...</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Now the types to be stored in the members <tt>s1</tt> and <tt>s2</tt> are generic types instead of hard-coded types. This would require the declaration of <tt>nebula</tt> in the program to be changed to this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Crab&lt;Stack, int, double&gt; nebula; // T=Stack, U=int, V=double</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>template</tt> parameter <tt>T</tt> represents a template type, and the type parameters <tt>U</tt> and <tt>V</tt> represent non-template types.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EP4GK">Template Classes and Friends</h4>
<p class="docText">Template class declarations can have friends, too. You can classify friends of templates into three categories:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">Non-template friends</p></li><li><p class="docList">Bound template friends, meaning the type of the friend is determined by the type of the class when a class is instantiated</p></li><li><p class="docList">Unbound template friends, meaning that all specializations of the friend are friends to each specialization of the class</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">Let’s look at examples of each.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EJ5GK">Non-Template Friend Functions to Template Classes</h5>
<p class="docText">Let’s declare an ordinary function in a template class as a friend:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template &lt;class T&gt;
class HasFriend
{
public:
    friend void counts();     // friend to all HasFriend instantiations
    ...
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This declaration makes the <tt>counts()</tt> function a friend to all possible instantiations of the template. For example, it would be a friend to the <tt>HasFriend&lt;int&gt;</tt> class and the <tt>HasFriend&lt;string&gt;</tt> class.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>counts()</tt> function 
is not invoked by an object (it’s a friend, not a member function), and 
it has no object parameters, so how does it access a <tt>HasFriend</tt>
 object? There are several possibilities. It could access a global 
object; it could access nonglobal objects by using a global pointer; it 
could create its own objects; and it could access static data members of
 a template class, which exist separately from an object.</p>
<p class="docText">Suppose 
you want to provide a template class argument to a friend function. Can 
you have a friend declaration like this, for example?</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>friend void report(HasFriend &amp;);   // possible?</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The answer is no. The reason is that there is no such thing as a <tt>HasFriend</tt> object. There are only particular specializations, such as <tt>HasFriend&lt;short&gt;</tt>. To provide a template class argument, then, you have to indicate a specialization. For example, you can use this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template &lt;class T&gt;
class HasFriend
{
    friend void report(HasFriend&lt;T&gt; &amp;); // bound template friend
    ...
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">To understand what this does, imagine the specialization produced if you declare an object of a particular type:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>HasFriend&lt;int&gt; hf;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The compiler would replace the template parameter <tt>T</tt> with <tt>int</tt>, giving the friend declaration this form:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>class HasFriend&lt;int&gt;
{
    friend void report(HasFriend&lt;int&gt; &amp;); // bound template friend
    ...
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">That is, <tt>report()</tt> with a <tt>HasFriend&lt;int&gt;</tt> parameter becomes a friend to the <tt>HasFriend&lt;int&gt;</tt> class. Similarly, <tt>report()</tt> with a <tt>HasFriend&lt;double&gt;</tt> parameter would be an overloaded version of <tt>report()</tt> that is a friend to the <tt>HasFriend&lt;double&gt;</tt> class.</p>
<p class="docText">Note that <tt>report()</tt>
 is not itself a template function; it just has a parameter that is a 
template. This means that you have to define explicit specializations 
for the friends you plan to use:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>void report(HasFriend&lt;short&gt; &amp;) {...}; // explicit specialization for short
void report(HasFriend&lt;int&gt; &amp;) {...};   // explicit specialization for int</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Listing 14.22 illustrates these points. The <tt>HasFriend</tt> template has a static member <tt>ct</tt>. Note that this means that each particular specialization of the class has its own static member. The <tt>counts()</tt> method, which is a friend to all <tt>HasFriend</tt> specializations, reports the value of <tt>ct</tt> for two particular specializations: <tt>HasFriend&lt;int&gt;</tt> and <tt>HasFriend&lt;double&gt;</tt>. The program also provides two <tt>report()</tt> functions, each of which is a friend to one particular <tt>HasFriend</tt> specialization.</p>
<p class="docText"></p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E3CHK">Listing 14.22. <tt>frnd2tmp.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// frnd2tmp.cpp -- template class with non-template friends
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
using std::cout;
using std::endl;

template &lt;typename T&gt;
class HasFriend
{
private:
    T item;
    static int ct;
public:
    HasFriend(const T &amp; i) : item(i) {ct++;}
    ~HasFriend()  {ct--; }
    friend void counts();
    friend void reports(HasFriend&lt;T&gt; &amp;); // template parameter
};

// each specialization has its own static data member
template &lt;typename T&gt;
int HasFriend&lt;T&gt;::ct = 0;

// non-template friend to all HasFriend&lt;T&gt; classes
void counts()
{
    cout &lt;&lt; "int count: " &lt;&lt; HasFriend&lt;int&gt;::ct &lt;&lt; "; ";
    cout &lt;&lt; "double count: " &lt;&lt; HasFriend&lt;double&gt;::ct &lt;&lt; endl;
}

// non-template friend to the HasFriend&lt;int&gt; class
void reports(HasFriend&lt;int&gt; &amp; hf)
{
    cout &lt;&lt;"HasFriend&lt;int&gt;: " &lt;&lt; hf.item &lt;&lt; endl;
}

// non-template friend to the HasFriend&lt;double&gt; class
void reports(HasFriend&lt;double&gt; &amp; hf)
{
    cout &lt;&lt;"HasFriend&lt;double&gt;: " &lt;&lt; hf.item &lt;&lt; endl;
}

int main()
{
    cout &lt;&lt; "No objects declared: ";
    counts();
    HasFriend&lt;int&gt; hfi1(10);
    cout &lt;&lt; "After hfi1 declared: ";
    counts();
    HasFriend&lt;int&gt; hfi2(20);
    cout &lt;&lt; "After hfi2 declared: ";
    counts();
    HasFriend&lt;double&gt; hfdb(10.5);
    cout &lt;&lt; "After hfdb declared: ";
    counts();
    reports(hfi1);
    reports(hfi2);
    reports(hfdb);

    return 0;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Some compilers will warn about using a non-template friend. Here is the output of the program in Listing 14.22:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>No objects declared: int count: 0; double count: 0
After hfi1 declared: int count: 1; double count: 0
After hfi2 declared: int count: 2; double count: 0
After hfdb declared: int count: 2; double count: 1
HasFriend&lt;int&gt;: 10
HasFriend&lt;int&gt;: 20
HasFriend&lt;double&gt;: 10.5</pre></div><br/>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EFGHK">Bound Template Friend Functions to Template Classes</h5>
<p class="docText">You can modify the preceding
 example by making the friend functions templates themselves. In 
particular, you can set things up for bound template friends, so each 
specialization of a class gets a matching specialization for a friend. 
The technique is a bit more complex than for non-template friends and 
involves three steps.</p>
<p class="docText">For the first step, you declare each template function before the class definition:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template &lt;typename T&gt; void counts();
template &lt;typename T&gt; void report(T &amp;);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Next, you declare the 
templates again as friends inside the function. These statements declare
 specializations based on the class template parameter type:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template &lt;typename TT&gt;
class HasFriendT
{
...
    friend void counts&lt;TT&gt;();
    friend void report&lt;&gt;(HasFriendT&lt;TT&gt; &amp;);
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>&lt;&gt;</tt> in the declarations identifies these as template specializations. In the case of <tt>report()</tt>, the <tt>&lt;&gt;</tt> can be left empty because the following template type argument can be deduced from the function argument:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>HasFriendT&lt;TT&gt;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">You could, however, use this instead:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>report&lt;HasFriendT&lt;TT&gt; &gt;(HasFriendT&lt;TT&gt; &amp;)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">However, the <tt>counts()</tt> function has no parameters, so you have to use the template argument syntax (<tt>&lt;TT&gt;</tt>) to indicate its specialization. Note, too, that <tt>TT</tt> is the parameter type for the <tt>HasFriendT</tt> class.</p>
<p class="docText">Again, the best way to understand
 these declarations is to imagine what they become when you declare an 
object of a particular specialization. For example, suppose you declare 
this object:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>HasFriendT&lt;int&gt; squack;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Then the compiler substitutes <tt>int</tt> for <tt>TT</tt> and generates the following class definition:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>class HasFriendT&lt;int&gt;
{
...
    friend void counts&lt;int&gt;();
    friend void report&lt;&gt;(HasFriendT&lt;int&gt; &amp;);
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">One specialization is based on <tt>TT</tt>, which becomes <tt>int</tt>, and the other is based on <tt>HasFriendT&lt;TT&gt;</tt>, which becomes <tt>HasFriendT&lt;int&gt;</tt>. Thus, the template specializations <tt>counts&lt;int&gt;()</tt> and <tt>report&lt;HasFriendT&lt;int&gt; &gt;()</tt> are declared as friends to the <tt>HasFriendT&lt;int&gt;</tt> class.</p>
<p class="docText">The third requirement the program must meet is to provide template definitions for the friends. Listing 14.23 illustrates these three aspects. Note that Listing 14.22 has one <tt>count()</tt> function that is a friend to all <tt>HasFriend</tt> classes, whereas Listing 14.23 has two <tt>count()</tt> functions, one of which is a friend to each of the instantiated class types. Because the <tt>count()</tt> function calls have no function parameter from which the compiler can deduce the desired specialization, these calls use the <tt>count&lt;int&gt;()</tt> and <tt>count&lt;double&gt;()</tt> forms to indicate the specialization. For the calls to <tt>report()</tt>, however, the compiler can use the argument type to deduce the specialization. You could use the <tt>&lt;&gt;</tt> form to the same effect:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>report&lt;HasFriendT&lt;int&gt; &gt;(hfi2);  // same as report(hfi2);</pre></div><br/>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EAMHK">Listing 14.23. <tt>tmp2tmp.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// tmp2tmp.cpp -- template friends to a template class
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
using std::cout;
using std::endl;

// template prototypes
template &lt;typename T&gt; void counts();
template &lt;typename T&gt; void report(T &amp;);

// template class
template &lt;typename TT&gt;
class HasFriendT
{
private:
    TT item;
    static int ct;
public:
    HasFriendT(const TT &amp; i) : item(i) {ct++;}
    ~HasFriendT() { ct--; }
    friend void counts&lt;TT&gt;();
    friend void report&lt;&gt;(HasFriendT&lt;TT&gt; &amp;);
};

template &lt;typename T&gt;
int HasFriendT&lt;T&gt;::ct = 0;

// template friend functions definitions
template &lt;typename T&gt;
void counts()
{
    cout &lt;&lt; "template size: " &lt;&lt; sizeof(HasFriendT&lt;T&gt;) &lt;&lt; "; ";
    cout &lt;&lt; "template counts(): " &lt;&lt; HasFriendT&lt;T&gt;::ct &lt;&lt; endl;
}

template &lt;typename T&gt;
void report(T &amp; hf)
{
    cout &lt;&lt; hf.item &lt;&lt; endl;
}

int main()
{
    counts&lt;int&gt;();
    HasFriendT&lt;int&gt; hfi1(10);
    HasFriendT&lt;int&gt; hfi2(20);
    HasFriendT&lt;double&gt; hfdb(10.5);
    report(hfi1);  // generate report(HasFriendT&lt;int&gt; &amp;)
    report(hfi2);  // generate report(HasFriendT&lt;int&gt; &amp;)
    report(hfdb);  // generate report(HasFriendT&lt;double&gt; &amp;)
    cout &lt;&lt; "counts&lt;int&gt;() output:\n";
    counts&lt;int&gt;();
    cout &lt;&lt; "counts&lt;double&gt;() output:\n";
    counts&lt;double&gt;();

    return 0;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here is the output of the program in Listing 14.23:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template size: 4; template counts(): 0
10
20
10.5
counts&lt;int&gt;() output:
template size: 4; template counts(): 2
counts&lt;double&gt;() output:
template size: 8; template counts(): 1</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">As you can see, <tt>counts&lt;double&gt;</tt> reports a different template size from <tt>counts&lt;int&gt;</tt>, demonstrating that each <tt>T</tt> type now gets its own <tt>count()</tt> friend.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E6OHK">Unbound Template Friend Functions to Template Classes</h5>
<p class="docText"><a name="section are"></a>The bound template friend 
functions in the preceding section are template specializations of a 
template declared outside a class. An <tt>int</tt> class specialization gets an <tt>int</tt>
 function specialization, and so on. By declaring a template inside a 
class, you can create unbound friend functions for which every function 
specialization is a friend to every class specialization. For unbound 
friends, the friend template type parameters are different from the 
template class type parameters:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template &lt;typename T&gt;
class ManyFriend
{
...
    template &lt;typename C, typename D&gt; friend void show2(C &amp;, D &amp;);
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Listing 14.24 shows an example that uses an unbound friend. In it, the function call <tt>show2(hfi1, hfi2)</tt> gets matched to the following specialization:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>void show2&lt;ManyFriend&lt;int&gt; &amp;, ManyFriend&lt;int&gt; &amp;&gt;
          (ManyFriend&lt;int&gt; &amp; c, ManyFriend&lt;int&gt; &amp; d);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Because it is a friend to all specializations of <tt>ManyFriend</tt>, this function has access to the <tt>item</tt> members of all specializations. But it only uses access to <tt>ManyFriend&lt;int&gt;</tt> objects.</p>
<p class="docText">Similarly, <tt>show2(hfd, hfi2)</tt> gets matched to this specialization:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>void show2&lt;ManyFriend&lt;double&gt; &amp;, ManyFriend&lt;int&gt; &amp;&gt;
          (ManyFriend&lt;double&gt; &amp; c, ManyFriend&lt;int&gt; &amp; d);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">It, too, is a friend to all <tt>ManyFriend</tt> specializations, and it uses its access to the <tt>item</tt> member of a <tt>ManyFriend&lt;int&gt;</tt> object and to the <tt>item</tt> member of a <tt>ManyFriend&lt;double&gt;</tt> object.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E5RHK">Listing 14.24. <tt>manyfrnd.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// manyfrnd.cpp -- unbound template friend to a template class
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
using std::cout;
using std::endl;

template &lt;typename T&gt;
class ManyFriend
{
private:
    T item;
public:
    ManyFriend(const T &amp; i) : item(i) {}
    template &lt;typename C, typename D&gt; friend void show2(C &amp;, D &amp;);
};

template &lt;typename C, typename D&gt; void show2(C &amp; c, D &amp; d)
{
    cout &lt;&lt; c.item &lt;&lt; ", " &lt;&lt; d.item &lt;&lt; endl;
}

int main()
{
    ManyFriend&lt;int&gt; hfi1(10);
    ManyFriend&lt;int&gt; hfi2(20);
    ManyFriend&lt;double&gt; hfdb(10.5);
    cout &lt;&lt; "hfi1, hfi2: ";
    show2(hfi1, hfi2);
    cout &lt;&lt; "hfdb, hfi2: ";
    show2(hfdb, hfi2);

    return 0;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here’s the output of the program in Listing 14.24:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>hfi1, hfi2: 10, 20
hfdb, hfi2: 10.5, 20</pre></div><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E4SHK">Template Aliases (C++11)</h4>
<p class="docText">It can be convenient, especially in template design, to create aliases for types. You can use <tt>typedef</tt> to create aliases for template specializations:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>// define three typedef aliases
typedef std::array&lt;double, 12&gt; arrd;
typedef std::array&lt;int, 12&gt; arri;
typedef std::array&lt;std::string, 12&gt; arrst;
arrd gallons;  // gallons is type std::array&lt;double, 12&gt;
arri days;     // days is type std::array&lt;int, 12&gt;
arrst months;  // months is type std::array&lt;std::string, 12&gt;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">But if you find yourself writing code similar to the preceding <tt>typedef</tt>s,
 over and over, you might wonder if you’ve forgotten some language 
feature that simplifies the task or if the language has forgotten to 
supply such a feature. In this case, C++11 provides a feature previously
 missing—a way to use a template to provide a family of aliases. Here’s 
what the approach looks like:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template&lt;typename T&gt;
  using arrtype = std::array&lt;T,12&gt;;  // template to create multiple aliases</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This makes <tt>arrtype</tt> a template alias that can be used as a type, as follows:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>arrtype&lt;double&gt; gallons;      // gallons is type std::array&lt;double, 12&gt;
arrtype&lt;int&gt; days;            // days is type std::array&lt;int, 12&gt;
arrtype&lt;std::string&gt; months;  // months is type std::array&lt;std::string, 12&gt;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In short, <tt>arrtype&lt;T&gt;</tt> means type <tt>std::array&lt;T,12&gt;</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">C++11 extends the <tt>using =</tt> syntax to non-templates too. In that case, it becomes equivalent to an ordinary <tt>typedef</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>typedef const char * pc1;       // typedef syntax
using pc2 = const char *;       // using = syntax
typedef const int *(*pa1)[10];  // typedef syntax
using pa2 = const int *(*)[10]; // using = syntax</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">As you get used to it, you may
 find the new form more readable because it separates the type name from
 type information more clearly.</p>
<p class="docText">Another C++11 addition to templates is the <span class="docEmphasis">variadic template</span>, which allows you to define a template class or function that can take a variable number of initializers. Chapter 18, “Visiting with the New C++ Standard,” looks into this topic.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
