<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Summary</h3>
<p class="docText">C++ provides several means for reusing code. Public inheritance, described in Chapter 13, “Class Inheritance,” enables you to model <span class="docEmphasis">is-a</span>
 relationships, with derived classes being able to reuse the code of 
base classes. Private and protected inheritance also let you reuse 
base-class code, this time modeling <span class="docEmphasis">has-a</span>
 relationships. With private inheritance, public and protected members 
of the base class become private members of the derived class. With 
protected inheritance, public and protected members of the base class 
become protected members of the derived class. Thus, in either case, the
 public interface of the base class becomes an internal interface for 
the derived class. This is sometimes described as inheriting the 
implementation but not the interface because a derived object can’t 
explicitly use the base-class interface. Thus, you can’t view a derived 
object as a kind of base object. Because of this, a base-class pointer 
or reference is not allowed to refer to a derived object without an 
explicit type cast.</p>
<p class="docText">You can also reuse class code by developing a class with members that are themselves objects. This approach, called <span class="docEmphasis">containment</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">layering</span>, or <span class="docEmphasis">composition</span>, also models the <span class="docEmphasis">has-a</span>
 relationship. Containment is simpler to implement and use than private 
or protected inheritance, so it is usually preferred. However, private 
and protected inheritance have slightly different capabilities. For 
example, inheritance allows a derived class access to protected members 
of a base class. Also it allows a derived class to redefine a virtual 
function inherited from the base class. Because containment is not a 
form of inheritance, neither of these capabilities are options when you 
reuse class code via containment. On the other hand, containment is more
 suitable if you need several objects of a given class. For example, a <tt>State</tt> class could contain an array of <tt>County</tt> objects.</p>
<p class="docText">Multiple inheritance (MI) 
allows you to reuse code for more than one class in a class design. 
Private or protected MI models the <span class="docEmphasis">has-a</span> relationship, and public MI models the <span class="docEmphasis">is-a</span>
 relationship. MI can create problems with multidefined names and 
multi-inherited bases. You can use class qualifiers to resolve name 
ambiguities and virtual base classes to avoid multi-inherited bases. 
However, using virtual base classes introduces new rules for writing 
initialization lists for constructors and for resolving ambiguities.</p>
<p class="docText">Class templates let you 
create a generic class design in which a type, usually a member type, is
 represented by a type parameter. A typical template looks like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template &lt;class T&gt;
class Ic
{
      T v;
      ...
public:
      Ic(const T &amp; val) : v(val) { }
      ...
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here <tt>T</tt> is the type 
parameter, and it acts as a stand-in for a real type to be specified at a
 later time. (This parameter can have any valid C++ name, but <tt>T</tt> and <tt>Type</tt> are common choices.) You can also use <tt>typename</tt> instead of <tt>class</tt> in this context:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template &lt;typename T&gt;  // same as template &lt;class T&gt;
class Rev {...} ;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Class definitions 
(instantiations) are generated when you declare a class object and 
specify a particular type. For example, the following declaration causes
 the compiler to generate a class declaration in which every occurrence 
of the type parameter <tt>T</tt> in the template is replaced by the actual type <tt>short</tt> in the class declaration:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>class Ic&lt;short&gt; sic;    // implicit instantiation</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In this case, the class name is <tt>Ic&lt;short&gt;</tt>, not <tt>Ic</tt>. <tt>Ic&lt;short&gt;</tt> is termed a <span class="docEmphasis">specialization</span> of the template. In particular, it is an implicit instantiation.</p>
<p class="docText">An explicit instantiation occurs when you declare a specific specialization of the class, using the keyword <tt>template</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template class IC&lt;int&gt;;  // explicit instantiation</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In this situation, the compiler uses the general template to generate an <tt>int</tt> specialization <tt>Ic&lt;int&gt;</tt>, even though no objects have yet been requested of that class.</p>
<p class="docText">You can provide 
explicit specializations, which are specialized class declarations that 
override a template definition. You just define the class, starting with
 <tt>template&lt;&gt;</tt>, and then you use 
the template class name, followed by angle brackets containing the type 
for which you want a specialization. For example, you could provide a 
specialized <tt>Ic</tt> class for character pointers as follows:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template &lt;&gt; class Ic&lt;char *&gt;.
{
      char * str;
      ...
public:
      Ic(const char * s) : str(s) { }
      ...
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Then a declaration of the following form would use the specialized definition for <tt>chic</tt> rather than using the general template:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>class Ic&lt;char *&gt; chic;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">A class template can specify more than one generic type and can also have non-type parameters:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template &lt;class T, class TT, int n&gt;
class Pals {...};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The following declaration would generate an implicit instantiation using <tt>double</tt> for <tt>T</tt>, <tt>string</tt> for <tt>TT</tt>, and <tt>6</tt> for <tt>n</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Pals&lt;double, string, 6&gt; mix;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">A class template can also have parameters that are templates:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template &lt; template &lt;typename T&gt; class CL, typename U, int z&gt;
class Trophy {...};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here <tt>z</tt> stands for an <tt>int</tt> value, <tt>U</tt> stands for the name of a type, and <tt>CL</tt> stands for a class template declared using <tt>template &lt;typename T&gt;</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Class templates can be partially specialized:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template &lt;class T&gt; Pals&lt;T, T, 10&gt; {...};
template &lt;class T, class TT&gt; Pals&lt;T, TT, 100&gt; {...};
template &lt;class T, int n&gt; Pals &lt;T, T*, n&gt; {...};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The first example here creates a specialization in which both types are the same and <tt>n</tt> has the value <tt>6</tt>. Similarly, the second creates a specialization for <tt>n</tt> equal to <tt>100</tt>, and the third creates a specialization for which the second type is a pointer to the first type.</p>
<p class="docText">Template classes can be members of other classes, structures, and templates.</p>
<p class="docText">The goal of all these
 methods is to allow programmers to reuse tested code without having to 
copy it manually. This simplifies the programming task and makes 
programs more reliable.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
