<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Programming Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Programming Exercises</h3>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1.</b></td><td class="docText">The <tt>Wine</tt> class has a <tt>string</tt> class object member (see Chapter 4) that holds the name of a wine and a <tt>Pair</tt> object (as discussed in this chapter) of <tt>valarray&lt;int&gt;</tt> objects (as discussed in this chapter). The first member of each <tt>Pair</tt>
 object holds the vintage years, and the second member holds the numbers
 of bottles owned for the corresponding particular vintage year. For 
example, the first <tt>valarray</tt> object of the <tt>Pair</tt> object might hold the years <tt>1988</tt>, <tt>1992</tt>, and <tt>1996</tt>, and the second <tt>valarray</tt> object might hold the bottle counts <tt>24</tt>, <tt>48</tt>, and <tt>144</tt>. It may be convenient for <tt>Wine</tt> to have an <tt>int</tt> member that stores the number of years. Also some <tt>typedef</tt>s might be useful to simplify the coding:
<div class="docText"><pre>typedef std::valarray&lt;int&gt; ArrayInt;
typedef Pair&lt;ArrayInt, ArrayInt&gt; PairArray;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Thus, the <tt>PairArray</tt> type represents type <tt>Pair&lt;std::valarray&lt;int&gt;, std::valarray&lt;int&gt; &gt;</tt>. Implement the <tt>Wine</tt> class by using containment. The class should have a default constructor and at least the following constructors:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>// initialize label to l, number of years to y,
// vintage years to yr[], bottles to bot[]
Wine(const char * l, int y, const int yr[], const int bot[]);
// initialize label to l, number of years to y,
// create array objects of length y
Wine(const char * l, int y);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>Wine</tt> class should have a method <tt>GetBottles()</tt> that, given a <tt>Wine</tt> object with <tt>y</tt> years, prompts the user to enter the corresponding number of vintage years and bottle counts. A method <tt>Label()</tt> should return a reference to the wine name. A method <tt>sum()</tt><a name="second"></a> should return the total number of bottles in the second <tt>valarray&lt;int&gt;</tt> object in the <tt>Pair</tt> object.</p>
<p class="docText">The program should prompt 
the user to enter a wine name, the number of elements of the array, and 
the year and bottle count information for each array element. The 
program should use this data to construct a <tt>Wine</tt> object and then display the information stored in the object. For guidance, here’s a sample test program:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedHeight">// pe14-1.cpp  -- using Wine class with containment
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include "winec.h"

int main ( void )
{
    using std::cin;
    using std::cout;
    using std::endl;

    cout &lt;&lt; "Enter name of wine: ";
    char lab[50];
    cin.getline(lab, 50);
    cout &lt;&lt; "Enter number of years: ";
    int yrs;
    cin &gt;&gt; yrs;

    Wine holding(lab, yrs); // store label, years, give arrays yrs elements
    holding.GetBottles();   // solicit input for year, bottle count
    holding.Show();         // display object contents

    const int YRS = 3;
    int y[YRS] = {1993, 1995, 1998};
    int b[YRS] = { 48, 60, 72};
    // create new object, initialize using data in arrays y and b
    Wine more("Gushing Grape Red",YRS, y, b);
    more.Show();
    cout &lt;&lt; "Total bottles for " &lt;&lt; more.Label() // use Label() method
         &lt;&lt; ": " &lt;&lt; more.sum() &lt;&lt; endl;          // use sum() method
    cout &lt;&lt; "Bye\n";
    return 0;
}

					  </pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">And here’s some sample output:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedHeight">Enter name of wine: <span class="docEmphStrong">Gully Wash</span>
Enter number of years: <span class="docEmphStrong">4</span>
Enter Gully Wash data for 4 year(s):
Enter year: <span class="docEmphStrong">1988</span>
Enter bottles for that year: <span class="docEmphStrong">42</span>
Enter year: <span class="docEmphStrong">1994</span>
Enter bottles for that year: <span class="docEmphStrong">58</span>
Enter year: <span class="docEmphStrong">1998</span>
Enter bottles for that year: <span class="docEmphStrong">12</span>2
Enter year: <span class="docEmphStrong">2001</span>
Enter bottles for that year: <span class="docEmphStrong">144</span>
Wine: Gully Wash
        Year    Bottles
        1988    42
        1994    58
        1998    122
        2001    144
Wine: Gushing Grape Red
        Year    Bottles
        1993    48
        1995    60
        1998    72
Total bottles for Gushing Grape Red: 180
Bye

					  </pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2.</b></td><td class="docText">This
 exercise is the same as Programming Exercise 1, except that you should 
use private inheritance instead of containment. Again, a few <tt>typedef</tt>s might prove handy. Also you might contemplate the meaning of statements such as the following:
<div class="docText"><pre>PairArray::operator=(PairArray(ArrayInt(),ArrayInt()));
cout  &lt;&lt; (const string &amp;)(*this);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The class should work with the same test program as shown in Programming Exercise 1.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3.</b></td><td class="docText">Define a <tt>QueueTp</tt> template. Test it by creating a queue of pointers-to-<tt>Worker</tt> (as defined in Listing 14.10) and using the queue in a program similar to that in Listing 14.12.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4.</b></td><td class="docText">A <tt>Person</tt> class holds the first name and the last name of a person. In addition to its constructors, it has a <tt>Show()</tt> method that displays both names. A <tt>Gunslinger</tt> class derives virtually from the <tt>Person</tt> class. It has a <tt>Draw()</tt> member that returns a type <tt>double</tt> value representing a gunslinger’s draw time. The class also has an <tt>int</tt> member representing the number of notches on a gunslinger’s gun. Finally, it has a <tt>Show()</tt> function that displays all this information.
<p class="docText">A <tt>PokerPlayer</tt> class derives virtually from the <tt>Person</tt> class. It has a <tt>Draw()</tt> member that returns a random number in the range 1 through 52, representing a card value. (Optionally, you could define a <tt>Card</tt> class with suit and face value members and use a <tt>Card</tt> return value for <tt>Draw()</tt>.) The <tt>PokerPlayer</tt> class uses the <tt>Person show()</tt> function. The <tt>BadDude</tt> class derives publicly from the <tt>Gunslinger</tt> and <tt>PokerPlayer</tt> classes. It has a <tt>Gdraw()</tt> member that returns a bad dude’s draw time and a <tt>Cdraw()</tt> member that returns the next card drawn. It has an appropriate <tt>Show()</tt>
 function. Define all these classes and methods, along with any other 
necessary methods (such as methods for setting object values) and test 
them in a simple program similar to that in Listing 14.12.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5.</b></td><td class="docText">Here are some class declarations:
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedHeight">// emp.h -- header file for abstr_emp class and children

#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;

class abstr_emp
{
private:
    std::string fname;    // abstr_emp's first name
    std::string lname;    // abstr_emp's last name
    std::string job;
public:
    abstr_emp();
    abstr_emp(const std::string &amp; fn, const std::string &amp;  ln,
             const std::string &amp;  j);
    virtual void ShowAll() const;    // labels and shows all data
    virtual void SetAll();        // prompts user for values
    friend std::ostream &amp;
             operator&lt;&lt;(std::ostream &amp; os, const abstr_emp &amp; e);
    // just displays first and last name
    virtual ~abstr_emp() = 0;         // virtual base class
};

class employee : public abstr_emp
{
public:
    employee();
    employee(const std::string &amp; fn, const std::string &amp;  ln,
             const std::string &amp;  j);
    virtual void ShowAll() const;
    virtual void SetAll();
};

class manager:  virtual public abstr_emp
{
private:
    int inchargeof;        // number of abstr_emps managed
protected:
    int InChargeOf() const { return inchargeof; } // output
    int &amp; InChargeOf(){ return inchargeof; }      // input
public:
    manager();
    manager(const std::string &amp; fn, const std::string &amp; ln,
            const std::string &amp; j, int ico = 0);
    manager(const abstr_emp &amp; e, int ico);
    manager(const manager &amp; m);
    virtual void ShowAll() const;
    virtual void SetAll();
};

class fink: virtual public abstr_emp
{
private:
    std::string reportsto;        // to whom fink reports
protected:
    const std::string ReportsTo() const { return reportsto; }
    std::string &amp; ReportsTo(){ return reportsto; }
public:
    fink();
    fink(const std::string &amp; fn, const std::string &amp; ln,
         const std::string &amp; j, const std::string &amp; rpo);
    fink(const abstr_emp &amp; e, const std::string &amp; rpo);
    fink(const fink &amp; e);
    virtual void ShowAll() const;
    virtual void SetAll();
};

class highfink: public manager, public fink // management fink
{
public:
    highfink();
    highfink(const std::string &amp; fn, const std::string &amp; ln,
             const std::string &amp; j, const std::string &amp; rpo,
             int ico);
    highfink(const abstr_emp &amp; e, const std::string &amp; rpo, int ico);
    highfink(const fink &amp; f, int ico);
    highfink(const manager &amp; m, const std::string &amp; rpo);
    highfink(const highfink &amp; h);
    virtual void ShowAll() const;
    virtual void SetAll();
};

					  </pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Note that the class hierarchy
 uses MI with a virtual base class, so keep in mind the special rules 
for constructor initialization lists for that case. Also note the 
presence of some protected-access methods. This simplifies the code for 
some of the <tt>highfink</tt> methods. (Note, for example, that if <tt>highfink::ShowAll()</tt> simply calls <tt>fink::ShowAll()</tt> and <tt>manager::ShowAll()</tt>, it winds up calling <tt>abstr_emp::ShowAll()</tt> twice.) Provide the class method implementations and test the classes in a program. Here is a minimal test program:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedHeight">// pe14-5.cpp
// useemp1.cpp -- using the abstr_emp classes

#include &lt;iostream&gt;
using namespace std;
#include "emp.h"

int main(void)
{
    employee em("Trip", "Harris", "Thumper");
    cout &lt;&lt; em &lt;&lt; endl;
    em.ShowAll();

    manager ma("Amorphia", "Spindragon", "Nuancer", 5);
    cout &lt;&lt; ma &lt;&lt; endl;
    ma.ShowAll();


    fink fi("Matt", "Oggs", "Oiler", "Juno Barr");
    cout &lt;&lt; fi &lt;&lt; endl;
    fi.ShowAll();
    highfink hf(ma, "Curly Kew");  // recruitment?
    hf.ShowAll();
    cout &lt;&lt; "Press a key for next phase:\n";
    cin.get();
    highfink hf2;
    hf2.SetAll();

    cout &lt;&lt; "Using an abstr_emp * pointer:\n";
    abstr_emp  * tri[4] = {&amp;em, &amp;fi, &amp;hf, &amp;hf2};
    for (int i = 0; i &lt; 4; i++)
        tri[i]-&gt;ShowAll();

    return 0;
}

					  </pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Why is no assignment operator defined?</p>
<p class="docText">Why are <tt>ShowAll()</tt> and <tt>SetAll()</tt> virtual?</p>
<p class="docText">Why is <tt>abstr_emp</tt> a virtual base class?</p>
<p class="docText">Why does the <tt>highfink</tt> class have no data section?</p>
<p class="docText">Why is only one version of <tt>operator&lt;&lt;()</tt> needed?</p>
<p class="docText">What would happen if the end of the program were replaced with this code?</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>abstr_emp  tri[4] = {em, fi, hf, hf2};
for (int i = 0; i &lt; 4; i++)
      tri[i].ShowAll();</pre></div><br/></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
