<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>15. Friends, Exceptions, and More</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h2 class="docChapterTitle" id="title-ID0ECZEK">15. Friends, Exceptions, and More</h2>
<p class="docText">In this chapter you’ll learn about the following:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">Friend classes</p></li><li><p class="docList">Friend class methods</p></li><li><p class="docList">Nested classes</p></li><li><p class="docList">Throwing exceptions, <tt>try</tt> blocks, and <tt>catch</tt> blocks</p></li><li><p class="docList">Exception classes</p></li><li><p class="docList">Runtime type identification (RTTI)</p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>dynamic_cast</tt> and <tt>typeid</tt></p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>static_cast</tt>, <tt>const_cast</tt>, and <tt>reinterpret_cast</tt></p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">This chapter ties up some loose
 ends and ventures into some of the later additions to the C++ language.
 The loose ends include friend classes, friend member functions, and 
nested classes, which are classes declared within other classes. The 
later additions discussed here are exceptions, runtime type 
identification (RTTI), and improved type cast control. C++ exception 
handling provides a mechanism for dealing with unusual occurrences that 
otherwise would bring a program to a halt. RTTI is a mechanism for 
identifying object types. The new type cast operators improve the safety
 of type casts. These last three facilities are fairly new to C++, and 
older compilers do not support them.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
