<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Nested Classes</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Nested Classes</h3>
<p class="docText">In C++, you can place a class declaration inside another class. The class declared within another is called a <span class="docEmphasis">nested class</span>,
 and it helps avoid name clutter by giving the new type class scope. 
Member functions of the class containing the declaration can create and 
use objects of the nested class. The outside world can use the nested 
class only if the declaration is in the public section and if you use 
the scope-resolution operator. (Older versions of C++ either don’t allow
 nested classes or implement the concept incompletely.)</p>
<p class="docText">Nesting classes is not the same 
as containment. Recall that containment means having a class object as a
 member of another class. Nesting a class, on the other hand, does not 
create a class member. Instead, it defines a type that is known just 
locally to the class that contains the nested class declaration.</p>
<p class="docText">The usual reasons for nesting a class are to assist in the implementation of another class and to avoid name conflicts. The <tt>Queue</tt> class example in Listing 12.10 in Chapter 12, “Classes and Dynamic Memory Allocation,” provides a disguised case of nested classes by nesting a structure definition:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>class Queue
{
private:
// class scope definitions
    // Node is a nested structure definition local to this class
    struct Node {Item item; struct Node * next;};
    ...
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Because a structure is a class whose members are public by default, <tt>Node</tt>
 really is a nested class. However, this definition doesn’t take 
advantage of class abilities. In particular, it lacks an explicit 
constructor. Let’s remedy that now.</p>
<p class="docText">First, you need to find where <tt>Node</tt> objects are created in the <tt>Queue</tt> example. Examining the class declaration (see Listing 12.10) and the methods definitions (see Listing 12.11) reveals that the only place in which <tt>Node</tt> objects are created is in the <tt>enqueue()</tt> method:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>bool Queue::enqueue(const Item &amp; item)
{
    if (isfull())
       return false;
    Node * add = new Node;  // create node
// on failure, new throws std::bad_alloc exception
    add-&gt;item = item;       // set node pointers
    add-&gt;next = NULL;
    ...
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This code explicitly assigns values to the <tt>Node</tt> members after creating a <tt>Node</tt>. This is the sort of work that is more properly done by a constructor.</p>
<p class="docText">Knowing now where and how a constructor should be used, you can provide an appropriate constructor definition:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>class Queue
{
// class scope definitions
    // Node is a nested class definition local to this class
    class Node
    {
    public:
        Item item;
        Node * next;
        Node(const Item &amp; i) : item(i), next(0) { }
    };
    ...
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This constructor initializes the node’s <tt>item</tt> member to <tt>i</tt> and sets the <tt>next</tt> pointer to <tt>0</tt>, which is one way of writing the null pointer in C++. (Using <tt>NULL</tt> would require including a header file that defines <tt>NULL</tt>. Users of a C++11-compliant compiler can use <tt>nullptr</tt>.) Because all nodes created by the <tt>Queue</tt> class have <tt>next</tt> initially set to the null pointer, this is the only constructor the class needs.</p>
<p class="docText">Next, you need to rewrite <tt>enqueue()</tt> by using the constructor</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>bool Queue::enqueue(const Item &amp; item)
{
    if (isfull())
        return false;
    Node * add = new Node(item);  // create, initialize node
// on failure, new throws std::bad_alloc exception
    ...
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This makes the code for <tt>enqueue()</tt>
 a bit shorter and a bit safer because it automates initialization 
rather than requiring the programmer to correctly remember what should 
be done.</p>
<p class="docText">This example defines the 
constructor in the class declaration. Suppose you wanted to define it in
 a methods file, instead. In that case, the definition must reflect that
 the <tt>Node</tt> class is defined within the <tt>Queue</tt> class. This is accomplished by using the scope-resolution operator twice:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Queue::Node::Node(const Item &amp; i) : item(i), next(0) { }</pre></div><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EFEFK">Nested Classes and Access</h4>
<p class="docText">Two kinds of access pertain to 
nested classes. First, where a nested class is declared controls the 
scope of the nested class; that is, it establishes which parts of a 
program can create objects of that class. Second, as with any class, the
 public, protected, and private sections of a nested class provide 
access control to class members. Where and how a nested class can be 
used depends on both scope and access control. Let’s examine these 
points further.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EPEFK">Scope</h5>
<p class="docText"><a name="section of"></a>If a nested class is 
declared in a private section of a second class, it is known only to 
that second class. This applies, for example, to the <tt>Node</tt> class nested in the <tt>Queue</tt> declaration in the preceding example. Hence, <tt>Queue</tt> members can use <tt>Node</tt> objects and pointers to <tt>Node</tt> objects, but other parts of a program don’t even know that the <tt>Node</tt> class exists. If you were to derive a class from <tt>Queue</tt>, <tt>Node</tt> would be invisible to that class, too, because a derived class can’t directly access the private parts of a base class.</p>
<p class="docText">If the nested class is declared in
 a protected section of a second class, it is visible to that class but 
invisible to the outside world. However, in this case, a derived class 
would know about the nested class and could directly create objects of 
that type.</p>
<p class="docText">If a nested class is declared 
in a public section of a second class, it is available to the second 
class, to classes derived from the second class, and, because it’s 
public, to the outside world. However, because the nested class has 
class scope, it has to be used with a class qualifier in the outside 
world. For example, suppose you have this declaration:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>class Team
{
public:
      class Coach { ... };
      ...
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Now suppose you have an unemployed coach, one who belongs to no team. To create a <tt>Coach</tt> object outside the <tt>Team</tt> class, you can use this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Team::Coach forhire;  // create a Coach object outside the Team class</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">These same scope 
considerations apply to nested structures and enumerations, too. Indeed,
 many programmers use public enumerations to provide class constants 
that can be used by client programmers. For example, the many 
implementations of classes defined to support the <tt>iostream</tt> facility use this technique to provide various formatting options, as you’ve already seen (and will explore more fully in Chapter 17, “Input, Output, and Files”). Table 15.1 summarizes scope properties for nested classes, structures, and enumerations.</p>
<p></p><table cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0" frame="hsides" rules="none"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 15.1. Scope Properties for Nested Classes, Structures, and Enumerations</h5></caption><colgroup align="left" span="4"><col width="150"></col><col width="150"></col><col width="150"></col><col width="150"></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Where Declared in Nesting Class</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Available to Nesting Class</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Available to Classes Derived from the Nesting Class</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Available to the Outside World</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Private section</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Yes</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">No</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">No</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Protected section</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Yes</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Yes</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">No</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Public section</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Yes</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Yes</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Yes, with class qualifier</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EXMFK">Access Control</h5>
<p class="docText">After a class is in scope, 
access control comes into play. The same rules govern access to a nested
 class that govern access to a regular class. Declaring the <tt>Node</tt> class in the <tt>Queue</tt> class declaration does not grant the <tt>Queue</tt> class any special access privileges to the <tt>Node</tt> class, nor does it grant the <tt>Node</tt> class any special access privileges to the <tt>Queue</tt> class. Thus, a <tt>Queue</tt> class object can access only the public members of a <tt>Node</tt> object explicitly. For that reason, the <tt>Queue</tt> example makes all the members of the <tt>Node</tt> class public. This violates the usual practice of making data members private, but the <tt>Node</tt> class is an internal implementation feature of the <tt>Queue</tt> class and is not visible to the outside world. That’s because the <tt>Node</tt> class is declared in the private section of the <tt>Queue</tt> class. Thus, although <tt>Queue</tt> methods can access <tt>Node</tt> members directly, a client using the <tt>Queue</tt> class cannot do so.</p>
<p class="docText">In short, the location of a 
class declaration determines the scope or visibility of a class. Given 
that a particular class is in scope, the usual access control rules 
(public, protected, private, friend) determine the access a program has 
to members of the nested class.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EIOFK">Nesting in a Template</h4>
<p class="docText">You’ve seen that templates are a good choice for implementing container classes such as the <tt>Queue</tt> class. You may be wondering whether having a nested class poses any problems to converting the <tt>Queue</tt> class definition to a template. The answer is no. Listing 15.5 shows
 how this conversion can be made. As is common for class templates, the 
header file includes the class template, along with method function 
templates.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EUPFK">Listing 15.5. <tt>queuetp.h</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// queuetp.h -- queue template with a nested class
#ifndef QUEUETP_H_
#define QUEUETP_H_

template &lt;class Item&gt;
class QueueTP
{
private:
    enum {Q_SIZE = 10};
    // Node is a nested class definition
    class Node
    {
    public:
        Item item;
        Node * next;
        Node(const Item &amp; i):item(i), next(0){ }
    };
    Node * front;       // pointer to front of Queue
    Node * rear;        // pointer to rear of Queue
    int items;          // current number of items in Queue
    const int qsize;    // maximum number of items in Queue
    QueueTP(const QueueTP &amp; q) : qsize(0) {}
    QueueTP &amp; operator=(const QueueTP &amp; q) { return *this; }
public:
    QueueTP(int qs = Q_SIZE);
    ~QueueTP();
    bool isempty() const
    {
        return items == 0;
    }
    bool isfull() const
    {
        return items == qsize;
    }
    int queuecount() const
    {
        return items;
    }
    bool enqueue(const Item &amp;item); // add item to end
    bool dequeue(Item &amp;item);       // remove item from front
};

// QueueTP methods
template &lt;class Item&gt;
QueueTP&lt;Item&gt;::QueueTP(int qs) : qsize(qs)
{
    front = rear = 0;
    items = 0;
}

template &lt;class Item&gt;
QueueTP&lt;Item&gt;::~QueueTP()
{
    Node * temp;
    while (front != 0)      // while queue is not yet empty
    {
        temp = front;       // save address of front item
        front = front-&gt;next;// reset pointer to next item
        delete temp;        // delete former front
    }
}

// Add item to queue
template &lt;class Item&gt;
bool QueueTP&lt;Item&gt;::enqueue(const Item &amp; item)
{
    if (isfull())
        return false;
    Node * add = new Node(item);    // create node
// on failure, new throws std::bad_alloc exception
    items++;
    if (front == 0)         // if queue is empty,
        front = add;        // place item at front
    else
        rear-&gt;next = add;   // else place at rear
    rear = add;             // have rear point to new node
    return true;
}

// Place front item into item variable and remove from queue
template &lt;class Item&gt;
bool QueueTP&lt;Item&gt;::dequeue(Item &amp; item)
{
    if (front == 0)
        return false;
    item = front-&gt;item;     // set item to first item in queue
    items--;
    Node * temp = front;    // save location of first item
    front = front-&gt;next;    // reset front to next item
    delete temp;            // delete former first item
    if (items == 0)
        rear = 0;
    return true;
}

 #endif

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">One interesting thing about the template in Listing 15.5 is that <tt>Node</tt> is defined in terms of the generic type <tt>Item</tt>. Thus, a declaration like the following leads to a <tt>Node</tt> defined to hold type <tt>double</tt> values:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>QueueTp&lt;double&gt; dq;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">And the following declaration leads to a <tt>Node</tt> defined to hold type <tt>char</tt> values:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>QueueTp&lt;char&gt; cq;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">These two <tt>Node</tt> classes are defined in two separate <tt>QueueTP</tt> classes, so there is no name conflict between the two. That is, one node is type <tt>QueueTP&lt;double&gt;::Node</tt>, and the other is type <tt>QueueTP&lt;char&gt;::Node</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Listing 15.6 offers a short program for testing the new class.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EQSFK">Listing 15.6. <tt>nested.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// nested.cpp -- using a queue that has a nested class
#include &lt;iostream&gt;

#include &lt;string&gt;
#include "queuetp.h"

int main()
{
    using std::string;
    using std::cin;
    using std::cout;

    QueueTP&lt;string&gt; cs(5);
    string temp;

    while(!cs.isfull())
    {
        cout &lt;&lt; "Please enter your name. You will be "
                "served in the order of arrival.\n"
                "name: ";
        getline(cin, temp);
        cs.enqueue(temp);
    }
    cout &lt;&lt; "The queue is full. Processing begins!\n";

    while (!cs.isempty())
    {
        cs.dequeue(temp);
        cout &lt;&lt; "Now processing " &lt;&lt; temp &lt;&lt; "...\n";
    }
    return 0;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here is a sample run of the program in Listings 15.5 and 15.6:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Please enter your name. You will be served in the order of arrival.
name: <span class="docEmphStrong">Kinsey Millhone</span>
Please enter your name. You will be served in the order of arrival.
name: <span class="docEmphStrong">Adam Dalgliesh</span>
Please enter your name. You will be served in the order of arrival.
name: <span class="docEmphStrong">Andrew Dalziel</span>
Please enter your name. You will be served in the order of arrival.
name: <span class="docEmphStrong">Kay Scarpetta</span>
Please enter your name. You will be served in the order of arrival.
name: <span class="docEmphStrong">Richard Jury</span>
The queue is full. Processing begins!
Now processing Kinsey Millhone...
Now processing Adam Dalgliesh...
Now processing Andrew Dalziel...
Now processing Kay Scarpetta...
Now processing Richard Jury...</pre></div><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
