<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Type Cast Operators</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Type Cast Operators</h3>
<p class="docText">The C type cast operator, in Bjarne Stroustrup’s view, is too lax. For example, consider the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>struct Data
{
    double data[200];
};

struct Junk
{
    int junk[100];
};
Data d = {2.5e33, 3.5e-19, 20.2e32};
char * pch = (char *) (&amp;d);   // type cast #1 – convert to string
char ch = char (&amp;d);          // type cast #2 - convert address to a char
Junk * pj = (Junk *) (&amp;d);    // type cast #3 - convert to Junk pointer</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">First, which of these three 
type casts makes any sense? Unless you resort to the implausible, none 
of them make much sense. Second, which of these three type casts are 
allowed? In C, all of them are. Stroustrup’s response to this laxity was
 to tighten up what is allowable for a general type cast and to add four
 type cast operators that provide more discipline for the casting 
process:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>dynamic_cast
const_cast
static_cast
reinterpret_cast</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Instead of using a general type
 cast, you can select an operator that is suited to a particular 
purpose. This documents the intended reason for the type cast and gives 
the compiler a chance to check that you did what you thought you did.</p>
<p class="docText">You’ve already seen the <tt>dynamic_cast</tt> operator. To summarize, suppose <tt>High</tt> and <tt>Low</tt> are two classes, that <tt>ph</tt> is type <tt>High *</tt>, and that <tt>pl</tt> is type <tt>Low *</tt>. Then the following statement assigns a <tt>Low *</tt> pointer to <tt>pl</tt> only if <tt>Low</tt> is an accessible base class (direct or indirect) to <tt>High</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>pl = dynamic_cast&lt;Low *&gt; ph;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Otherwise, the statement assigns the null pointer to <tt>pl</tt>. In general, the operator has this syntax:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>dynamic_cast &lt; <span class="docEmphasis">type-name</span> &gt; (<span class="docEmphasis">expression</span>)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The purpose of this operator is to allow upcasts within a class hierarchy (such type casts being safe because of the <span class="docEmphasis">is-a</span> relationship) and to disallow other casts.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>const_cast</tt> operator is for making a type cast with the sole purpose of changing whether a value is <tt>const</tt> or <tt>volatile</tt>. It has the same syntax as the <tt>dynamic_cast</tt> operator:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>const_cast &lt; <span class="docEmphasis">type-name</span> &gt; (<span class="docEmphasis">expression</span>)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The result of making such a type cast is an error if any other aspect of the type is altered. That is, <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>type_name</tt></span> and <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>expression</tt></span> must be of the same type, except that they can differ in the presence or absence of <tt>const</tt> or <tt>volatile</tt>. Again, suppose <tt>High</tt> and <tt>Low</tt> are two classes:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>High bar;
const High * pbar = &amp;bar;
    ...
High * pb = const_cast&lt;High *&gt; (pbar);    // valid
const Low * pl = const_cast&lt;const Low *&gt; (pbar);      // invalid</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The first type cast makes <tt>*pb</tt> a pointer that can be used to alter the value of the <tt>bar</tt> object; it removes the <tt>const</tt> label. The second type cast is invalid because it attempts to change the type from <tt>const High *</tt> to <tt>const Low *</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">The reason for this 
operator is that occasionally you may have a need for a value that is 
constant most of the time but that can be changed occasionally. In such a
 case, you can declare the value as <tt>const</tt> and use <tt>const_cast</tt>
 when you need to alter the value. This could be done using the general 
type cast, but the general type cast can also simultaneously change the 
type:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>High bar;
const High * pbar = &amp;bar;
...
High * pb = (High *) (pbar);       // valid
Low * pl = (Low *) (pbar);         // also valid</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Because the simultaneous change of type and constantness may be an unintentional programming slip, using the <tt>const_cast</tt> operator is safer.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>const_cast</tt> is 
not all powerful. It can change the pointer access to a quantity, but 
the effect of attempting to change a quantity that is declared <tt>const</tt> is undefined. Let’s clarify this statement with the short example shown in Listing 15.19.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EX2FK">Listing 15.19. <tt>constcast.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>// constcast.cpp -- using const_cast&lt;&gt;
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
using std::cout;
using std::endl;

void change(const int * pt, int n);

int main()
{
    int pop1 = 38383;
    const int pop2 = 2000;

    cout &lt;&lt; "pop1, pop2: " &lt;&lt; pop1 &lt;&lt; ", " &lt;&lt; pop2 &lt;&lt; endl;
    change(&amp;pop1, -103);
    change(&amp;pop2, -103);
    cout &lt;&lt; "pop1, pop2: " &lt;&lt; pop1 &lt;&lt; ", " &lt;&lt; pop2 &lt;&lt; endl;
    return 0;
}

void change(const int * pt, int n)
{
    int * pc;

    pc = const_cast&lt;int *&gt;(pt);
    *pc += n;
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>const_cast</tt> operator can remove the <tt>const</tt> from <tt>const int * pt</tt>, thus allowing the compiler to accept the following statement in <tt>change()</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>*pc += n;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">However, because <tt>pop2</tt> is declared as <tt>const</tt>, the compiler may protect it from any change, as is shown by the following sample output:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>pop1, pop2: 38383, 2000
pop1, pop2: 38280, 2000</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">As you can see, the calls to <tt>change()</tt> alter <tt>pop1</tt> but not <tt>pop2</tt>. The pointer in <tt>change()</tt> is declared as <tt>const int *</tt>, so it can’t be used to change the value of the pointed-to <tt>int</tt>. The pointer <tt>pc</tt> has the <tt>const</tt> cast away, so it can be used to change the pointed-to value, but only if that value wasn’t itself <tt>const</tt>. Therefore, <tt>pc</tt> can be used to alter <tt>pop1</tt> but not <tt>pop2</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>static_cast</tt> operator has the same syntax as the other operators:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>static_cast &lt; <span class="docEmphasis">type-name</span> &gt; (<span class="docEmphasis">expression</span>)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">It’s valid only if <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>type_name</tt></span> can be converted implicitly to the same type that <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>expression</tt></span> has, or vice versa. Otherwise, the type cast is an error. Suppose that <tt>High</tt> is a base class to <tt>Low</tt> and that <tt>Pond</tt> is an unrelated class. Then conversions from <tt>High</tt> to <tt>Low</tt> and <tt>Low</tt> to <tt>High</tt> are valid, but a conversion from <tt>Low</tt> to <tt>Pond</tt> is disallowed:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>High bar;
Low blow;
...
High * pb = static_cast&lt;High *&gt; (&amp;blow);     // valid upcast
Low * pl = static_cast&lt;Low *&gt; (&amp;bar);        // valid downcast
Pond * pmer = static_cast&lt;Pond *&gt; (&amp;blow);   // invalid, Pond unrelated</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The
 first conversion here is valid because an upcast can be done 
explicitly. The second conversion, from a base-class pointer to a 
derived-class pointer, can’t be done without an explicit type 
conversion. But because the type cast in the other direction can be made
 without a type cast, it’s valid to use <tt>static_cast</tt> for a downcast.</p>
<p class="docText">Similarly, because an 
enumeration value can be converted to an integral type without a type 
cast, an integral type can be converted to an enumeration value with <tt>static_cast</tt>. Also you can use <tt>static_cast</tt> to convert <tt>double</tt> to <tt>int</tt>, to convert <tt>float</tt> to <tt>long</tt>, and to perform the various other numeric conversions.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>reinterpret_cast</tt> operator is for inherently risky type casts. It doesn’t let you cast away <tt>const</tt>,
 but it does allow other unsavory things. Sometimes a programmer has to 
do implementation-dependent, unsavory things, and using the <tt>reinterpret_cast</tt> operator makes it simpler to keep track of such acts. It has the same syntax as the other three operators:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>reinterpret_cast &lt; <span class="docEmphasis">type-name</span> &gt; (<span class="docEmphasis">expression</span>)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here is a sample use:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>struct dat {short a; short b;};
long value = 0xA224B118;
dat * pd = reinterpret_cast&lt; dat *&gt; (&amp;value);
cout &lt;&lt; hex &lt;&lt; pd-&gt;a;   // display first 2 bytes of value</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Typically, such type casts 
would be used for low-level, implementation-dependent programming and 
would not be portable. For example, one system may store the bytes in a 
multibyte value in a different order than does a second system.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>reinterpret_cast</tt>
 operator doesn’t allow just anything, however. For example, you can 
cast a pointer type to an integer type that’s large enough to hold the 
pointer representation, but you can’t cast a pointer to a smaller 
integer type or to a floating-point type. Another restriction is that 
you can’t cast a function pointer to a data pointer or vice versa.</p>
<p class="docText">The plain type cast in C++ is 
also restricted. Basically, it can do anything the other type casts can 
do, plus some combinations, such as a <tt>static_cast</tt> or <tt>reinterpret_cast</tt> followed by a <tt>const_cast</tt>,
 but it can’t do anything else. Thus, the following type cast is allowed
 in C but, typically, not in C++ because for most C++ implementations 
the <tt>char</tt> type is too small to hold a pointer implementation:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>char ch = char (&amp;d);          // type cast #2 - convert address to a char</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">These restrictions make sense, but if you find such enforced good judgment oppressive, you still have C available.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
