<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Summary</h3>
<p class="docText">Friends
 allow you to develop a more flexible interface for classes. A class can
 have other functions, other classes, and member functions of other 
classes as friends. In some cases, you may need to use forward 
declarations and to exert care in the ordering of class declarations and
 methods in order to get friends to mesh properly.</p>
<p class="docText">Nested classes are classes
 that are declared within other classes. Nested classes facilitate the 
design of helper classes that implement other classes but needn’t be 
part of a public interface.</p>
<p class="docText">The C++ exception 
mechanism provides a flexible way to deal with awkward programming 
events such as inappropriate values, failed I/O attempts, and the like. 
Throwing an exception terminates the function currently executing and 
transfers control to a matching <tt>catch</tt> block. <tt>catch</tt> blocks immediately follow a <tt>try</tt> block, and for an exception to be caught, the function call that directly or indirectly led to the exception must be in the <tt>try</tt> block. The program then executes the code in the <tt>catch</tt>
 block. This code may attempt to fix the problem, or it can terminate 
the program. A class can be designed with nested exception classes that 
can be thrown when problems specific to the class are detected. A 
function can include an exception specification that identifies the 
exceptions that can be thrown in that function, although C++11 
deprecates that feature. Uncaught exceptions (those with no matching <tt>catch</tt> block) by default terminate a program. So do unexpected exceptions (those not matching an exception specification.)</p>
<p class="docText">The RTTI features allow a program to detect the type of an object. The <tt>dynamic_cast</tt>
 operator is used to cast a derived-class pointer to a base-class 
pointer; its main purpose is to ensure that it’s okay to invoke a 
virtual function call. The <tt>typeid</tt> operator returns a <tt>type_info</tt> object. Two <tt>typeid</tt> return values can be compared to determine whether an object is of a specific type, and the returned <tt>type_info</tt> object can be used to obtain information about an object.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>dynamic_cast</tt>, <tt>static_cast</tt>, <tt>const_cast</tt>, and <tt>reinterpret_cast</tt> operators provide safer, better-documented type casts than the general type cast mechanism.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
