<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter Review</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Chapter Review</h3>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1.</b></td><td class="docText">What’s wrong with the following attempts at establishing friends?
<div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"></p><div class="docText"><pre>class snap {
    friend clasp;
     ...
};
class clasp { ... };</pre></div><p></p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"></p><div class="docText"><pre>class cuff {
public:
      void snip(muff &amp;) { ... }
      ...
};
class muff {
     friend void cuff::snip(muff &amp;);
     ...
};</pre></div><p></p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">class muff {</p><div class="docText"><pre>      friend void cuff::snip(muff &amp;);
     ...
};
class cuff {
public:
      void snip(muff &amp;) { ... }
      ...
};</pre></div></div></li></ol></div></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2.</b></td><td class="docText">You’ve
 seen how to create mutual class friends. Can you create a more 
restricted form of friendship in which only some members of Class B are 
friends to Class A and some members of A are friends to B? Explain.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3.</b></td><td class="docText">What problems might the following nested class declaration have?
<div class="docText"><pre>class Ribs
{
private:
    class Sauce
    {
          int soy;
          int sugar;
   public:
          Sauce(int s1, int s2) : soy(s1), sugar(s2) { }
   };
   ...
};</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4.</b></td><td class="docText">How does <tt>throw</tt> differ from <tt>return</tt>?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5.</b></td><td class="docText">Suppose you have a hierarchy of exception classes that are derived from a base exception class. In what order should you place <tt>catch</tt> blocks?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6.</b></td><td class="docText">Consider the <tt>Grand</tt>, <tt>Superb</tt>, and <tt>Magnificent</tt> classes defined in this chapter. Suppose <tt>pg</tt> is a type <tt>Grand *</tt> pointer that is assigned the address of an object of one of these three classes and that <tt>ps</tt> is a type <tt>Superb *</tt> pointer. What is the difference in how the following two code samples behave?
<div class="docText"><pre>if (ps = dynamic_cast&lt;Superb *&gt;(pg))
    ps-&gt;say();  // sample #1

if (typeid(*pg) == typeid(Superb))
    (Superb *) pg)-&gt;say();  // sample #2</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>7.</b></td><td class="docText">How is the <tt>static_cast</tt> operator different from the <tt>dynamic_cast</tt> operator?</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
