<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Programming Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Programming Exercises</h3>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1.</b></td><td class="docText">Modify the <tt>Tv</tt> and <tt>Remote</tt> classes as follows:
<div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Make them mutual friends.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Add a state variable member to the <tt>Remote</tt> class that describes whether the remote control is in normal or interactive mode.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Add a <tt>Remote</tt> method that displays the mode.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Provide the <tt>Tv</tt> class with a method for toggling the new <tt>Remote</tt> member. This method should work only if the TV is in the on state.</p></div></li></ol></div>
<p class="docText">Write a short program that tests these new features.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2.</b></td><td class="docText">Modify Listing 15.11 so that the two exception types are classes derived from the <tt>logic_error</tt> class provided by the <tt>&lt;stdexcept&gt;</tt> header file. Have each <tt>what()</tt>
 method report the function name and the nature of the problem. The 
exception objects need not hold the bad values; they should just support
 the <tt>what()</tt> method.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3.</b></td><td class="docText">This
 exercise is the same as Programming Exercise 2, except that the 
exceptions should be derived from a base class (itself derived from <tt>logic_error</tt>)
 that stores the two argument values, the exceptions should have a 
method that reports these values as well as the function name, and a 
single <tt>catch</tt> block that catches the 
base-class exemption should be used for both exceptions, with either 
exception causing the loop to terminate.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4.</b></td><td class="docText">Listing 15.16 uses two <tt>catch</tt> blocks after each <tt>try</tt> block so that the <tt>nbad_index</tt> exception leads to the <tt>label_val()</tt> method being invoked. Modify the program so that it uses a single <tt>catch</tt> block after each <tt>try</tt> block and uses RTTI to handle invoking <tt>label_val()</tt> only when appropriate.</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
<p class="docText"> </p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
