<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>16. The string Class and the Standard Template Library</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h2 class="docChapterTitle" id="title-ID0E4XFK">16. The <tt>string</tt> Class and the Standard Template Library</h2>
<p class="docText">In this chapter you’ll learn about the following:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">The standard C++ <tt>string</tt> class</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>auto_ptr</tt>, <tt>unique_ptr</tt>, and <tt>shared_ptr</tt> templates</p></li><li><p class="docList">The Standard Template Library (STL)</p></li><li><p class="docList">Container classes</p></li><li><p class="docList">Iterators</p></li><li><p class="docList">Function objects (functors)</p></li><li><p class="docList">STL algorithms</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>initializer_list</tt> template</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">By now you are familiar with 
the C++ goal of reusable code. One of the big payoffs is when you can 
reuse code written by others. That’s where class libraries come in. 
There are many commercially available C++ class libraries, and there are
 also libraries that come as part of the C++ package. For example, 
you’ve been using the input/output classes supported by the <tt>ostream</tt> header file. This chapter looks at other reusable code available for your programming pleasure.</p>
<p class="docText">You’ve already encountered the <tt>string</tt>
 class, and this chapter examines it more extensively. Then the chapter 
looks at “smart pointer” template classes that make managing dynamic 
memory a bit easier. Next, the chapter looks at the Standard Template 
Library (STL), a collection of useful templates for handling various 
kinds of container objects. The STL exemplifies the programming paradigm
 called <span class="docEmphasis">generic programming</span>. Finally, the chapter looks at the <tt>initializer_list</tt> template class, the C++11 addition that enables using initializer-list syntax with STL objects.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
