<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Function Objects (a.k.a. Functors)</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Function Objects (a.k.a. Functors)</h3>
<p class="docText">Many STL algorithms use <span class="docEmphasis">function objects</span>, also known as <span class="docEmphasis">functors</span>. A <span class="docEmphasis">functor</span> is any object that can be used with <tt>()</tt> in the manner of a function. This includes normal function names, pointers to functions, and class objects for which the <tt>()</tt> operator is overloaded—that is, classes for which the peculiar-looking function <tt>operator()()</tt> is defined. For example, you could define a class like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>class Linear
{
private:
    double slope;
    double y0;
public:
    Linear(double sl_ = 1, double y_ = 0)
        : slope(sl_), y0(y_) {}
    double operator()(double x) {return y0 + slope * x; }
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The overloaded <tt>()</tt> operator then allows you to use <tt>Linear</tt> objects like functions:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Linear f1;
Linear f2(2.5, 10.0);
double y1 = f1(12.5);   // right-hand side is f1.operator()(12.5)
double y2 = f2(0.4);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here <tt>y1</tt> is calculated using the expression <tt>0 + 1 * 12.5</tt>, and <tt>y2</tt> is calculated using the expression <tt>10.0 + 2.5 * 0.4</tt>. In the expression <tt>y0 + slope * x</tt>, the values for <tt>y0</tt> and <tt>slope</tt> come from the constructor for the object, and the value of <tt>x</tt> comes from the argument to <tt>operator()()</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Remember the <tt>for_each</tt> function? It applied a specified function to each member of a range:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>for_each(books.begin(), books.end(), ShowReview);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In
 general, the third argument could be a functor, not just a regular 
function. Actually, this raises a question: How do you declare the third
 argument? You can’t declare it as a function pointer because a function
 pointer specifies the argument type. Because a container can contain 
just about any type, you don’t know in advance what particular argument 
type should be used. The STL solves that problem by using templates. The
 <tt>for_each</tt> prototype looks like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template&lt;class InputIterator, class Function&gt;
Function for_each(InputIterator first, InputIterator last, Function f);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>ShowReview()</tt> prototype is this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>void ShowReview(const Review &amp;);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This makes the identifier <tt>ShowReview</tt> have the type <tt>void (*)(const Review &amp;)</tt>, so that is the type assigned to the template argument <tt>Function</tt>. With a different function call, the <tt>Function</tt> argument could represent a class type that has an overloaded <tt>()</tt> operator. Ultimately, the <tt>for_each()</tt> code will have an expression using <tt>f()</tt>. In the <tt>ShowReview()</tt> example, <tt>f</tt> is a pointer to a function, and <tt>f()</tt> invokes the function. If the final <tt>for_each()</tt> argument is an object, then <tt>f()</tt> becomes the object that invokes its overloaded <tt>()</tt> operator.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EU4GK">Functor Concepts</h4>
<p class="docText">Just as the STL defines concepts for containers and iterators, it defines functor concepts:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">A <span class="docEmphasis">generator</span> is a functor that can be called with no arguments.</p></li><li><p class="docList">A <span class="docEmphasis">unary function</span> is a functor that can be called with one argument.</p></li><li><p class="docList">A <span class="docEmphasis">binary function</span> is a functor that can be called with two arguments.</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">For example, the functor supplied to <tt>for_each()</tt> should be a unary function because it is applied to one container element at a time.</p>
<p class="docText">Of course, these concepts come with refinements:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">A unary function that returns a <tt>bool</tt> value is a <span class="docEmphasis">predicate</span>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">A binary function that returns a <tt>bool</tt> value is a <span class="docEmphasis">binary predicate</span>.</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">Several STL functions require predicate or binary predicate arguments. For example, Listing 16.9 uses a version of <tt>sort()</tt> that takes a binary predicate as its third argument:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>bool WorseThan(const Review &amp; r1, const Review &amp; r2);
...
sort(books.begin(), books.end(), WorseThan);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>list</tt> template has a <tt>remove_if()</tt>
 member that takes a predicate as an argument. It applies the predicate 
to each member in the indicated range, removing those elements for which
 the predicate returns <tt>true</tt>. For example, the following code would remove all elements greater than 100 from the list <tt>three</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>bool tooBig(int n){ return n &gt; 100; }
list&lt;int&gt; scores;
...
scores.remove_if(tooBig);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Incidentally,
 this last example shows where a class functor might be useful. Suppose 
you want to remove every value greater than 200 from a second list. It 
would be nice if you could pass the cut-off value to <tt>tooBig()</tt>
 as a second argument so you could use the function with different 
values, but a predicate can have but one argument. If, however, you 
design a <tt>TooBig</tt> class, you can use class members instead of function arguments to convey additional information:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template&lt;class T&gt;
class TooBig
{
private:
    T cutoff;
public:
    TooBig(const T &amp; t) : cutoff(t) {}
    bool operator()(const T &amp; v) { return v &gt; cutoff; }
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here one value (<tt>v</tt>) is passed as a function argument, and the second argument (<tt>cutoff</tt>) is set by the class constructor. Given this definition, you can initialize different <tt>TooBig</tt> objects to different cut-off values to be used in calls to <tt>remove_if()</tt>. Listing 16.15 illustrates the technique.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EKCHK">Listing 16.15. <tt>functor.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// functor.cpp -- using a functor
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;list&gt;
#include &lt;iterator&gt;
#include &lt;algorithm&gt;

template&lt;class T&gt;  // functor class defines operator()()
class TooBig
{
private:
    T cutoff;
public:
    TooBig(const T &amp; t) : cutoff(t) {}
    bool operator()(const T &amp; v) { return v &gt; cutoff; }
};

void outint(int n) {std::cout &lt;&lt; n &lt;&lt; " ";}

int main()
{
    using std::list;
    using std::cout;
    using std::endl;

    TooBig&lt;int&gt; f100(100); // limit = 100
    int vals[10] = {50, 100, 90, 180, 60, 210, 415, 88, 188, 201};
    list&lt;int&gt; yadayada(vals, vals + 10); // range constructor
    list&lt;int&gt; etcetera(vals, vals + 10);
 // C++11 can use the following instead
//  list&lt;int&gt; yadayada = {50, 100, 90, 180, 60, 210, 415, 88, 188, 201};
//  list&lt;int&gt; etcetera {50, 100, 90, 180, 60, 210, 415, 88, 188, 201};
    cout &lt;&lt; "Original lists:\n";
    for_each(yadayada.begin(), yadayada.end(), outint);
    cout &lt;&lt; endl;
    for_each(etcetera.begin(), etcetera.end(), outint);
    cout &lt;&lt; endl;
    yadayada.remove_if(f100);               // use a named function object
    etcetera.remove_if(TooBig&lt;int&gt;(200));   // construct a function object
    cout &lt;&lt;"Trimmed lists:\n";
    for_each(yadayada.begin(), yadayada.end(), outint);
    cout &lt;&lt; endl;
    for_each(etcetera.begin(), etcetera.end(), outint);
    cout &lt;&lt; endl;
    return 0;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">One functor (<tt>f100</tt>) is a declared object, and the second (<tt>TooBig&lt;int&gt;(200)</tt>) is an anonymous object created by a constructor call. Here’s the output of the program in Listing 16.15:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Original lists:
50 100 90 180 60 210 415 88 188 201
50 100 90 180 60 210 415 88 188 201
Trimmed lists:
50 100 90 60 88
50 100 90 180 60 88 188</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Suppose that you already have a template function with two arguments:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template &lt;class T&gt;
bool tooBig(const T &amp; val, const T &amp; lim)
{
    return val &gt; lim;
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">You can use a class to convert it to a one-argument function object:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template&lt;class T&gt;
class TooBig2
{
private:
    T cutoff;
public:
    TooBig2(const T &amp; t) : cutoff(t) {}
    bool operator()(const T &amp; v) { return tooBig&lt;T&gt;(v, cutoff); }
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">That is, you can use the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>TooBig2&lt;int&gt; tB100(100);
int x;
cin &gt;&gt; x;
if (tB100(x))   // same as if (tooBig(x,100))
    ...</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">So the call <tt>tB100(x)</tt> is the same as <tt>tooBig(x,100)</tt>,
 but the two-argument function is converted to a one-argument function 
object, with the second argument being used to construct the function 
object. In short, the class functor <tt>TooBig2</tt> is a function adapter that adapts a function to meet a different interface.</p>
<p class="docText">As noted in the listing, C++11’s initializer-list feature simplifies initialization. You can replace</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int vals[10] = {50, 100, 90, 180, 60, 210, 415, 88, 188, 201};
list&lt;int&gt; yadayada(vals, vals + 10); // range constructor
list&lt;int&gt; etcetera(vals, vals + 10);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">with this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>list&lt;int&gt; yadayada = {50, 100, 90, 180, 60, 210, 415, 88, 188, 201};
list&lt;int&gt; etcetera {50, 100, 90, 180, 60, 210, 415, 88, 188, 201};</pre></div><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EWIHK">Predefined Functors</h4>
<p class="docText">The STL defines several 
elementary functors. They perform actions such as adding two values and 
comparing two values for equality. They are provided to help support STL
 functions that take functions as arguments. For example, consider the <tt>transform()</tt>
 function. It has two versions. The first version takes four arguments. 
The first two arguments are iterators that specify a range in a 
container. (By now you must be familiar with that approach.) The third 
is an iterator that specifies where to copy the result. The final is a 
functor that is applied to each element in the range to produce each new
 element in the result. For example, consider the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>const int LIM = 5;
double arr1[LIM] = {36, 39, 42, 45, 48};
vector&lt;double&gt; gr8(arr1, arr1 + LIM);
ostream_iterator&lt;double, char&gt; out(cout, " ");
transform(gr8.begin(), gr8.end(), out, sqrt);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This
 code calculates the square root of each element and sends the resulting
 values to the output stream. The destination iterator can be in the 
original range. For example, replacing <tt>out</tt> in this example with <tt>gr8.begin()</tt> would copy the new values over the old values. Clearly, the functor used must be one that works with a single argument.</p>
<p class="docText">The second version uses a
 function that takes two arguments, applying the function to one element
 from each of two ranges. It takes an additional argument, which comes 
third in order, identifying the start of the second range. For example, 
if <tt>m8</tt> were a second <tt>vector&lt;double&gt;</tt> object and if <tt>mean(double, double)</tt> returned the mean of two values, the following would output the average of each pair of values from <tt>gr8</tt> and <tt>m8</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>transform(gr8.begin(), gr8.end(), m8.begin(), out, mean);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Now suppose you want to add the two arrays. You can’t use <tt>+</tt> as an argument because, for type <tt>double</tt>, <tt>+</tt> is a built-in operator, not a function. You could define a function to add two numbers and use it:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>double add(double x, double y) { return x + y; }
...
transform(gr8.begin(), gr8.end(), m8.begin(), out, add);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">But then you’d have to 
define a separate function for each type. It would be better to define a
 template, except that you don’t have to because the STL already has. 
The <tt>functional</tt> (formerly <tt>function.h</tt>) header defines several template class function objects, including one called <tt>plus&lt;&gt;()</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Using the <tt>plus&lt;&gt;</tt> class for ordinary addition is possible, if awkward:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>#include &lt;functional&gt;
...
plus&lt;double&gt; add;  // create a plus&lt;double&gt; object
double y = add(2.2, 3.4); // using plus&lt;double&gt;::operator()()</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">But it makes it easy to provide a function object as an argument:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>transform(gr8.begin(), gr8.end(), m8.begin(), out, plus&lt;double&gt;() );</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here, rather than create a named object, the code uses the <tt>plus&lt;double&gt;</tt>
 constructor to construct a functor to do the adding. (The parentheses 
indicate calling the default constructor; what’s passed to <tt>transform()</tt> is the constructed function object.)</p>
<p class="docText">The STL provides functor equivalents for all the built-in arithmetic, relational, and logical operators. Table 16.12
 shows the names for these functor equivalents. They can be used with 
the C++ built-in types or with any user-defined type that overloads the 
corresponding operator.</p>
<p class="docText"></p><p></p><table cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0" frame="hsides" rules="none"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 16.12. Operators and Functor Equivalents</h5></caption><colgroup align="left" span="2"><col width="200"></col><col width="400"></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Operator</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Functor Equivalent</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>+</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>plus</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>-</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>minus</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>*</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>multiplies</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>/</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>divides</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>%</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>modulus</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>-</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>negate</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>==</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>equal_to</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>!=</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>not_equal_to</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>&gt;</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>greater</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>&lt;</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>less</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>&gt;=</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>greater_equal</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>&lt;=</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>less_equal</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>&amp;&amp;</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>logical_and</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>||</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>logical_or</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>!</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>logical_not</tt></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<div class="docNote"><p class="docNoteTitle">Caution</p>
<p class="docText">Older C++ implementations use the functor name <tt>times</tt> instead of <tt>multiplies</tt>.</p>
</div><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E4XHK">Adaptable Functors and Function Adapters</h4>
<p class="docText">The predefined functors in Table 16.12 are all <span class="docEmphasis">adaptable</span>.
 Actually, the STL has five related concepts: adaptable generators, 
adaptable unary functions, adaptable binary functions, adaptable 
predicates, and adaptable binary predicates.</p>
<p class="docText">What makes a functor adaptable is that it carries <tt>typedef</tt> members identifying its argument types and return type. The members are called <tt>result_type</tt>, <tt>first_argument_type</tt>, and <tt>second_argument_type</tt>, and they represent what they sound like. For example, the return type of a <tt>plus&lt;int&gt;</tt> object is identified as <tt>plus&lt;int&gt;::result_type</tt>, and this would be a <tt>typedef</tt> for <tt>int</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">The significance of a functor 
being adaptable is that it can then be used by function adapter objects,
 which assume the existence of these <tt>typedef</tt> members. For example, a function with an argument that is an adaptable functor can use the <tt>result_type</tt> member to declare a variable that matches the function’s return type.</p>
<p class="docText">Indeed, the STL 
provides function adapter classes that use these facilities. For 
example, suppose you want to multiply each element of the vector <tt>gr8</tt> by 2.5. That calls for using the <tt>transform()</tt> version with a unary function argument, like the example shown earlier:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>transform(gr8.begin(), gr8.end(), out, sqrt);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>multiplies()</tt> 
functor can do the multiplication, but it’s a binary function. So you 
need a function adapter that converts a functor that has two arguments 
to one that has one argument. The earlier <tt>TooBig2</tt> example shows one way, but the STL has automated the process with the <tt>binder1st</tt> and <tt>binder2nd</tt> classes, which convert adaptable binary functions to adaptable unary functions.</p>
<p class="docText">Let’s look at <tt>binder1st</tt>. Suppose you have an adaptable binary function object <tt>f2()</tt>. You can create a <tt>binder1st</tt> object that binds a particular value, called <tt>val</tt>, to be used as the first argument to <tt>f2()</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>binder1st(f2, val) f1;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Then, invoking <tt>f1(x)</tt> with its single argument returns the same value as invoking <tt>f2()</tt> with <tt>val</tt> as its first argument and <tt>f1()</tt>’s argument as its second argument. That is, <tt>f1(x)</tt> is equivalent to <tt>f2(val, x)</tt>, except that it is a unary function instead of a binary function. The <tt>f2()</tt> function has been adapted. Again, this is possible only if <tt>f2()</tt> is an adaptable function.</p>
<p class="docText">This might seem a bit awkward. However, the STL provides the <tt>bind1st()</tt> function to simplify using the <tt>binder1st</tt> class. You give it the function name and value used to construct a <tt>binder1st</tt> object, and it returns an object of that type. For example, you can convert the binary function <tt>multiplies()</tt> to a unary function that multiplies its argument by 2.5. Just do this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>bind1st(multiplies&lt;double&gt;(), 2.5)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Thus, the solution to multiplying every element in <tt>gr8</tt> by 2.5 and displaying the results is this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>transform(gr8.begin(), gr8.end(), out,
        bind1st(multiplies&lt;double&gt;(), 2.5));</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>binder2nd</tt> 
class is similar, except that it assigns the constant to the second 
argument instead of to the first. It has a helper function called <tt>bind2nd</tt> that works analogously to <tt>bind1st</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Listing 16.16 incorporates some of the recent examples into a short program.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EO4HK">Listing 16.16. <tt>funadap.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// funadap.cpp -- using function adapters
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;vector&gt;
#include &lt;iterator&gt;
#include &lt;algorithm&gt;
#include &lt;functional&gt;

void Show(double);
const int LIM = 6;
int main()
{
    using namespace std;
    double arr1[LIM] = {28, 29, 30, 35, 38, 59};
    double arr2[LIM] = {63, 65, 69, 75, 80, 99};
    vector&lt;double&gt; gr8(arr1, arr1 + LIM);
    vector&lt;double&gt; m8(arr2, arr2 + LIM);
    cout.setf(ios_base::fixed);
    cout.precision(1);
    cout &lt;&lt; "gr8:\t";
    for_each(gr8.begin(), gr8.end(), Show);
    cout &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "m8: \t";
    for_each(m8.begin(), m8.end(), Show);
    cout &lt;&lt; endl;

    vector&lt;double&gt; sum(LIM);
    transform(gr8.begin(), gr8.end(), m8.begin(), sum.begin(),
              plus&lt;double&gt;());
    cout &lt;&lt; "sum:\t";
    for_each(sum.begin(), sum.end(), Show);
    cout &lt;&lt; endl;

    vector&lt;double&gt; prod(LIM);
    transform(gr8.begin(), gr8.end(), prod.begin(),
              bind1st(multiplies&lt;double&gt;(), 2.5));
    cout &lt;&lt; "prod:\t";
    for_each(prod.begin(), prod.end(), Show);
    cout &lt;&lt; endl;

    return 0;
}

void Show(double v)
{
    std::cout.width(6);
    std::cout &lt;&lt; v &lt;&lt; ' ';
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here is the output of the program in Listing 16.16:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>gr8:      28.0   29.0   30.0   35.0   38.0   59.0
m8:       63.0   65.0   69.0   75.0   80.0   99.0
sum:      91.0   94.0   99.0  110.0  118.0  158.0
prod:     70.0   72.5   75.0   87.5   95.0  147.5</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">C++11 provides an alternative to function pointers and functors. It’s called a <span class="docEmphasis">lambda expression</span>, another topic discussed in Chapter 18.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
