<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Algorithms</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Algorithms</h3>
<p class="docText">The STL contains many nonmember functions for working with containers. You’ve seen a few of them already: <tt>sort()</tt>, <tt>copy()</tt>, <tt>find()</tt>, <tt>for_each()</tt>, <tt>random_shuffle()</tt>, <tt>set_union()</tt>, <tt>set_intersection()</tt>, <tt>set_difference()</tt>, and <tt>transform()</tt>.
 You’ve probably noticed that they feature the same overall design, 
using iterators to identify data ranges to be processed and to identify 
where results are to go. Some also take a function object argument to be
 used as part of the data processing.</p>
<p class="docText">There are two main generic 
components to the algorithm function designs. First, they use templates 
to provide generic types. Second, they use iterators to provide a 
generic representation for accessing data in a container. Thus, the <tt>copy()</tt> function can work with a container that holds type <tt>double</tt> values in an array, with a container that holds <tt>string</tt> values in a linked list, or with a container that stores user-defined objects in a tree structure, such as is used by <tt>set</tt>. Because pointers are a special case of iterators, STL functions such as <tt>copy()</tt> can be used with ordinary arrays.</p>
<p class="docText">The uniform container design allows meaningful relationships between containers of different kinds. For example, you can use <tt>copy()</tt> to copy values from an ordinary array to a <tt>vector</tt> object, from a <tt>vector</tt> object to a <tt>list</tt> object, and from a <tt>list</tt> object to a <tt>set</tt> object. You can use <tt>==</tt> to compare different kinds of containers—for example, <tt>deque</tt> and <tt>vector</tt>. This is possible because the overloaded <tt>==</tt> operator for containers uses iterators to compare contents, so a <tt>deque</tt> object and a <tt>vector</tt> object test as equal if they have the same content in the same order.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ET2GK">Algorithm Groups</h4>
<p class="docText">The STL divides the algorithm library into four groups:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">Nonmodifying sequence operations</p></li><li><p class="docList">Mutating sequence operations</p></li><li><p class="docList">Sorting and related operations</p></li><li><p class="docList">Generalized numeric operations</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">The first three groups are described in the <tt>algorithm</tt> (formerly <tt>algo.h</tt>) header file, and the fourth group, being specifically oriented toward numeric data, gets its own header file, called <tt>numeric</tt>. (Formerly, they, too, were in <tt>algo.h</tt>.)</p>
<p class="docText">Nonmodifying sequence operations operate on each element in a range. These operations leave a container unchanged. For example, <tt>find()</tt> and <tt>for_each()</tt> belong to this category.</p>
<p class="docText">Mutating sequence operations also 
operate on each element in a range. As the name suggests, however, they 
can mutate, or change, the contents of a container. The change could be 
in values or in the order in which the values are stored. The <tt>transform()</tt>, <tt>random_shuffle()</tt>, and <tt>copy()</tt> functions fall into this category.</p>
<p class="docText">Sorting and related operations include several sorting functions (including <tt>sort()</tt>) and a variety of other functions, including the set operations.</p>
<p class="docText">The numeric operations 
include functions to sum the contents of a range, calculate the inner 
product of two containers, calculate partial sums, and calculate 
adjacent differences. Typically, these are operations that are 
characteristic of arrays, so <tt>vector</tt> is the container most likely to be used with them.</p>
<p class="docText">Appendix G provides a complete summary of these functions.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E4AHK">General Properties of Algorithms</h4>
<p class="docText">As you’ve seen again and 
again in this chapter, STL functions work with iterators and iterator 
ranges. The function prototype indicates the assumptions made about the 
iterators. For example, the <tt>copy()</tt> function has this prototype:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template&lt;class InputIterator, class OutputIterator&gt;
OutputIterator copy(InputIterator first, InputIterator last,
                     OutputIterator result);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Because the identifiers <tt>InputIterator</tt> and <tt>OutputIterator</tt> are template parameters, they just as easily could have been <tt>T</tt> and <tt>U</tt>.
 However, the STL documentation uses the template parameter names to 
indicate the concept that the parameter models. So this declaration 
tells you that the range parameters must be input iterators or better 
and that the iterator indicating where the result goes must be an output
 parameter or better.</p>
<p class="docText">One way of classifying 
algorithms is on the basis of where the result of the algorithm is 
placed. Some algorithms do their work in place, and others create 
copies. For example, when the <tt>sort()</tt> function is finished, the result occupies the same location that the original data did. So <tt>sort()</tt> is an <span class="docEmphasis">in-place algorithm</span>. The <tt>copy()</tt> function, however, sends the result of its work to another location, so it is a <span class="docEmphasis">copying algorithm</span>. The <tt>transform()</tt> function can do both. Like <tt>copy()</tt>, it uses an output iterator to indicate where the results go. Unlike <tt>copy()</tt>, <tt>transform()</tt>
 allows the output iterator to point to a location in the input range, 
so it can copy the transformed values over the original values.</p>
<p class="docText">Some algorithms come in two versions: an in-place version and a copying version. The STL convention is to append <tt>_copy</tt>
 to the name of the copying version. The latter version takes an 
additional output iterator parameter to specify the location to which to
 copy the outcome. For example, there is a <tt>replace()</tt> function that has this prototype:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template&lt;class ForwardIterator, class T&gt;
void replace(ForwardIterator <span class="docEmphasis">first</span>, ForwardIterator <span class="docEmphasis">last</span>,
              const T&amp; <span class="docEmphasis">old_value</span>, const T&amp; <span class="docEmphasis">new_value</span>);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">It replaces each instance of <tt>old_value</tt> with <tt>new_value</tt>. This occurs in place. Because this algorithm both reads from and writes to container elements, the iterator type has to be <tt>ForwardIterator</tt> or better. The copying version has this prototype:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template&lt;class InputIterator, class OutputIterator, class T&gt;
OutputIterator replace_copy(InputIterator <span class="docEmphasis">first</span>, InputIterator <span class="docEmphasis">last</span>,
              OutputIterator <span class="docEmphasis">result</span>,
              const T&amp; <span class="docEmphasis">old_value</span>, const T&amp; <span class="docEmphasis">new_value</span>);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This time the resulting data is copied to a new location, given by <tt>result</tt>, so the read-only input iterator is sufficient for specifying the range.</p>
<p class="docText">Note that <tt>replace_copy()</tt> has an <tt>OutputIterator</tt>
 return type. The convention for copying algorithms is that they return 
an iterator pointing to the location one past the last value copied.</p>
<p class="docText">Another common variation 
is that some functions have a version that performs an action 
conditionally, depending on the result of applying a function to a 
container element. These versions typically append <tt>_if</tt> to the function name. For example, <tt>replace_if()</tt> replaces an old value with a new value if applying a function to the old value returns the value <tt>true</tt>. Here’s the prototype:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template&lt;class ForwardIterator, class Predicate class T&gt;
void replace_if(ForwardIterator <span class="docEmphasis">first</span>, ForwardIterator <span class="docEmphasis">last</span>,
              Predicate <span class="docEmphasis">pred</span>, const T&amp; <span class="docEmphasis">new_value</span>);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">(Recall that a predicate is a unary function that returns a <tt>bool</tt> value.) There’s also a version called <tt>replace_copy_if()</tt>. You can probably figure out what it does and what its prototype is like.</p>
<p class="docText">As with <tt>InputIterator</tt>, <tt>Predicate</tt> is a template parameter name and could just as easily be called <tt>T</tt> or <tt>U</tt>. However, the STL chooses to use <tt>Predicate</tt> to remind the user that the actual argument should be a model of the <tt>Predicate</tt> concept. Similarly, the STL uses terms such as <tt>Generator</tt> and <tt>BinaryPredicate</tt>
 to identify arguments that should model other function object concepts.
 Keep in mind that although the documentation can remind you what the 
iterator or functor requirements are, these names are not something the 
compiler can check. If you use the wrong sort of iterator, you can 
expect to see a long list of error messages as the compiler tries to 
instantiate the template.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EDGHK">The STL and the <tt>string</tt> Class</h4>
<p class="docText">The <tt>string</tt> class, although not part of the STL, is designed with the STL in mind. For example, it has <tt>begin()</tt>, <tt>end()</tt>, <tt>rbegin()</tt>, and <tt>rend()</tt> members. Thus, it can use the STL interface. Listing 16.17 uses the STL to show all the permutations you can form from the letters in a word. A <span class="docEmphasis">permutation</span> is a rearrangement of the order of the elements in a container. The <tt>next_permutation()</tt>
 algorithm transforms the contents of a range to the next permutation; 
in the case of a string, the permutations are arranged in ascending 
alphabetical order. The algorithm returns <tt>true</tt> if it succeeds and <tt>false</tt>
 if the range already is in the final sequence. To get all the 
permutations of a range, you should start with the elements in the 
earliest possible order, and the program uses the STL <tt>sort()</tt> algorithm for that purpose.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EJKHK">Listing 16.17. <tt>strgstl.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>// strgstl.cpp -- applying the STL to a string
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;algorithm&gt;

int main()
{
    using namespace std;
    string letters;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Enter the letter grouping (quit to quit): ";
    while (cin &gt;&gt; letters &amp;&amp; letters != "quit")
    {
        cout &lt;&lt; "Permutations of " &lt;&lt; letters &lt;&lt; endl;
        sort(letters.begin(), letters.end());
        cout &lt;&lt; letters &lt;&lt; endl;
        while (next_permutation(letters.begin(), letters.end()))
            cout &lt;&lt; letters &lt;&lt; endl;
        cout &lt;&lt; "Enter next sequence (quit to quit): ";
    }
    cout &lt;&lt; "Done.\n";
    return 0;
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here’s a sample run of the program in Listing 16.17:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Enter the letter grouping (quit to quit): <span class="docEmphStrong">awl</span>
Permutations of awl
alw
awl
law
lwa
wal
wla
Enter next sequence (quit to quit): <span class="docEmphStrong">all</span>
Permutations of all
all
lal
lla
Enter next sequence (quit to quit): <span class="docEmphStrong">quit</span>
Done.</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Note that the <tt>next_permutation()</tt> algorithm automatically provides only unique permutations, which is why the output shows more permutations for the word <span class="docEmphasis">awl</span> than for the word <span class="docEmphasis">all</span>, which has duplicate letters.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EVPHK">Functions Versus Container Methods</h4>
<p class="docText">Sometimes you have a choice 
between using an STL method and an STL function. Usually, the method is 
the better choice. First, it should be better optimized for a particular
 container. Second, being a member function, it can use a template 
class’s memory management facilities and resize a container when needed.</p>
<p class="docText">Suppose, for example, that you have a list of numbers and you want to remove all instances of a certain value, say <tt>4</tt>, from the list. If <tt>la</tt> is a <tt>list&lt;int&gt;</tt> object, you can use the list <tt>remove()</tt> method:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>la.remove(4);  // remove all 4s from the list</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">After this method call, all elements with the value <tt>4</tt> are removed from the list, and the list is automatically resized.</p>
<p class="docText">There is also an STL algorithm called <tt>remove()</tt> (see Appendix G). Instead of being invoked by an object, it takes range arguments. So if <tt>lb</tt> is a <tt>list&lt;int&gt;</tt> object, a call to the function could look like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>remove(lb.begin(), lb.end(), 4);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">However, because this <tt>remove()</tt>
 is not a member, it can’t adjust the size of the list. Instead, it 
makes sure all the nonremoved items are at the beginning of the list, 
and it returns an iterator to the new past-the-end value. You can then 
use this iterator to fix the list size. For example, you can use the 
list <tt>erase()</tt> method to remove a range that describes the part of the list that is no longer needed. Listing 16.18 shows how this process works.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E1RHK">Listing 16.18. <tt>listrmv.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// listrmv.cpp -- applying the STL to a string
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;list&gt;
#include &lt;algorithm&gt;

void Show(int);
const int LIM = 10;
int main()
{
    using namespace std;
    int ar[LIM] = {4, 5, 4, 2, 2, 3, 4, 8, 1, 4};
    list&lt;int&gt; la(ar, ar + LIM);
    list&lt;int&gt; lb(la);
    cout &lt;&lt; "Original list contents:\n\t";
    for_each(la.begin(), la.end(), Show);
    cout &lt;&lt; endl;
    la.remove(4);
    cout &lt;&lt; "After using the remove() method:\n";
    cout &lt;&lt; "la:\t";
    for_each(la.begin(), la.end(), Show);
    cout &lt;&lt; endl;
    list&lt;int&gt;::iterator last;
    last = remove(lb.begin(), lb.end(), 4);
    cout &lt;&lt; "After using the remove() function:\n";
    cout &lt;&lt; "lb:\t";
    for_each(lb.begin(), lb.end(), Show);
    cout &lt;&lt; endl;
    lb.erase(last, lb.end());
    cout &lt;&lt; "After using the erase() method:\n";
    cout &lt;&lt; "lb:\t";
    for_each(lb.begin(), lb.end(), Show);
    cout &lt;&lt; endl;
    return 0;
}

void Show(int v)
{
    std::cout &lt;&lt; v &lt;&lt; ' ';
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here’s the output of the program in Listing 16.18:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Original list contents:
    4 5 4 2 2 3 4 8 1 4
After using the remove() method:
la: 5 2 2 3 8 1
After using the remove() function:
lb: 5 2 2 3 8 1 4 8 1 4
After using the erase() method:
lb: 5 2 2 3 8 1</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">As you can see, the <tt>remove()</tt> method reduces the list <tt>la</tt> from 10 elements to 6 elements. However, list <tt>lb</tt> still contains 10 elements after the <tt>remove()</tt> function is applied to it. The last 4 elements are disposable because each is either the value <tt>4</tt> or a duplicate of a value moved farther to the front of the list.</p>
<p class="docText">Although the methods are 
usually better suited, the nonmethod functions are more general. As 
you’ve seen, you can use them on arrays and <tt>string</tt>
 objects as well as STL containers, and you can use them with mixed 
container types—for example, to save data from a vector container to a 
list or a set.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EMVHK">Using the STL</h4>
<p class="docText">The STL is a library whose parts 
are designed to work together. The STL components are tools, but they 
are also building blocks to create other tools. Let’s illustrate this 
with an example. Suppose you want to write a program that lets the user 
enter words. At the end, you’d like a record of the words as they were 
entered, an alphabetical list of the words used (capitalization 
differences ignored), and a record of how many times each word was 
entered. To keep things simple, let’s assume that the input contains no 
numbers or punctuation.</p>
<p class="docText">Entering and saving the list of words is simple enough. Following the example of Listings 16.8 and 16.9, you can create a <tt>vector&lt;string&gt;</tt> object and use <tt>push_back()</tt> to add input words to the vector:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>vector&lt;string&gt; words;
string input;
while (cin &gt;&gt; input &amp;&amp; input != "quit")
    words.push_back(input);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">What about getting the alphabetic word list? You can use <tt>sort()</tt> followed by <tt>unique()</tt>, but that approach overwrites the original data because <tt>sort()</tt> is an in-place algorithm. There is an easier way that avoids this problem. You can create a <tt>set&lt;string&gt;</tt>
 object and copy (using an insert iterator) the words from the vector to
 the set. A set automatically sorts its contents, which means you don’t 
have to call <tt>sort()</tt>, and a set allows only one copy of a key, so that takes the place of calling <tt>unique()</tt>. Wait! The specification called for ignoring the case differences. One way to handle that is to use <tt>transform()</tt> instead of <tt>copy()</tt> to copy data from the vector to the set. For the transformation function, you can use one that converts a string to lowercase:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>set&lt;string&gt; wordset;
transform(words.begin(), words.end(),
    insert_iterator&lt;set&lt;string&gt; &gt; (wordset, wordset.begin()), ToLower);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>ToLower()</tt> function is easy to write. You just use <tt>transform()</tt> to apply the <tt>tolower()</tt> function to each element in the string, using the string both as source and destination. Remember, <tt>string</tt>
 objects, too, can use the STL functions. Passing and returning the 
string as a reference means the algorithm works on the original string 
without having to make copies. Here’s the code for <tt>ToLower()</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>string &amp; ToLower(string &amp; st)
{
    transform(st.begin(), st.end(), st.begin(), tolower);
    return st;
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">One possible problem is that the <tt>tolower()</tt> function is defined as <tt>int tolower(int)</tt>, and some compilers want the function to match the element type, which is <tt>char</tt>. One solution is to replace <tt>tolower</tt> with <tt>toLower</tt> and to provide the following definition:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>char toLower(char ch) { return tolower(ch); }</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">To get the number of times each word appears in the input, you can use the <tt>count()</tt>
 function. It takes a range and a value as arguments, and it returns the
 number of times the value appears in the range. You can use the <tt>vector</tt> object to provide the range and the <tt>set</tt>
 object to provide the list of words to count. That is, for each word in
 the set, you can count how many times it appears in the vector. To keep
 the resulting count associated with the correct word, you can store the
 word and the count as a <tt>pair&lt;const string, int&gt;</tt> object in a <tt>map</tt> object. The word will be the key (just one copy), and the count will be the value. This can be done in a single loop:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>map&lt;string, int&gt; wordmap;
set&lt;string&gt;::iterator  si;
for (si = wordset.begin(); si != wordset.end(); si++)
    wordmap.insert(pair&lt;string, int&gt;(*si, count(words.begin(),
    words.end(), *si)));</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>map</tt> class 
has an interesting feature: You can use array notation with keys that 
serve as indexes to access the stored values. For example, <tt>wordmap["the"]</tt> would represent the value associated with the key <tt>"the"</tt>, which in this case is the number of occurrences of the string <tt>"the"</tt>. Because the <tt>wordset</tt> container holds all the keys used by <tt>wordmap</tt>, you can use the following code as an alternative and more attractive way of storing results:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>for (si = wordset.begin(); si != wordset.end(); si++)
    wordmap[*si] = count(words.begin(), words.end(), *si);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Because <tt>si</tt> points to a string in the <tt>wordset</tt> container, <tt>*si</tt> is a string and can serve as a key for <tt>wordmap</tt>. This code places both keys and values into the <tt>wordmap</tt> map.</p>
<p class="docText">Similarly, you can use the array notation to report results:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>for (si = wordset.begin(); si != wordset.end(); si++)
    cout &lt;&lt; *si &lt;&lt; ": " &lt;&lt; wordmap[*si] &lt;&lt; endl;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">If a key is invalid, the corresponding value is <tt>0</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Listing 16.19
 puts these ideas together and includes code to display the contents of 
the three containers (a vector with the input, a set with a word list, 
and a map with a word count).</p>
<p class="docText"></p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EW2HK">Listing 16.19. <tt>usealgo.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">//usealgo.cpp -- using several STL elements
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;vector&gt;
#include &lt;set&gt;
#include &lt;map&gt;
#include &lt;iterator&gt;
#include &lt;algorithm&gt;
#include &lt;cctype&gt;
using namespace std;

char toLower(char ch) { return tolower(ch); }
string &amp; ToLower(string &amp; st);
void display(const string &amp; s);

int main()
{
    vector&lt;string&gt; words;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Enter words (enter quit to quit):\n";
    string input;
    while (cin &gt;&gt; input &amp;&amp; input != "quit")
        words.push_back(input);

    cout &lt;&lt; "You entered the following words:\n";
    for_each(words.begin(), words.end(), display);
    cout &lt;&lt; endl;

    // place words in set, converting to lowercase
    set&lt;string&gt; wordset;
    transform(words.begin(), words.end(),
        insert_iterator&lt;set&lt;string&gt; &gt; (wordset, wordset.begin()),
        ToLower);
    cout &lt;&lt; "\nAlphabetic list of words:\n";
    for_each(wordset.begin(), wordset.end(), display);
    cout &lt;&lt; endl;

    // place word and frequency in map
    map&lt;string, int&gt; wordmap;
    set&lt;string&gt;::iterator si;
    for (si = wordset.begin(); si != wordset.end(); si++)
        wordmap[*si] = count(words.begin(), words.end(), *si);

    // display map contents
    cout &lt;&lt; "\nWord frequency:\n";
    for (si = wordset.begin(); si != wordset.end(); si++)
        cout &lt;&lt; *si &lt;&lt; ": " &lt;&lt; wordmap[*si] &lt;&lt; endl;

    return 0;
}

string &amp; ToLower(string &amp; st)
{
    transform(st.begin(), st.end(), st.begin(), toLower);
    return st;
}

void display(const string &amp; s)
{
    cout &lt;&lt; s &lt;&lt; " ";
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here is a sample run of the program in Listing 16.19:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Enter words (enter quit to quit):
<span class="docEmphStrong">The dog saw the cat and thought the cat fat</span>
<span class="docEmphStrong">The cat thought the cat perfect</span>
<span class="docEmphStrong">quit</span>
You entered the following words:
The dog saw the cat and thought the cat fat The cat thought the cat perfect

Alphabetic list of words:
and cat dog fat perfect saw the thought

Word frequency:
and: 1
cat: 4
dog: 1
fat: 1
perfect: 1
saw: 1
the: 5
thought: 2</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The moral here is that your 
attitude when using the STL should be to avoid writing as much code as 
possible. STL’s generic and flexible design should save you lots of 
work. Also the STL designers are algorithm people who are very much 
concerned with efficiency. So the algorithms are well chosen and inline.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
