<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Other Libraries</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Other Libraries</h3>
<p class="docText">C++
 provides some other class libraries that are more specialized than the 
examples covered so far in this chapter. For instance, the <tt>complex</tt> header file provides a <tt>complex</tt> class template for complex numbers, with specializations for <tt>float</tt>, <tt>long</tt>, and <tt>long double</tt>.
 The class provides standard complex number operations, along with 
standard functions that can be used with complex numbers. The C++11 
random header file extends random number functionality.</p>
<p class="docText">Chapter 14 introduced another example, the <tt>valarray</tt> template class, supported by the <tt>valarray</tt>
 header file. This class template is designed to represent numeric 
arrays and provides support for a variety of numeric array operations, 
such as adding the contents of one array to another, applying math 
functions to each element of an array and applying linear algebra 
operations to arrays.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ENCHK"><tt>vector</tt>, <tt>valarray</tt>, and <tt>array</tt></h4>
<p class="docText">Perhaps you are wondering why C++ has three array templates: <tt>vector</tt>, <tt>valarray</tt>, and <tt>array</tt>. These classes were developed by different groups for different purposes. The <tt>vector</tt> template class is part of a system of container classes and algorithms. The <tt>vector</tt>
 class supports container-oriented activities, such as sorting, 
insertion, rearrangement, searching, transferring data to other 
containers, and other manipulations. The <tt>valarray</tt> class template, on the other hand, is oriented toward numeric computation, and it is not part of the STL. It doesn’t have <tt>push_back()</tt> and <tt>insert()</tt> methods, for example, but it does provide a simple, intuitive interface for many mathematical operations. Finally, <tt>array</tt>
 is designed as a substitute for the built-in array type, combining the 
compactness and efficiency of that type with a better, safer interface. 
Being of fixed size, <tt>array</tt> doesn’t support <tt>push_back()</tt> and <tt>insert()</tt>, but it does offer several other STL methods. These include <tt>begin(</tt>), <tt>end()</tt>, <tt>rbegin()</tt>, and <tt>rend()</tt>, making it easy to apply STL algorithms to <tt>array</tt> objects.</p>
<p class="docText">Suppose, for example, that you have these declarations:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>vector&lt;double&gt; ved1(10), ved2(10), ved3(10);
array&lt;double, 10&gt; vod1, vod2, vod3;
valarray&lt;double&gt; vad1(10), vad2(10), vad3(10);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Furthermore, assume that <tt>ved1</tt>, <tt>ved2</tt>, <tt>vod1</tt>, <tt>vod2</tt>, <tt>vad1</tt>, and <tt>vad2</tt>
 all acquire suitable values. Suppose you want to assign the sum of the 
first elements of two arrays to the first element of a third array, and 
so on. With the <tt>vector</tt> class, you would do this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>transform(ved1.begin(), ved1.end(), ved2.begin(), ved3.begin(),
          plus&lt;double&gt;());</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">You can do the same with the <tt>array</tt> class:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>transform(vod1.begin(), vod1.end(), vod2.begin(), vod3.begin(),
          plus&lt;double&gt;());</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">However, the <tt>valarray</tt> class overloads all the arithmetic operators to work with <tt>valarray</tt> objects, so you would use this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>vad3 = vad1 + vad2;    // + overloaded</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Similarly, the following would result in each element of <tt>vad3</tt> being the product of the corresponding elements in <tt>vad1</tt> and <tt>vad2</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>vad3 = vad1 * vad2;    // * overloaded</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Suppose you want to replace every value in an array with that value multiplied by 2.5. The STL approach is this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>transform(ved3.begin(), ved3.end(), ved3.begin(),
          bind1st(multiplies&lt;double&gt;(), 2.5));</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>valarray</tt> class overloads multiplying a <tt>valarray</tt>
 object by a single value, and it also overloads the various computed 
assignment operators, so you could use either of the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>vad3 = 2.5 * vad3;     // * overloaded
vad3 *= 2.5;           // *= overloaded</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Suppose you want to take 
the natural logarithm of every element of one array and store the result
 in the corresponding element of a second array. The STL approach is 
this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>transform(ved1.begin(), ved1.end(), ved3.begin(),
          log);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>valarray</tt> class overloads the usual math functions to take a <tt>valarray</tt> argument and to return a <tt>valarray</tt> object, so you can use this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>vad3 = log(vad1);     // log() overloaded</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Or you could use the <tt>apply()</tt> method, which also works for non-overloaded functions:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>vad3 = vad1.apply(log);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>apply()</tt> method doesn’t alter the invoking object; instead, it returns a new object that contains the resulting values.</p>
<p class="docText">The simplicity of the <tt>valarray</tt> interface is even more apparent when you do a multistep calculation:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>vad3 = 10.0* ((vad1 + vad2) / 2.0 + vad1 * cos(vad2));</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>vector</tt>-STL version is left as an exercise for the motivated reader.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>valarray</tt> class also provides a <tt>sum()</tt> method that sums the contents of a <tt>valarray</tt> object, a <tt>size()</tt> method that returns the number of elements, a <tt>max()</tt> method that returns the largest value in an object, and a <tt>min()</tt> method that returns the smallest value.</p>
<p class="docText">As you can see, <tt>valarray</tt> has a clear notational advantage over <tt>vector</tt> for mathematical operations, but it is also much less versatile. The <tt>valarray</tt> class does have a <tt>resize()</tt> method, but there’s no automatic resizing of the sort you get when you use the <tt>vector push_back()</tt> method. There are no methods for inserting values, searching, sorting, and the like. In short, the <tt>valarray</tt> class is more limited than the <tt>vector</tt> class, but its narrower focus allows a much simpler interface.</p>
<p class="docText">Does the simpler interface that <tt>valarray</tt>
 provides translate to better performance? In most cases, no. The simple
 notation is typically implemented with the same sort of loops you would
 use with ordinary arrays. However, some hardware designs allow vector 
operations in which the values in an array are loaded simultaneous into 
an array of registers and then processed simultaneously. In principle, <tt>valarray</tt> operations could be implemented to take advantage of such designs.</p>
<p class="docText">Can you use the STL with <tt>valarray</tt> objects? Answering this question provides a quick review of some STL principles. Suppose you have a <tt>valarray&lt;double&gt;</tt> object that has 10 elements:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>valarray&lt;double&gt; vad(10);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">After the array has been filled with numbers, can you, say, use the STL sort function on it? The <tt>valarray</tt> class doesn’t have <tt>begin()</tt> and <tt>end()</tt> methods, so you can’t use them as the range arguments:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>sort(vad.begin(), vad.end());  // NO, no begin(), end()</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Also <tt>vad</tt> is an object, not a pointer, so you can’t imitate ordinary array usage and provide <tt>vad</tt> and <tt>vad + 10</tt>, as the following code attempts to do:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>sort(vad, vad + 10);  // NO, vad an object, not an address</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">You can use the address operator:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>sort(&amp;vad[0], &amp;vad[10]);  // maybe?</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">But the behavior of using a subscript one past the end is undefined for <tt>valarray</tt>. This doesn’t necessarily mean using <tt>&amp;vad[10</tt>]
 won’t work.(In fact, it did work for all six compilers used to test 
this code.) But it does mean that it might not work. For the code to 
fail, you probably would need a very unlikely circumstance, such as the 
array being butted against the end of the block of memory set aside for 
the heap. But, if a $385-million mission depended on your code, you 
might not want to risk that failure.</p>
<p class="docText">C++11 remedies the situation by providing <tt>begin()</tt> and <tt>end()</tt> template functions that take a <tt>valarray</tt> object as an argument. So you would use <tt>begin(vad)</tt> instead of <tt>vad.begin()</tt>. These functions return values that are compatible with STL range requirements:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>sort(begin(vad), end(vad)); // C++11 fix!</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Listing 16.20 illustrates some of the relative strengths of the <tt>vector</tt> and <tt>valarray</tt> classes. It uses <tt>push_back()</tt> and the automatic sizing feature of <tt>vector</tt> to collect data. Then after sorting the numbers, the program copies them from the <tt>vector</tt> object to a <tt>valarray</tt> object of the same size and does a few math operations.</p>
<p class="docText"></p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EZOHK">Listing 16.20. <tt>valvect.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// valvect.cpp -- comparing vector and valarray
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;valarray&gt;
#include &lt;vector&gt;
#include &lt;algorithm&gt;
int main()
{
    using namespace std;
    vector&lt;double&gt; data;
    double temp;

    cout &lt;&lt; "Enter numbers (&lt;=0 to quit):\n";
    while (cin &gt;&gt; temp &amp;&amp; temp &gt; 0)
        data.push_back(temp);
    sort(data.begin(), data.end());
    int size = data.size();
    valarray&lt;double&gt; numbers(size);
    int i;
    for (i = 0; i &lt; size; i++)
        numbers[i] = data[i];
    valarray&lt;double&gt; sq_rts(size);
    sq_rts = sqrt(numbers);
    valarray&lt;double&gt; results(size);
    results = numbers + 2.0 * sq_rts;
    cout.setf(ios_base::fixed);
    cout.precision(4);
    for (i = 0; i &lt; size; i++)
    {
        cout.width(8);
        cout &lt;&lt; numbers[i] &lt;&lt; ": ";
        cout.width(8);
        cout &lt;&lt; results[i] &lt;&lt; endl;
    }
    cout &lt;&lt; "done\n";
    return 0;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here is a sample run of the program in Listing 16.20:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Enter numbers (&lt;=0 to quit):
<span class="docEmphStrong">3.3 1.8 5.2 10 14.4 21.6 26.9 0</span>
  1.8000:   4.4833
  3.3000:   6.9332
  5.2000:   9.7607
 10.0000:  16.3246
 14.4000:  21.9895
 21.6000:  30.8952
 26.9000:  37.2730
done</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>valarray</tt> class has many features besides the ones discussed so far. For example, if <tt>numbers</tt> is a <tt>valarray&lt;double&gt;</tt> object, the following statement creates an array of <tt>bool</tt> values, with <tt>vbool[i]</tt> set to the value of <tt>numbers[i] &gt; 9</tt>—that is, to <tt>true</tt> or <tt>false</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>valarray&lt;bool&gt; vbool = numbers &gt; 9;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">There are extended versions of subscripting. Let’s look at one—the <tt>slice</tt> class. A <tt>slice</tt>
 class object can be used as an array index, in which case it 
represents, in general, not just one value but a subset of values. A <tt>slice</tt> object is initialized to three integer values: the <span class="docEmphasis">start</span>, the <span class="docEmphasis">number</span>, and the <span class="docEmphasis">stride</span>. The <span class="docEmphasis">start</span> indicates the index of the first element to be selected, the <span class="docEmphasis">number</span> indicates the number of elements to be selected, and the <span class="docEmphasis">stride</span> represents the spacing between elements. For example, the object constructed by <tt>slice(1,4,3)</tt>
 means select the four elements whose indexes are 1, 4, 7, and 10. That 
is, start with the start element, add the stride to get the next 
element, and so on until four elements are selected. If, say, <tt>varint</tt> is a <tt>vararray&lt;int&gt;</tt> object, then the following statement would set elements 1, 4, 7, and 10 to the value <tt>10</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>varint[slice(1,4,3)] = 10;  // set selected elements to 10</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This special subscripting facility allows you to use a one-dimensional <tt>valarray</tt>
 object to represent two-dimensional data. For example, suppose you want
 to represent an array with 4 rows and 3 columns. You can store the 
information in a 12-element <tt>valarray</tt> object. Then a <tt>slice(0,3,1)</tt> object used as a subscript would represent elements 0, 1, and 2—that is, the first row. Similarly, a <tt>slice(0,4,3)</tt> subscript would represent elements 0, 3, 6, and 9—that is, the first column. Listing 16.21 illustrates some features of <tt>slice</tt>.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EYVHK">Listing 16.21. <tt>vslice.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// vslice.cpp -- using valarray slices
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;valarray&gt;
#include &lt;cstdlib&gt;

const int SIZE = 12;
typedef std::valarray&lt;int&gt; vint;     // simplify declarations
void show(const vint &amp; v, int cols);
int main()
{
    using std::slice;                // from &lt;valarray&gt;
    using std::cout;
    vint valint(SIZE);               // think of as 4 rows of 3

    int i;
    for (i = 0; i &lt; SIZE; ++i)
        valint[i] = std::rand() % 10;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Original array:\n";
    show(valint, 3);                 // show in 3 columns
    vint vcol(valint[slice(1,4,3)]); // extract 2nd column
    cout &lt;&lt; "Second column:\n";
    show(vcol, 1);                   // show in 1 column
    vint vrow(valint[slice(3,3,1)]); // extract 2nd row
    cout &lt;&lt; "Second row:\n";
    show(vrow, 3);
    valint[slice(2,4,3)]  = 10;      // assign to 2nd column
    cout &lt;&lt; "Set last column to 10:\n";
    show(valint, 3);
    cout &lt;&lt; "Set first column to sum of next two:\n";
    // + not defined for slices, so convert to valarray&lt;int&gt;
    valint[slice(0,4,3)]  = vint(valint[slice(1,4,3)])
                               + vint(valint[slice(2,4,3)]);
    show(valint, 3);
    return 0;
}

void show(const vint &amp; v, int cols)
{
    using std::cout;
    using std::endl;

    int lim = v.size();
    for (int i = 0; i &lt; lim; ++i)
    {
        cout.width(3);
        cout &lt;&lt; v[i];
        if (i % cols == cols - 1)
            cout &lt;&lt; endl;
        else
            cout &lt;&lt; ' ';
    }
    if (lim % cols != 0)
        cout &lt;&lt; endl;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>+</tt> operator is defined for <tt>valarray</tt> objects, such as <tt>valint</tt>, and it’s defined for a single <tt>int</tt> element, such as <tt>valint[1]</tt>. But as the code in Listing 16.21 notes, the <tt>+</tt> operator isn’t defined for <tt>slice</tt>-subscripted <tt>valarray</tt> units, such as <tt>valint[slice(1,4,3)]</tt>. Therefore, the program constructs full objects from the slices to enable addition:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>vint(valint[slice(1,4,3)])    // calls a slice-based constructor</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>valarray</tt> class provides constructors just for this purpose.</p>
<p class="docText">Here is a sample run of the program in Listing 16.21:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedHeight">Original array:
  0   3   3
  2   9   0
  8   2   6
  6   9   1
Second column:
  3
  9
  2
  9
Second row:
  2   9   0
Set last column to 10:
  0   3  10
  2   9  10
  8   2  10
  6   9  10
Set first column to sum of next two:
 13   3  10
 19   9  10
 12   2  10
 19   9  10

					  </pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Because values are set using <tt>rand()</tt>, different implementations of <tt>rand()</tt> will result in different values.</p>
<p class="docText">There’s more, including the <tt>gslice</tt> class to represent multidimensional slices, but this should be enough to give you a sense of what <tt>valarray</tt> is about.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ELZHK">The <tt>initializer_list</tt> Template (C++11)</h4>
<p class="docText">The <tt>initializer_list</tt> 
template is another C++11 addition to the C++ library. You can use the 
initializer-list syntax to initialize an STL container to a list of 
values:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>std::vector&lt;double&gt; payments {45.99, 39.23, 19.95, 89.01};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This would create a 
container for four elements and initialize the elements to the four 
values in the list. What makes this possible is that the container 
classes now have constructors taking an <tt>initializer_list&lt;T&gt;</tt> argument. A <tt>vector&lt;double&gt;</tt> object, for example, has a constructor that accepts an <tt>initializer_list&lt;double&gt;</tt> argument, and the previous declaration is the same as this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>std::vector&lt;double&gt; payments({45.99, 39.23, 19.95, 89.01});</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here, the list is written explicitly as a constructor argument.</p>
<p class="docText">Normally, as part of the C++11 universal initialization syntax, you can invoke a class constructor using <tt>{}</tt> instead of <tt>()</tt> notation:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>shared_ptr&lt;double&gt; pd {new double}; // ok to use {} instead of ()</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">But this would create problems if there also is an <tt>initializer_list</tt> constructor:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>std::vector&lt;int&gt; vi{10};    // ??</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Which constructor does this invoke?</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>std::vector&lt;int&gt; vi(10);    // case A: 10 uninitialized elements
std::vector&lt;int&gt; vi({10});  // case B: 1 element set to 10</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The answer is that if the class does have a constructor accepting an <tt>initializer_list</tt> argument, then using the <tt>{}</tt> syntax invokes that particular constructor. So in this example, case B applies.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>initializer_list</tt> elements should all be of one type. However, the compiler will do conversions to match the type:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>std::vector&lt;double&gt; payments {45.99, 39.23, 19, 89};
// same as std::vector&lt;double&gt; payments {45.99, 39.23, 19.0, 89.0};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here, because the <tt>vector</tt> element type is <tt>double</tt>, the list is type <tt>initializer_list&lt;double&gt;</tt>, and <tt>19</tt> and <tt>89</tt> are converted to <tt>double</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">The usual list restrictions on narrowing apply:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>std::vector&lt;int&gt; values = {10, 8, 5.5};  // narrowing, compile-time error</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here, the element type is <tt>int</tt>, and the implied conversion of <tt>5.5</tt> to <tt>int</tt> is not allowed.</p>
<p class="docText">It doesn’t make sense to provide an <tt>initializer_list</tt> constructor unless the class is meant to handle lists of varying sizes. For instance, you don’t want an <tt>initializer_list</tt> constructor for a class taking a fixed number of values. For example, the following declaration does not provide an <tt>initializer_list</tt> constructor for the three data members:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>class Position
{
private:
    int x;
    int y;
    int z;
public:
    Position(int xx = 0, int yy  = 0, int zz = 0)
             : x(xx), y(yy), z(zz) {}
    // no initializer_list constructor
    ...
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This allows you to use the <tt>{}</tt> syntax with the <tt>Position(int,int,int)</tt> constructor:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Position A = {20, -3};  // uses Position(20,-3,0)</pre></div><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EI6HK">Using <tt>initializer_list</tt></h4>
<p class="docText">You can use <tt>initializer_list</tt> objects in your code by including the <tt>initializer_list</tt> header file. The template class has <tt>begin()</tt> and <tt>end()</tt> members, and you can use them to access list elements. It also has a <tt>size()</tt> member that returns the number of elements. Listing 16.22 shows a simple example using <tt>initializer_list</tt>. It requires a compiler that supports this C++11 feature.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EJAAM">Listing 16.22. <tt>ilist.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// ilist.cpp -- use initializer_list (C++11 feature)
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;initializer_list&gt;

double sum(std::initializer_list&lt;double&gt; il);
double average(const std::initializer_list&lt;double&gt; &amp; ril);

int main()
{
    using std::cout;

    cout &lt;&lt; "List 1: sum = " &lt;&lt; sum({2,3,4})
         &lt;&lt;", ave = " &lt;&lt; average({2,3,4}) &lt;&lt; '\n';
    std::initializer_list&lt;double&gt; dl = {1.1, 2.2, 3.3, 4.4, 5.5};
    cout &lt;&lt; "List 2: sum = " &lt;&lt; sum(dl)
         &lt;&lt;", ave = " &lt;&lt; average(dl) &lt;&lt; '\n';
    dl = {16.0, 25.0, 36.0, 40.0, 64.0};
    cout &lt;&lt; "List 3: sum = " &lt;&lt; sum(dl)
         &lt;&lt;", ave = " &lt;&lt; average(dl) &lt;&lt; '\n';
    return 0;
}

double sum(std::initializer_list&lt;double&gt; il)
{
    double tot = 0;
    for (auto p = il.begin(); p !=il.end(); p++)
        tot += *p;
    return tot;
}

double average(const std::initializer_list&lt;double&gt; &amp; ril)
{
    double tot = 0;
    int n = ril.size();
    double ave = 0.0;
    if (n &gt; 0)
    {
        for (auto p = ril.begin(); p !=ril.end(); p++)
            tot += *p;
        ave = tot / n;
    }
    return ave;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here’s a sample run:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>List 1: sum = 9, ave = 3
List 2: sum = 16.5, ave = 3.3
List 3: sum = 181, ave = 36.2</pre></div><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EBBAM">Program Notes</h4>
<p class="docText">You can pass an <tt>initializer_list</tt> object by value or by reference, as shown by <tt>sum()</tt> and <tt>average()</tt>.
 The object itself is small, typically two pointers (one to the 
beginning and one past end) or a pointer to the beginning and an integer
 representing the size, so the choice is not a major performance issue. 
(The STL passes them by value.)</p>
<p class="docText">The function argument can be a list literal, like <tt>{2,3,4}</tt>, or it can be a list variable, like <tt>dl</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">The iterator types for <tt>initializer_list</tt> are <tt>const</tt>, so you can’t change the values in a list:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>*dl.begin() = 2011.6;                // not allowed</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">But, as Listing 16.22 shows, you can attach a list variable to a different list:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>dl = {16.0, 25.0, 36.0, 40.0, 64.0};  // allowed</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">However, the intended use of the <tt>initializer_list</tt> class is to pass a list of values to a constructor or some other function.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
