<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Summary</h3>
<p class="docText">C++ includes a powerful set 
of libraries that provide solutions to many common programming problems 
and the tools to simplify many more problems. The <tt>string</tt>
 class provides a convenient means to handle strings as objects as well 
as automatic memory management and a host of methods and functions for 
working with strings. For example, these methods and functions allow you
 to concatenate strings, insert one string into another, reverse a 
string, search a string for characters or substrings, and perform input 
and output operations.</p>
<p class="docText">Smart pointer templates such as <tt>auto_ptr</tt> and C++11’s <tt>shared_ptr</tt> and <tt>unique_ptr</tt> make it easier to manage memory allocated by <tt>new</tt>. If you use one of these smart pointers instead of a regular pointer to hold the address returned by <tt>new</tt>, you don’t have to remember to use the <tt>delete</tt> operator later. When the smart pointer object expires, its destructor calls the <tt>delete</tt> operator automatically.</p>
<p class="docText">The STL is a collection 
of container class templates, iterator class templates, function object 
templates, and algorithm function templates that feature a unified 
design based on generic programming principles. The algorithms use 
templates to make them generic in terms of type of stored object and an 
iterator interface to make them generic in terms of the type of 
container. Iterators are generalizations of pointers.</p>
<p class="docText">The STL uses the term <span class="docEmphasis">concept</span>
 to denote a set of requirements. For example, the concept of forward 
iterators includes the requirements that a forward iterator object can 
be dereferenced for reading and writing and that it can be incremented. 
Actual implementations of the concept are said to <span class="docEmphasis">model</span>
 the concept. For example, the forward iterator concept could be modeled
 by an ordinary pointer or by an object designed to navigate a linked 
list. Concepts based on other concepts are termed <span class="docEmphasis">refinements</span>. For example, the bidirectional iterator is a refinement of the forward iterator concept.</p>
<p class="docText">Container classes, such as <tt>vector</tt> and <tt>set</tt>,
 are models of container concepts, such as containers, sequences, and 
associative containers. The STL defines several container class 
templates: <tt>vector</tt>, <tt>deque</tt>, <tt>list</tt>, <tt>set</tt>, <tt>multiset</tt>, <tt>map</tt>, <tt>multimap</tt>, and <tt>bitset</tt>. It also defines the adapter class templates <tt>queue</tt>, <tt>priority_queue</tt>, and <tt>stack</tt>;
 these classes adapt an underlying container class to give it the 
characteristic interface suggested by the adapter class template name. 
Thus, <tt>stack</tt>, although based, by default, on <tt>vector</tt>, allows insertion and removal only at the top of the stack. C++11 adds <tt>forward_list</tt>, <tt>unordered_set</tt>, <tt>unordered_multiset</tt>, <tt>unordered_map</tt>, and <tt>unordered_multimap</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Some algorithms are expressed 
as container class methods, but the bulk are expressed as general, 
nonmember functions. This is made possible by using iterators as the 
interface between containers and algorithms. One advantage to this 
approach is that there needs to be just one <tt>for_each()</tt> or <tt>copy()</tt>
 function, and so on, instead of a separate version for each container. A
 second advantage is that STL algorithms can be used with non-STL 
containers, such as ordinary arrays, <tt>string</tt> objects, <tt>array</tt> objects, and any classes you design consistent with the STL iterator and container idiom.</p>
<p class="docText">Both containers and algorithms
 are characterized by the type of iterator they provide or need. You 
should check that a container features an iterator concept that supports
 the algorithm’s needs. For example, the <tt>for_each()</tt> algorithm uses an input iterator, whose minimal requirements are met by all the STL container class types. But <tt>sort()</tt>
 requires random access iterators, which not all container classes 
support. A container class may offer a specialized method as an option 
if it doesn’t meet the requirements for a particular algorithm. For 
example, the <tt>list</tt> class has a <tt>sort()</tt> method that is based on bidirectional iterators, so it can use that method instead of the general function.</p>
<p class="docText">The STL also provides function objects, or functors, that are classes for which the <tt>()</tt> operator is overloaded—that is, for which the <tt>operator()()</tt> method is defined. Objects
 of such classes can be invoked by using function notation but can carry
 additional information. Adaptable functors, for example, have <tt>typedef</tt>
 statements that identify the argument types and the return value type 
for the functor. This information can be used by other components, such 
as function adapters.</p>
<p class="docText">By representing common 
container types and providing a variety of common operations implemented
 with efficient algorithms, all done in a generic manner, the STL 
provides an excellent source of reusable code. You may be able to solve a
 programming problem directly with the STL tools, or you may be able to 
use them as building blocks to construct the solution you need.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>complex</tt> and <tt>valarray</tt> template classes support numeric operations for complex numbers and arrays.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
