<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter Review</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Chapter Review</h3>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1.</b></td><td class="docText">Consider the following class declaration:
<div class="docText"><pre>class RQ1
{
private:
    char * st;       // points to C-style string
public:
    RQ1() { st = new char [1]; strcpy(st,""); }
    RQ1(const char * s)
    {st = new char [strlen(s) + 1]; strcpy(st, s); }
    RQ1(const RQ1 &amp; rq)
    {st = new char [strlen(rq.st) + 1]; strcpy(st, rq.st); }
    ~RQ1() {delete [] st};
    RQ &amp; operator=(const RQ &amp; rq);
    // more stuff
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Convert this to a declaration that uses a <tt>string</tt> object instead. What methods no longer need explicit definitions?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2.</b></td><td class="docText">Name at least two advantages <tt>string</tt> objects have over C-style strings in terms of ease-of-use.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3.</b></td><td class="docText">Write a function that takes a reference to a <tt>string</tt> object as an argument and that converts the <tt>string</tt> object to all uppercase.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4.</b></td><td class="docText">Which of the following are not examples of correct usage (conceptually or syntactically) of <tt>auto_ptr</tt>? (Assume that the needed header files have been included.)
<div class="docText"><pre>auto_ptr&lt;int&gt; pia(new int[20]);
auto_ptr&lt;string&gt; (new string);
int rigue = 7;
auto_ptr&lt;int&gt;pr(&amp;rigue);
auto_ptr dbl (new double);</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5.</b></td><td class="docText">If
 you could make the mechanical equivalent of a stack that held golf 
clubs instead of numbers, why would it (conceptually) be a bad golf bag?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6.</b></td><td class="docText">Why would a <tt>set</tt> container be a poor choice for storing a hole-by-hole record of your golf scores?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>7.</b></td><td class="docText">Because a pointer is an iterator, why didn’t the STL designers simply use pointers instead of iterators?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>8.</b></td><td class="docText">Why
 didn’t the STL designers simply define a base iterator class, use 
inheritance to derive classes for the other iterator types, and express 
the algorithms in terms of those iterator classes?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9.</b></td><td class="docText">Give at least three examples of convenience advantages that a <tt>vector</tt> object has over an ordinary array.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>10.</b></td><td class="docText">If Listing 16.9 were implemented with <tt>list</tt> instead of <tt>vector</tt>, what parts of the program would become invalid? Could the invalid part be fixed easily? If so, how?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11.</b></td><td class="docText">Consider the <tt>TooBig</tt> functor in Listing 16.15. What does the following code do, and what values get assigned to <tt>bo</tt>?
<div class="docText"><pre>bool bo = TooBig&lt;int&gt;(10)(15);</pre></div><br/></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
