<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Programming Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Programming Exercises</h3>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1.</b></td><td class="docText">A <span class="docEmphasis">palindrome</span>
 is a string that is the same backward as it is forward. For example, 
“tot” and “otto” are rather short palindromes. Write a program that lets
 a user enter a string and that passes to a <tt>bool</tt> function a reference to the string. The function should return <tt>true</tt> if the string is a palindrome and <tt>false</tt>
 otherwise. At this point, don’t worry about complications such as 
capitalization, spaces, and punctuation. That is, this simple version 
should reject “Otto” and “Madam, I’m Adam.” Feel free to scan the list 
of string methods in Appendix F for methods to simplify the task.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2.</b></td><td class="docText">Do
 the same problem as given in Programming Exercise 1 but do worry about 
complications such as capitalization, spaces, and punctuation. That is, 
“Madam, I’m Adam” should test as a palindrome. For example, the testing 
function could reduce the string to “madamimadam” and then test whether 
the reverse is the same. Don’t forget the useful <tt>cctype</tt> library. You might find an STL function or two useful although not necessary.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3.</b></td><td class="docText">Redo Listing 16.3 so that it gets it words from a file. One approach is to use a <tt>vector&lt;string&gt;</tt> object instead of an array of <tt>string</tt>. Then you can use <tt>push_back()</tt> to copy how ever many words are in your data file into the <tt>vector&lt;string&gt;</tt> object and use the <tt>size()</tt>
 member to determine the length of the word list. Because the program 
should read one word at a time from the file, you should use the <tt>&gt;&gt;</tt> operator rather than <tt>getline()</tt>. The file itself should contain words separated by spaces, tabs, or new lines.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4.</b></td><td class="docText">Write a function with an old-style interface that has this prototype:
<div class="docText"><pre>int reduce(long ar[], int n);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The actual arguments 
should be the name of an array and the number of elements in the array. 
The function should sort an array, remove duplicate values, and return a
 value equal to the number of elements in the reduced array. Write the 
function using STL functions. (If you decide to use the general <tt>unique()</tt> function, note that it returns the end of the resulting range.) Test the function in a short program.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5.</b></td><td class="docText">Do the same problem as described in Programming Exercise 4, except make it a template function:
<div class="docText"><pre>template &lt;class T&gt;
int reduce(T ar[], int n);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Test the function in a short program, using both a <tt>long</tt> instantiation and a <tt>string</tt> instantiation.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6.</b></td><td class="docText">Redo the example shown in Listing 12.12, using the STL <tt>queue</tt> template class instead of the <tt>Queue</tt> class described in Chapter 12.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>7.</b></td><td class="docText">A common game is the lottery card. The card has numbered spots of which a certain number are selected at random. Write a <tt>Lotto()</tt>
 function that takes two arguments. The first should be the number of 
spots on a lottery card, and the second should be the number of spots 
selected at random. The function should return a <tt>vector&lt;int&gt;</tt> object that contains, in sorted order, the numbers selected at random. For example, you could use the function as follows:
<div class="docText"><pre>vector&lt;int&gt; winners;
winners = Lotto(51,6);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This would assign to <tt>winners</tt> a vector that contains six numbers selected randomly from the range 1 through 51. Note that simply using <tt>rand()</tt>
 doesn’t quite do the job because it may produce duplicate values. 
Suggestion: Have the function create a vector that contains all the 
possible values, use <tt>random_shuffle()</tt>, 
and then use the beginning of the shuffled vector to obtain the values. 
Also write a short program that lets you test the function.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>8.</b></td><td class="docText">Mat and Pat want to invite their friends to a party. They ask you to write a program that does the following:
<ul><li><p class="docList">Allows Mat to enter a list of his friends’ names. The names are stored in a container and then displayed in sorted order.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Allows Pat to enter a list of her friends’ names. The names are stored in a second container and then displayed in sorted order.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Creates a third container that merges the two lists, eliminates duplicates, and displays the contents of this container.</p></li></ul></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9.</b></td><td class="docText">Compared
 to an array, a linked list features easier addition and removal of 
elements but is slower to sort. This raises a possibility: Perhaps it 
might be faster to copy a list to an array, sort the array, and copy the
 sorted result back to the list than to simply use the list algorithm 
for sorting. (But it also could use more memory.) Test the speed 
hypothesis with the following approach:
<div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Create a large <tt>vector&lt;int&gt;</tt> object <tt>vi0</tt>, using <tt>rand()</tt> to provide initial values.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Create a second <tt>vector&lt;int&gt;</tt> object <tt>vi</tt> and a <tt>list&lt;int&gt;</tt> object <tt>li</tt> of the same size as the original and initialize them to values in the original vector.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Time how long the program takes to sort <tt>vi</tt> using the STL <tt>sort()</tt> algorithm, then time how long it takes to sort <tt>li</tt> using the <tt>list sort()</tt> method.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Reset <tt>li</tt> to the unsorted contents of <tt>vi0</tt>. Time the combined operation of copying <tt>li</tt> to <tt>vi</tt>, sorting <tt>vi</tt>, and copying the result back to <tt>li</tt>.</p></div></li></ol></div>
<p class="docText">To time these operations, you can use <tt>clock()</tt> from the <tt>ctime</tt> library. As in Listing 5.14, you can use this statement to start the first timing:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>clock_t start = clock();</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Then use the following at the end of the operation to get the elapsed time:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>clock_t end = clock();
cout &lt;&lt; (double)(end - start)/CLOCKS_PER_SEC;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This is by no means a 
definitive test because the results will depend on a variety of factors,
 including available memory, whether multiprocessing is going on, and 
the size of the array or list. (One would expect the relative efficiency
 advantage of the array over the list to increase with the number of 
elements being sorted.) Also if you have a choice between a default 
build and a release build, use the release build for the measurement. 
With today’s speedy computers, you probably will need to use as large an
 array as possible to get meaningful readings. You might try, for 
example, 100,000 elements, 1,000,000 elements, and 10,000,000 elements.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>10.</b></td><td class="docText">Modify Listing 16.9 (<tt>vect3.cpp</tt>) as follows:
<div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Add a <tt>price</tt> member to the <tt>Review</tt> structure.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Instead of using a <tt>vector</tt> of <tt>Review</tt> objects to hold the input, use a <tt>vector</tt> of <tt>shared_ptr&lt;Review&gt;</tt> objects. Remember that a <tt>shared_ptr</tt> has to be initialized with a pointer returned by <tt>new</tt>.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Follow
 the input stage with a loop that allows the user the following options 
for displaying books: in original order, in alphabetical order, in order
 of increasing ratings, in order of decreasing ratings, in order of 
increasing price, in order of decreasing price, and quitting.</p></div></li></ol></div>
<p class="docText">Here’s one possible approach. After getting the initial input, create another vector of <tt>shared_ptr</tt>s initialized to the original array. Define an <tt>operator&lt;()</tt> function that compares pointed-to structures and use it to sort the second vector so that the <tt>shared_ptr</tt>s are in the order of the book names stored in the pointed-to objects. Repeat the process to get <tt>vector</tt>s of <tt>shared_ptr</tt>s sorted by <tt>rating</tt> and by <tt>price</tt>. Note that <tt>rbegin()</tt> and <tt>rend()</tt> save you the trouble of also creating <tt>vector</tt>s of reversed order.</p></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
