<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>17. Input, Output, and Files</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h2 class="docChapterTitle" id="title-ID0E6EHK">17. Input, Output, and Files</h2>
<p class="docText">In this chapter you’ll learn about the following:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">The C++ view of input and output</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>iostream</tt> family of classes</p></li><li><p class="docList">Redirection</p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>ostream</tt> class methods</p></li><li><p class="docList">Formatting output</p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>istream</tt> class methods</p></li><li><p class="docList">Stream states</p></li><li><p class="docList">File I/O</p></li><li><p class="docList">Using the <tt>ifstream</tt> class for input from files</p></li><li><p class="docList">Using the <tt>ofstream</tt> class for output to files</p></li><li><p class="docList">Using the <tt>fstream</tt> class file input and output</p></li><li><p class="docList">Command-line processing</p></li><li><p class="docList">Binary files</p></li><li><p class="docList">Random file access</p></li><li><p class="docList">Incore formatting</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">Discussing C++ input and 
output (I/O) poses a problem. On the one hand, practically every program
 uses input and output, and learning how to use them is one of the first
 tasks facing someone learning a computer language. On the other hand, 
C++ uses many of its more advanced language features to implement input 
and output, including classes, derived classes, function overloading, 
virtual functions, templates, and multiple inheritance. Thus, to really 
understand C++ I/O, you must know a lot of C++. To get you started, the 
early chapters of this book outline the basic ways for using the <tt>istream</tt> class object <tt>cin</tt> and the <tt>ostream</tt> class object <tt>cout</tt> for input and output, and, to a lesser degree, using <tt>ifstream</tt> and <tt>ofstream</tt> objects for file input and output. This chapter takes a longer
 look at C++’s input and output classes, showing how they are designed 
and explaining how to control the output format. (If you’ve skipped a 
few chapters just to learn advanced formatting, you can read the 
sections on formatting, noting the techniques and ignoring the 
explanations.)</p>
<p class="docText">The C++ facilities for file input and output are based on the same basic class definitions that <tt>cin</tt> and <tt>cout</tt>
 are based on, so this chapter uses the discussion of console I/O 
(keyboard and screen) as a springboard to investigating file I/O.</p>
<p class="docText">The ANSI/ISO C++ 
standards committee has worked to make C++ I/O more compatible with 
existing C I/O, and this has produced some changes from traditional C++ 
practices.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
