<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Incore Formatting</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Incore Formatting</h3>
<p class="docText">The <tt>iostream</tt> family supports I/O between a program and a terminal. The <tt>fstream</tt> family uses the same interface to provide I/O between a program and a file. The C++ library also provides an <tt>sstream</tt> family, which uses the same interface to provide I/O between a program and a <tt>string</tt> object. That is, you can use the same <tt>ostream</tt> methods you’ve used with <tt>cout</tt> to write formatted information into a <tt>string</tt> object, and you can use <tt>istream</tt> methods such as <tt>getline()</tt> to read information from a <tt>string</tt> object. The process of reading formatted information from a <tt>string</tt> object or of writing formatted information to a <tt>string</tt> object is termed <span class="docEmphasis">incore</span> formatting. Let’s take a brief look at these facilities. (The <tt>sstream</tt> family of <tt>string</tt> support supersedes the <tt>strstream.h</tt> family of <tt>char</tt>-array support.)</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>sstream</tt> header file defines an <tt>ostringstream</tt> class that is derived from the <tt>ostream</tt> class. (There is also a <tt>wostringstream</tt> class based on <tt>wostream</tt>, for wide character sets.) If you create an <tt>ostringstream</tt> object, you can write information to it, which it stores. You can use the same methods with an <tt>ostringstream</tt> object that you can with <tt>cout</tt>. That is, you can do something like the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>ostringstream outstr;
double price = 380.0;
char * ps = " for a copy of the ISO/EIC C++ standard!";
outstr.precision(2);
outstr &lt;&lt; fixed;
outstr &lt;&lt; "Pay only CHF " &lt;&lt; price &lt;&lt; ps &lt;&lt; endl;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The formatted text goes into a buffer, and the object uses dynamic memory allocation to expand the buffer size as needed. The <tt>ostringstream</tt> class has a member function, called <tt>str()</tt>, that returns a string object initialized to the buffer’s contents:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>string mesg = outstr.str();    // returns string with formatted information</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Using the <tt>str()</tt> method “freezes” the object, and you can no longer write to it.</p>
<p class="docText">Listing 17.21 provides a short example of incore formatting.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EQKAM">Listing 17.21. <tt>strout.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>// strout.cpp -- incore formatting (output)
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;sstream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;
int main()
{
    using namespace std;
    ostringstream outstr;   // manages a string stream

    string hdisk;
    cout &lt;&lt; "What's the name of your hard disk? ";
    getline(cin, hdisk);
    int cap;
    cout &lt;&lt; "What's its capacity in GB? ";
    cin &gt;&gt; cap;
    // write formatted information to string stream
    outstr &lt;&lt; "The hard disk " &lt;&lt; hdisk &lt;&lt; " has a capacity of "
            &lt;&lt; cap &lt;&lt; " gigabytes.\n";
    string result = outstr.str();   // save result
    cout &lt;&lt; result;                 // show contents

    return 0;

}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here’s a sample run of the program in Listing 17.21:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>What's the name of your hard disk? <span class="docEmphStrong">Datarapture</span>
What's its capacity in GB? <span class="docEmphStrong">2000</span>
The hard disk Datarapture has a capacity of 2000 gigabytes.</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>istringstream</tt> class lets you use the <tt>istream</tt> family of methods to read data from an <tt>istringstream</tt> object, which can be initialized from a <tt>string</tt> object. Suppose <tt>facts</tt> is a <tt>string</tt> object. To create an <tt>istringstream</tt> object associated with this string, you can use the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>istringstream instr(facts);     // use facts to initialize stream</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Then you use <tt>istream</tt> methods to read data from <tt>instr</tt>. For example, if <tt>instr</tt> contained a bunch of integers in character format, you could read them as follows:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int n;
int sum = 0;
while (instr &gt;&gt; n)
    sum += n;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Listing 17.22 uses the overloaded <tt>&gt;&gt;</tt> operator to read the contents of a string one word at a time.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EJOAM">Listing 17.22. <tt>strin.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>// strin.cpp -- formatted reading from a char array
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;sstream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;
int main()
{
    using namespace std;
    string lit = "It was a dark and stormy day, and "
                 " the full moon glowed brilliantly. ";
    istringstream instr(lit);   // use buf for input
    string word;
    while (instr &gt;&gt; word)       // read a word a time
        cout &lt;&lt; word &lt;&lt; endl;
    return 0;

}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here is the output of the program in Listing 17.22:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>It
was
a
dark
and
stormy
day,
and
the
full
moon
glowed
brilliantly.</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In short, the <tt>istringstream</tt> and <tt>ostringstream</tt> classes give you the power of the <tt>istream</tt> and <tt>ostream</tt> class methods to manage character data stored in strings.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
