<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Summary</h3>
<p class="docText">A stream is a flow of bytes 
into or out of a program. A buffer is a temporary holding area in memory
 that acts as an intermediary between a program and a file or other I/O 
devices. Information can be transferred between a buffer and a file, 
using large chunks of data of the size most efficiently handled by 
devices such as disk drives. And information can be transferred between a
 buffer and a program in a byte-by-byte flow that often is more 
convenient for the processing done in a program. C++ handles input by 
connecting a buffered stream to a program and to its source of input. 
Similarly, C++ handles output by connecting a buffered stream to a 
program and to its output target. The <tt>iostream</tt> and <tt>fstream</tt> files constitute an I/O class library that defines a rich set of classes for managing streams. C++ programs that include the <tt>iostream</tt> file automatically open eight streams, managing them with eight objects. The <tt>cin</tt> object manages the standard input stream, which, by default, connects to the standard input device, typically a keyboard. The <tt>cout</tt> object manages the standard output stream, which, by default, connects to the standard output device, typically a monitor. The <tt>cerr</tt> and <tt>clog</tt>
 objects manage unbuffered and buffered streams connected to the 
standard error device, typically a monitor. These four objects have four
 wide character counterparts, named <tt>wcin</tt>, <tt>wcout</tt>, <tt>wcerr</tt>, and <tt>wclog</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">The I/O class library provides a variety of useful methods. The <tt>istream</tt> class defines versions of the extraction operator (<tt>&gt;&gt;</tt>) that recognize all the basic C++ types and that convert character input to those types. The <tt>get()</tt> family of methods and the <tt>getline()</tt> method provide further support for single-character input and for string input. Similarly, the <tt>ostream</tt> class defines versions of the insertion operator (<tt>&lt;&lt;</tt>) that recognize all the basic C++ types and that convert them to suitable character output. The <tt>put()</tt> method provides further support for single-character output. The <tt>wistream</tt> and <tt>wostream</tt> classes provide similar support for wide characters.</p>
<p class="docText">You can control how a program formats output by using <tt>ios_base</tt> class methods and by using manipulators (functions that can be concatenated with insertion) defined in the <tt>iostream</tt> and <tt>iomanip</tt>
 files. These methods and manipulators let you control the number base, 
the field width, the number of decimal places displayed, the system used
 to display floating-point values, and other elements.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>fstream</tt> file provides class definitions that extend the <tt>iostream</tt> methods to file I/O. The <tt>ifstream</tt> class derives from the <tt>istream</tt> class. By associating an <tt>ifstream</tt> object with a file, you can use all the <tt>istream</tt> methods for reading the file. Similarly, associating an <tt>ofstream</tt> object with a file lets you use the <tt>ostream</tt> methods to write to a file. And associating an <tt>fstream</tt> object with a file lets you employ both input and output methods with the file.</p>
<p class="docText">To associate a file with a
 stream, you can provide the filename when initializing a file stream 
object or you can first create a file stream object and then use the <tt>open()</tt> method to associate the stream with a file. The <tt>close()</tt> method terminates the connection between a stream and a file. The class constructors and the <tt>open()</tt>
 method take an optional second argument that provides the file mode. 
The file mode determines such things as whether the file is to be read 
and/or written to, whether opening a file for writing truncates it, 
whether attempting to open a non-existent file is an error, and whether 
to use the binary or text mode.</p>
<p class="docText">A text file stores all 
information in character form. For example, numeric values are converted
 to character representations. The usual insertion and extraction 
operators, along with <tt>get()</tt> and <tt>getline()</tt>,
 support this mode. A binary file stores all information by using the 
same binary representation the computer uses internally. Binary files 
store data, particularly floating-point values, more accurately and 
compactly than text files, but they are less portable. The <tt>read()</tt> and <tt>write()</tt> methods support binary input and output.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>seekg()</tt> and <tt>seekp()</tt>
 functions provide C++ random access for files. These class methods let 
you position a file pointer relative to the beginning of a file, 
relative to the end, or relative to the current position. The <tt>tellg()</tt> and <tt>tellp()</tt> methods report the current file position.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>sstream</tt> header file defines <tt>istringstream</tt> and <tt>ostringstream</tt> classes that let you use <tt>istream</tt> and <tt>ostream</tt> methods to extract information from a string and to format information placed into a string.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
