<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter Review</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Chapter Review</h3>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1.</b></td><td class="docText">What role does the <tt>iostream</tt> file play in C++ I/O?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2.</b></td><td class="docText">Why does typing a number such as 121 as input require a program to make a conversion?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3.</b></td><td class="docText">What’s the difference between the standard output and the standard error?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4.</b></td><td class="docText">Why is <tt>cout</tt> able to display various C++ types without being provided explicit instructions for each type?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5.</b></td><td class="docText">What feature of the output method definitions allows you to concatenate output?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6.</b></td><td class="docText">Write
 a program that requests an integer and then displays it in decimal, 
octal, and hexadecimal forms. Display each form on the same line, in 
fields that are 15 characters wide, and use the C++ number base 
prefixes.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>7.</b></td><td class="docText">Write a program that requests the following information and that formats it as shown:
<div class="docText"><pre>Enter your name: <span class="docEmphStrong">Billy Gruff</span>
Enter your hourly wages: <span class="docEmphStrong">12</span>
Enter number of hours worked: <span class="docEmphStrong">7.5</span>
First format:
                   Billy Gruff: $     12.00:  7.5
Second format:
Billy Gruff                   : $12.00     :7.5</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>8.</b></td><td class="docText">Consider the following program:
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedHeight">//rq17-8.cpp
#include &lt;iostream&gt;

int main()
{
    using namespace std;
    char ch;
    int ct1 = 0;

    cin &gt;&gt; ch;
    while (ch != 'q')
    {
        ct1++;
        cin &gt;&gt; ch;
    }

    int ct2 = 0;
    cin.get(ch);
    while (ch != 'q')
    {
        ct2++;
        cin.get(ch);
    }
    cout &lt;&lt; "ct1 = " &lt;&lt; ct1 &lt;&lt; "; ct2 = " &lt;&lt; ct2 &lt;&lt; "\n";

    return 0;
}

					  </pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">What does it print, given the following input:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>I see a q&lt;Enter&gt;
I see a q&lt;Enter&gt;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here <tt>&lt;Enter&gt;</tt> signifies pressing the Enter key.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9.</b></td><td class="docText">Both
 of the following statements read and discard characters up to and 
including the end of a line. In what way does the behavior of one differ
 from that of the other?
<div class="docText"><pre>while (cin.get() != '\n')
    continue;
cin.ignore(80, '\n');</pre></div><br/></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
