<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Programming Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Programming Exercises</h3>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1.</b></td><td class="docText">Write a program that counts the number of characters up to the first <tt>$</tt> in input and that leaves the <tt>$</tt> in the input stream.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2.</b></td><td class="docText">Write a program that copies your keyboard input (up to the simulated end-of-file) to a file named on the command line.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3.</b></td><td class="docText">Write
 a program that copies one file to another. Have the program take the 
filenames from the command line. Have the program report if it cannot 
open a file.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4.</b></td><td class="docText">Write
 a program that opens two text files for input and one for output. The 
program should concatenate the corresponding lines of the input files, 
use a space as a separator, and write the results to the output file. If
 one file is shorter than the other, the remaining lines in the longer 
file should also be copied to the output file. For example, suppose the 
first input file has these contents:
<div class="docText"><pre>eggs kites donuts
balloons hammers
stones</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">And suppose the second input file has these contents:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>zero lassitude
finance drama</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The resulting file would have these contents:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>eggs kites donuts zero lassitude
balloons hammers finance drama
stones</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5.</b></td><td class="docText">Mat and Pat want to invite their friends to a party, much as they did in Programming Exercise 8 in Chapter 16, except now they want a program that uses files. They have asked you to write a program that does the following:
<ul><li><p class="docList">Reads a list of Mat’s friends’ names from a text file called <tt>mat.dat</tt>, which lists one friend per line. The names are stored in a container and then displayed in sorted order.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Reads a list of Pat’s friends’ names from a text file called <tt>pat.dat</tt>, which lists one friend per line. The names are stored in a container and then displayed in sorted order.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Merges the two lists, eliminating duplicates and stores the result in the file <tt>matnpat.dat</tt>, one friend per line.</p></li></ul></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6.</b></td><td class="docText">Consider the class definitions of Programming Exercise 5 in Chapter 14, “Reusing Code in C++”. If you haven’t yet done that exercise, do so now. Then do the following:
<p class="docText">Write a program that uses standard C++ I/O and file I/O in conjunction with data of types <tt>employee</tt>, <tt>manager</tt>, <tt>fink</tt>, and <tt>highfink</tt>, as defined in Programming Exercise 5 in Chapter 14. The program should be along the general lines of Listing 17.17
 in that it should let you add new data to a file. The first time 
through, the program should solicit data from the user, show all the 
entries, and save the information in a file. On subsequent uses, the 
program should first read and display the file data, let the user add 
data, and show all the data. One difference is that data should be 
handled by an array of pointers to type <tt>employee</tt>. That way, a pointer can point to an <tt>employee</tt>
 object or to objects of any of the three derived types. Keep the array 
small to facilitate checking the program; for example, you might limit 
the array to 10 elements:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>const int MAX = 10;     // no more than 10 objects
...
employee * pc[MAX];</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">For keyboard entry, the 
program should use a menu to offer the user the choice of which type of 
object to create. The menu should use a switch to use <tt>new</tt> to create an object of the desired type and to assign the object’s address to a pointer in the <tt>pc</tt> array. Then that object can use the virtual <tt>setall()</tt> function to elicit the appropriate data from the user:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>pc[i]-&gt;setall();  // invokes function corresponding to type of object</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">To save the data to a file, devise a virtual <tt>writeall()</tt> function for that purpose:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>for (i = 0; i &lt; index; i++)
    pc[i]-&gt;writeall(fout);// fout ofstream connected to output file</pre></div><br/>
<div class="docNote"><p class="docNoteTitle">Note</p>
<p class="docText">Use text I/O, not 
binary I/O, for Programming Exercise 6. (Unfortunately, virtual objects 
include pointers to tables of pointers to virtual functions, and <tt>write()</tt> copies this information to a file. An object filled by using <tt>read()</tt>
 from the file gets weird values for the function pointers, which really
 messes up the behavior of virtual functions.) Use a newline character 
to separate each data field from the next; this makes it easier to 
identify fields on input. Or you could still use binary I/O, but not 
write objects as a whole. Instead, you could provide class methods that 
apply the <tt>write()</tt> and <tt>read()</tt>
 functions to each class member individually rather than to the object 
as a whole. That way, the program could save just the intended data to a
 file.</p>
</div><br/>
<p class="docText">The tricky part is recovering 
the data from the file. The problem is, how can the program know whether
 the next item to be recovered is an <tt>employee</tt> object, a <tt>manager</tt> object, a <tt>fink</tt> type, or a <tt>highfink</tt>
 type? One approach is, when writing the data for an object to a file, 
precede the data with an integer that indicates the type of object to 
follow. Then, on file input, the program can read the integer and then 
use <tt>switch</tt> to create the appropriate object to receive the data:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>enum classkind{Employee, Manager, Fink, Highfink}; // in class header
...
int classtype;
while((fin &gt;&gt; classtype).get(ch)){ // newline separates int from data
    switch(classtype) {
        case Employee  : pc[i] = new employee;
                      : break;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Then you can use the pointer to invoke a virtual <tt>getall()</tt> function to read the information:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>pc[i++]-&gt;getall();</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>7.</b></td><td class="docText">Here is part of a program that reads keyboard input into a vector of <tt>string</tt> objects, stores the string contents (not the objects) in a file, and then copies the file contents back into a vector of <tt>string</tt> objects:
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedHeight">int main()
{
    using namespace std;
    vector&lt;string&gt; vostr;
    string temp;

// acquire strings
    cout &lt;&lt; "Enter strings (empty line to quit):\n";
    while (getline(cin,temp) &amp;&amp; temp[0] != '\0')
        vostr.push_back(temp);
    cout &lt;&lt; "Here is your input.\n";
    for_each(vostr.begin(), vostr.end(), ShowStr);

// store in a file
    ofstream fout("strings.dat", ios_base::out | ios_base::binary);
    for_each(vostr.begin(), vostr.end(), Store(fout));
    fout.close();

// recover file contents
    vector&lt;string&gt; vistr;
    ifstream fin("strings.dat", ios_base::in | ios_base::binary);
    if (!fin.is_open())
    {
        cerr &lt;&lt; "Could not open file for input.\n";
        exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
    }
    GetStrs(fin, vistr);
    cout &lt;&lt; "\nHere are the strings read from the file:\n";
    for_each(vistr.begin(), vistr.end(), ShowStr);

    return 0;
}

					  </pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Note that the file is opened in binary format and that the intention is that I/O be accomplished with <tt>read()</tt> and <tt>write()</tt>. Quite a bit remains to be done:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">Write a <tt>void ShowStr(const string &amp;)</tt> function that displays a <tt>string</tt> object followed by a newline character.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Write a <tt>Store</tt> functor that writes string information to a file. The <tt>Store</tt> constructor should specify an <tt>ifstream</tt> object, and the overloaded <tt>operator()(const string &amp;)</tt>
 should indicate the string to write. A workable plan is to first write 
the string’s size to the file and then write the string contents. For 
example, if <tt>len</tt> holds the string size, you could use this:</p><div class="docText"><pre>os.write((char *)&amp;len, sizeof(std::size_t));  // store length
os.write(s.data(), len);                      // store characters</pre></div><p class="docList">The <tt>data()</tt> member returns a pointer to an array that holds the characters in the string. It’s similar to the <tt>c_str()</tt> member except that the latter appends a null character.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Write a <tt>GetStrs()</tt> function that recovers information from the file. It can use <tt>read()</tt>
 to obtain the size of a string and then use a loop to read that many 
characters from the file, appending them to an initially empty temporary
 string. Because a string’s data is private, you have to use a class 
method to get data into the string rather than read directly into it.</p></li></ul></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
<p class="docText"> </p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
