<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>C++11 Features Revisited</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">C++11 Features Revisited</h3>
<p class="docText">By now you may have lost track of the many C++11 changes we already have encountered. This section reviews them briefly.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EILAM">New Types</h4>
<p class="docText">C++11 adds the <tt>long long</tt> and <tt>unsigned long long</tt> types to support 64-bit integers (or wider) and the <tt>char16_t</tt> and <tt>char32_t</tt> types to support 16-bit and 32-bit character representations, respectively. It also adds the “raw” string. Chapter 3, “Dealing with Data,” discusses these additions.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ECMAM">Uniform Initialization</h4>
<p class="docText">C++11 extends the applicability of the brace-enclosed list (<span class="docEmphasis">list-initialization</span>)
 so that it can be used with all built-in types and with user-defined 
types (that is, class objects). The list can be used either with or 
without the <tt>=</tt> sign:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int x = {5};
double y {2.75};
short quar[5] {4,5,2,76,1};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Also the list-initialization syntax can be used in <tt>new</tt> expressions:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int * ar = new int [4] {2,4,6,7};         // C++11</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">With class objects, a braced list can be used instead of a parenthesized list to invoke a constructor:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>class Stump
{
private:
    int roots;
    double weight;
public:
     Stump(int r, double w) : roots(r), weight(w) {}
};
Stump s1(3,15.6);      // old style
Stump s2{5, 43.4};     // C++11
Stump s3 = {4, 32.1};  // C++11</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">However, if a class has a constructor whose argument is a <tt>std::initializer_list</tt>
 template, then only that constructor can use the list-initialization 
form. Various aspects of list-initialization were discussed in Chapters 3, 4, 9, 10, and 16.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EOPAM">Narrowing</h5>
<p class="docText">The initialization-list 
syntax provides protection against narrowing—that is, against assigning a
 numeric value to a numeric type not capable of holding that value. 
Ordinary initialization allows you to do things that may or may not make
 sense:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>char c1 = 1.57e27;   // double-to-char, undefined behavior
char c2 = 459585821; // int-to-char, undefined behavior</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">If you use 
initialization-list syntax, however, the compiler disallows type 
conversions that attempt to store values in a type “narrower” than the 
value:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>char c1 {1.57e27};    // double-to-char, compile-time error
char c2 = {459585821};// int-to-char,out of range, compile-time error</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">However, conversions to 
wider types are allowed. Also a conversion to a narrower type is allowed
 if the value is within the range allowed by the type:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>char c1 {66};     // int-to-char, in range, allowed
double c2 = {66}; // int-to-double, allowed</pre></div><br/>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ESQAM"><tt>std::initializer_list</tt></h5>
<p class="docText">C++11 provides an <tt>initializer_list</tt> template class (discussed in Chapter 16, “The <tt>string</tt>
 Class and the Standard Template Library”) that can be used as a 
constructor argument. If a class has such a constructor, the brace 
syntax can be used only with that constructor. The items in the list 
should all be of the same type or else be convertible to the same type. 
The STL containers provide constructors with <tt>initializer_list</tt> arguments:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>vector&lt;int&gt; a1(10);    // uninitialized vector with 10 elements
vector&lt;int&gt; a2{10};    // initializer-list, a2 has 1 element set to 10
vector&lt;int&gt; a3{4,6,1}; // 3 elements set to 4,6,1</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>initializer_list</tt> header file provides support for this template class. The class has <tt>begin()</tt> and <tt>end()</tt> member functions specifying the range of the list. You can use an <tt>initializer_list</tt> argument for regular functions as well as for constructors:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>#include &lt;initializer_list&gt;
double sum(std::initializer_list&lt;double&gt; il);
int main()
{
   double total = sum({2.5,3.1,4});  // 4 converted to 4.0
...
}
double sum(std::initializer_list&lt;double&gt; il)
{
    double tot = 0;
    for (auto p = il.begin(); p !=il.end(); p++)
        tot += *p;
    return tot;
}</pre></div><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EVTAM">Declarations</h4>
<p class="docText">C++11 implements several features that simplify declarations, particularly for situations arising when templates are used.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E6TAM"><tt>auto</tt></h5>
<p class="docText">C++11 strips the keyword <tt>auto</tt> of its former meaning as a storage class specifier (Chapter 9, “Memory Models and Namespaces”) and puts it to use (Chapter 3)
 to implement automatic type deduction, provided that an explicit 
initializer is given. The compiler sets the type of the variable to the 
type of the initialization value:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>auto maton = 112;  // maton is type int
auto pt = &amp;maton;  // pt is type int *
double fm(double, int);
auto pf = fm;      // pf is type double (*)(double,int)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>auto</tt> keyword can simplify template declarations too. For example, if <tt>il</tt> is an object of type <tt>std::initializer_list&lt;double&gt;</tt>, you can replace</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>for (std::initializer_list&lt;double&gt;::iterator p = il.begin();
                                             p !=il.end(); p++)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">with this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>for (auto p = il.begin(); p !=il.end(); p++)</pre></div><br/>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ETWAM"><tt>decltype</tt></h5>
<p class="docText">The <tt>decltype</tt> keyword creates a variable of the type indicated by an expression. The following statement means “make <tt>y</tt> the same type as <tt>x</tt>,” where <tt>x</tt> is an expression:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>decltype(x) y;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here are a couple of examples:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>double x;
int n;
decltype(x*n) q; // q same type as x*n, i.e., double
decltype(&amp;x) pd; // pd same as &amp;x, i.e., double *</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This is particularly useful in template definitions, when the type may not be determined until a specific instantiation is made:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template&lt;typename T, typename U)
void ef(T t, U u)
{
    decltype(T*U) tu;
    ...
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here, <tt>tu</tt> is of whatever type results from the operation <tt>T*U</tt>, assuming that operation is defined. For example, if <tt>T</tt> is <tt>char</tt> and <tt>U</tt> is <tt>short</tt>, <tt>tu</tt> would be of type <tt>int</tt> because of the automatic integer promotions that take place in integer arithmetic.</p>
<p class="docText">The workings of <tt>decltype</tt> are more complicated than those of <tt>auto</tt>, and the resulting types can be references and can be <tt>const</tt>-qualified, depending on the expressions used. Here are some more examples:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int j = 3;
int &amp;k = j
const int &amp;n = j;
decltype(n) i1;      // i1 type const int &amp;
decltype(j) i2;      // i2 type int
decltype((j)) i3;    // i3 type int &amp;
decltype(k + 1) i4;  // i4 type int</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">See Chapter 8, “Adventures in Functions,” for the rules that lead to these results.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ENZAM">Trailing Return Type</h5>
<p class="docText">C++11
 introduces a new syntax for declaring functions, one in which the 
return type comes after the function name and parameter list instead of 
before them:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>double f1(double, int);          // traditional syntax
auto f2(double, int) -&gt; double;  // new syntax, return type is double</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The new syntax may look like a 
step backwards in readability for the usual function declarations, but 
it does make it possible to use <tt>decltype</tt> to specify template function return types:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template&lt;typename T, typename U)
auto eff(T t, U u) -&gt; decltype(T*U)
{
    ...
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The problem that’s addressed here is that <tt>T</tt> and <tt>U</tt> are not in scope before the compiler reads the <tt>eff</tt> parameter list, so any use of <tt>decltype</tt> has to come after the parameter list. The new syntax makes that possible.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EE3AM">Template Aliases: <tt>using =</tt></h5>
<p class="docText">It’s handy to be able to create aliases for long or complex type identifiers. C++ already had <tt>typedef</tt> for that purpose:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>typedef std::vector&lt;std::string&gt;::iterator itType;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">C++11 provides a second syntax (discussed in Chapter 14, “Reusing Code in C++”) for creating aliases:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>using itType = std::vector&lt;std::string&gt;::iterator;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The difference is that the new syntax also can be used for partial template specializations, whereas <tt>typedef</tt> can’t:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template&lt;typename T&gt;
  using arr12 = std::array&lt;T,12&gt;;  // template for multiple aliases</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This statement specializes the <tt>array&lt;T,int&gt;</tt> template by setting the <tt>int</tt> parameter to <tt>12</tt>. For instance, consider these declarations:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>std::array&lt;double, 12&gt; a1;
std::array&lt;std::string, 12&gt; a2;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">They can be replaced with the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>arr12&lt;double&gt; a1;
arr12(std::string&gt; a2;</pre></div><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ER5AM"><tt>nullptr</tt></h4>
<p class="docText">The
 null pointer is a pointer guaranteed not to point to valid data. 
Traditionally, C++ has represented this pointer in source code with <tt>0</tt>, although the internal representation could be different. This raises some problems because it makes <tt>0</tt> both a pointer constant and an integer constant. As discussed in Chapter 12, “Classes and Dynamic Memory Allocation,” C++11 introduces the keyword <tt>nullptr</tt>
 to represent the null pointer; it is a pointer type and not convertible
 to an integer type. For backward compatibility, C++ still allows the 
use of <tt>0</tt>, and the expression <tt>nullptr == 0</tt> evaluates as <tt>true</tt>, but using <tt>nullptr</tt> instead of <tt>0</tt> provides better type safety. For example, the value <tt>0</tt> could be passed to a function accepting an <tt>int</tt> argument, but the compiler will identify an attempt to pass <tt>nullptr</tt> to such a function as an error. So, for clarity and added safety, use <tt>nullptr</tt> if your compiler accepts it.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EVBBM">Smart Pointers</h4>
<p class="docText">A program that uses <tt>new</tt> to allocate memory from the heap (or free store) should use <tt>delete</tt> to free that memory when it no longer is needed. Earlier, C++ introduced the <tt>auto_ptr</tt>
 smart pointer to help automate the process. Subsequent programming 
experience, particularly with the STL, indicated that something more 
sophisticated was needed. Guided by the experience of programmers and by
 solutions provided by the BOOST library, C++11 deprecates <tt>auto_ptr</tt> and introduces three new smart pointer types: <tt>unique_ptr</tt>, <tt>shared_ptr</tt>, and <tt>weak_ptr</tt>. Chapter 16 discusses the first two.</p>
<p class="docText">All the new smart pointers have been designed to work with STL containers and with move semantics.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EXCBM">Exception Specification Changes</h4>
<p class="docText">C++ provides a syntax for specifying what exceptions, if any, a function may throw (refer to Chapter 15, “Friends, Exceptions, and More”):</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>void f501(int) throw(bad_dog);    // can throw type bad_dog exception
void f733(long long) throw();     // doesn't throw an exception</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">As with <tt>auto_ptr</tt>,
 the collective experience of the C++ programming community is that, in 
practice, exception specifications didn’t work as well as intended. 
Thus, the C++11 standard deprecates exception specifications. However, 
the standards committee felt that there is some value in documenting 
that a function does not throw an exception, and it added the keyword <tt>noexcept</tt> for this purpose:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>void f875(short, short) noexcept; // doesn't throw an exception</pre></div><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E5DBM">Scoped Enumerations</h4>
<p class="docText">Traditional C++ 
enumerations provide a way to create named constants. However, they come
 with a rather low level of type checking. Also the scope for 
enumeration names is the scope that encloses the enumeration definition,
 which means that two enumerations defined
 in the same scope must not have enumeration members with the same name.
 Finally, enumerations may not be completely portable because different 
implementations may choose to use different underlying types. C++11 
introduces a variant of enumerations that addresses these problems. The 
new form is indicated by using <tt>class</tt> or <tt>struct</tt> in the definition:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>enum Old1 {yes, no, maybe};                        // traditional form
enum class New1 {never, sometimes, often, always}; // new form
enum struct New2 {never, lever, sever};            // new form</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The new forms avoid name conflicts by requiring explicit scoping. Thus, you would use <tt>New1::never</tt> and <tt>New2::never</tt> to identify those particular enumerations. Chapter 10, “Objects and Classes,” provides more details.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EKGBM">Class Changes</h4>
<p class="docText">C++11 makes several 
changes to simplify and expand class design. These include ways to allow
 constructors to call one another and to be inherited, better ways to 
control method access, and move constructors and assignment operators, 
all of which will be covered in this chapter. Meanwhile, let’s review 
the changes that have been discussed previously.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EUGBM"><tt>explicit</tt> Conversion Operators</h5>
<p class="docText">One of the exciting aspects 
in the early days of C++ was the ease with which automatic conversions 
for classes could be established. One of the realizations that grew as 
programming experience accumulated was that automatic type conversions 
could lead to problems in the form of unexpected conversions. C++ then 
addressed one aspect of the problem by introducing the keyword <tt>explicit</tt> to suppress automatic conversions invoked by one-argument constructors:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>class Plebe
{
    Plebe(int);   // automatic int-to-plebe conversion
    explicit Plebe(double);  // requires explicit use
    ...
};
...
Plebe a, b;
a = 5;           // implicit conversion, call Plebe(5)
b = 0.5;         // not allowed
b = Plebe(0.5);  // explicit conversion</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">C++11 extends the use of <tt>explicit</tt> (discussed in Chapter 11, “Working with Classes”) so that conversion functions can be treated similarly:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>class Plebe
{
...
// conversion functions
    operator int() const;
    explicit operator double() const;
    ...
};
...
Plebe a, b;
int n = a;       // int-to-Plebe automatic conversion
double x = b;    // not allowed
x = double(b);   // explicit conversion, allowed</pre></div><br/>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E4HBM">Member In-Class Initialization</h5>
<p class="docText">Many
 first-time users of C++ have wondered why they can’t initialize members
 simply by providing values in the class definition. Now they (and you) 
can. The syntax looks like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>class Session
{
    int mem1 = 10;         // in-class initialization
    double mem2 {1966.54}; // in-class initialization
    short mem3;
public:
    Session(){}                                                      // #1
    Session(short s) : mem3(s) {}                                    // #2
    Session(int n, double d, short s) : mem1(n), mem2(d), mem3(s) {} // #3
...
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">You can use the equal sign or 
the brace forms of initialization, but not the parenthesized version. 
The result is the same as if you provided the first two constructors 
with member initialization list entries for <tt>mem1</tt> and <tt>mem2</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Session() : mem1(10), mem2(1966.54) {}
Session(short s) : mem1(10), mem2(1966.54), mem3(s) {}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Note how using in-class 
initialization avoids having to duplicate code in the constructors, thus
 reducing work and the number of opportunities for error and boredom for
 the programmer.</p>
<p class="docText">These default values 
are overridden by a constructor that supplies values in the member 
initialization list, so the third constructor overrides the in-class 
member initialization.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EBKBM">Template and STL Changes</h4>
<p class="docText">C++11 makes several 
changes extending the usability of templates in general and the Standard
 Template Library in particular. Some are in the library itself; others 
relate to ease of use. In this chapter we’ve already mentioned template 
aliases and the STL-friendly smart pointers.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ELKBM">Range-based <tt>for</tt> Loop</h5>
<p class="docText">The range-based <tt>for</tt> loop (discussed in Chapter 5, “Loops and Relational Expressions,” and Chapter 16) simplifies writing loops for built-in arrays and for classes, such as <tt>std::string</tt> and the STL containers, that have <tt>begin()</tt> and <tt>end()</tt> methods identifying a range. The loop applies the indicated action to each element in the array or container:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>double prices[5] = {4.99, 10.99, 6.87, 7.99, 8.49};
for (double x : prices)
    std::cout &lt;&lt; x &lt;&lt; std::endl;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here, <tt>x</tt> takes on the value of each element in <tt>prices</tt> in turn. The type of <tt>x</tt> should match the type of the array element. An easier and safer way of doing this is to use <tt>auto</tt> to declare <tt>x</tt>; the compiler will deduce the type from the information in the <tt>prices</tt> declaration:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>double prices[5] = {4.99, 10.99, 6.87, 7.99, 8.49};
for (auto x : prices)
    std::cout &lt;&lt; x &lt;&lt; std::endl;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">If your intent is to have the loop modify elements of the array or container, use a reference type:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>std::vector&lt;int&gt; vi(6);
for (auto &amp; x: vi)         // use a reference if loop alters contents
    x = std::rand();</pre></div><br/>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EIPBM">New STL Containers</h5>
<p class="docText">C++11 adds <tt>forward_list</tt>, <tt>unordered_map</tt>, <tt>unordered_multimap</tt>, <tt>unordered_set</tt>, and <tt>unordered_multiset</tt> to its collection of STL containers (see Chapter 16). The <tt>forward_list</tt>
 container is a singly linked list that can be traversed in just one 
direction; it’s simpler and more economical of space than the doubly 
linked <tt>list</tt> container. The other four containers support implementing hash tables.</p>
<p class="docText">C++11 also adds the <tt>array</tt> template (discussed in Chapter 4, “Compound Types,” and Chapter 16), for which one specifies an element type and a fixed number of elements:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>std::array&lt;int,360&gt; ar;  // array of 360 ints</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This template 
class does not satisfy all the usual template requirements. For example,
 because the size is fixed, you can’t use any method, such as <tt>put_back()</tt>, that changes the size of a container. But <tt>array</tt> does have the <tt>begin()</tt> and <tt>end()</tt> methods, which allow you to use many of the range-based STL algorithms with array objects.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ELRBM">New STL Methods</h5>
<p class="docText">C++11 adds <tt>cbegin()</tt> and <tt>cend()</tt> to the list of STL methods. Like <tt>begin()</tt> and <tt>end()</tt>,
 the new methods return iterators to the first element and to one past 
the last element of a container, thus specifying a range encompassing 
all the elements. In addition, the new methods treat the elements as if they were <tt>const</tt>. Similarly, <tt>crbegin()</tt> and <tt>crend()</tt> are <tt>const</tt> versions of <tt>rbegin()</tt> and <tt>rend()</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">More significantly, STL
 containers now have move constructors and move assignment operators in 
addition to the traditional copy constructors and regular assignment 
operators. This chapter describes move semantics later.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ELVBM"><tt>valarray</tt> Upgrade</h5>
<p class="docText">The <tt>valarray</tt> template was developed independently of the STL, and its original design precluded using range-based STL algorithms with <tt>valarray</tt> objects. C++11 adds two functions, <tt>begin()</tt> and <tt>end()</tt>, that each take a <tt>valarray</tt> argument. They return iterators to the first and one past the last element of a <tt>valarray</tt> object, allowing one to use range-based STL algorithms (see Chapter 16).</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ELWBM"><tt>export</tt> Departs</h5>
<p class="docText">C++98 introduced the <tt>export</tt>
 keyword in the hopes of creating a way to separate template definitions
 into interface files containing the prototypes and template 
declarations and implementation files containing the template function 
and methods definitions. This proved to be impractical, and C++11 ends 
that roll for export. However, the Standard retains <tt>export</tt> as a keyword for possible future use.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E4WBM">Angle Brackets</h5>
<p class="docText">To avoid confusion with the <tt>&gt;&gt;</tt> operator, C++ required a space between the brackets in nested template declarations:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>std::vector&lt;std::list&lt;int&gt; &gt; vl; // &gt;&gt; not ok</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">C++11 removes that requirement:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>std::vector&lt;std::list&lt;int&gt;&gt; vl; //  &gt;&gt; ok in C++11</pre></div><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E3XBM">The rvalue Reference</h4>
<p class="docText">The traditional C++ reference, now called an <span class="docEmphasis">lvalue reference</span>,
 binds an identifier to an lvalue. An lvalue is an expression, such as a
 variable name or a dereferenced pointer, that represents data for which
 the program can obtain an address. Originally, an lvalue was one that 
could appear on the left side of an assignment statement, but the advent
 of the <tt>const</tt> modifier allowed for constructs that cannot be assigned to but which are still addressable:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int n;
int * pt = new int;
const int b = 101;  // can't assign to b, but &amp;b is valid
int &amp; rn = n;       // n identifies datum at address &amp;n
int &amp; rt = *pt;     // *pt identifies datum at address pt
const int &amp; rb = b; // b identifies const datum at address &amp;b</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">C++11 adds the rvalue reference (discussed in Chapter 8), indicated by using <tt>&amp;&amp;,</tt> that can bind to rvalues—that is, values that can appear on the right-hand side of an assignment
 expression but for which one cannot apply the address operator. 
Examples include literal constants (aside from C-style strings, which 
evaluate as addresses), expressions such as <tt>x+y</tt>, and function return values, providing the function does not return a reference:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int x = 10;
int y = 23;
int &amp;&amp; r1 = 13;
int &amp;&amp; r2 = x + y;
double &amp;&amp; r3 = std::sqrt(2.0);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Note that what <tt>r2</tt> really binds to is the value to which <tt>x + y</tt> evaluates at that time. That is, <tt>r2</tt> binds to the value <tt>23</tt>, and <tt>r2</tt> is unaffected by subsequent changes to <tt>x</tt> or <tt>y</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Interestingly, binding an rvalue
 to an rvalue reference results in the value being stored in a location 
whose address can be taken. That is, although you can’t apply the <tt>&amp;</tt> operator to <tt>13</tt>, you can apply it to <tt>r1</tt>. This binding of the data to particular addresses is what makes it possible to access the data through the rvalue references.</p>
<p class="docText">Listing 18.1 provides a short example illustrating some of these points about rvalue references.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EW1BM">Listing 18.1. <tt>rvref.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>// rvref.cpp -- simple uses of rvalue references
#include &lt;iostream&gt;

inline double f(double tf) {return 5.0*(tf-32.0)/9.0;};
int main()
{
    using namespace std;
    double tc = 21.5;
    double &amp;&amp; rd1 = 7.07;
    double &amp;&amp; rd2 = 1.8 * tc + 32.0;
    double &amp;&amp; rd3 = f(rd2);
    cout &lt;&lt; " tc value and address: " &lt;&lt; tc &lt;&lt;", " &lt;&lt; &amp;tc &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "rd1 value and address: " &lt;&lt; rd1 &lt;&lt;", " &lt;&lt; &amp;rd1 &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "rd2 value and address: " &lt;&lt; rd2 &lt;&lt;", " &lt;&lt; &amp;rd2 &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "rd3 value and address: " &lt;&lt; rd3 &lt;&lt;", " &lt;&lt; &amp;rd3 &lt;&lt; endl;
    cin.get();
    return 0;
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here is a sample output:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre> tc value and address: 21.5, 002FF744
rd1 value and address: 7.07, 002FF728
rd2 value and address: 70.7, 002FF70C
rd3 value and address: 21.5, 002FF6F0</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">One of the main reasons for introducing the rvalue reference is to implement move semantics, the next topic in this chapter.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
