<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>New Class Features</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">New Class Features</h3>
<p class="docText">C++11 adds several 
features to classes in addition to those already mentioned in this 
chapter—that is, explicit conversion operators and in-class member 
initialization.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EKVAM">Special Member Functions</h4>
<p class="docText">C++11 adds two more <span class="docEmphasis">special member functions</span>
 (the move constructor and the move assignment operator) to four 
previous ones (the default constructor, the copy constructor, the copy 
assignment operator, and the destructor). These are member functions 
that the compiler provides automatically, subject to a variety of 
conditions.</p>
<p class="docText">The default constructor, recall, 
is a constructor that can be called with no arguments. The compiler 
provides one if you fail to define any constructors for the class. This 
default version of a default constructor is termed the <span class="docEmphasis">defaulted</span>
 default constructor. The defaulted default constructor leaves members 
of the built-in types uninitialized, and it invokes the default 
constructors for members that are class objects.</p>
<p class="docText">Also the compiler provides a 
defaulted copy constructor if you don’t provide one and if your code 
requires its use, and it now provides a defaulted move constructor if 
you don’t provide one and if your code requires its use. If the class 
name is <tt>Someclass</tt>, these two defaulted constructors have the following prototypes:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Someclass::Someclass(const Someclass &amp;);  // defaulted copy constructor
Someclass::Someclass(Someclass &amp;&amp;);       // defaulted move constructor</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In similar 
circumstances, the compiler provides a defaulted copy assignment 
operator and a defaulted move assignment operator with the following 
prototypes:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedWidth">Someclass &amp; Someclass::operator(const Someclass &amp;);  // defaulted copy assignment
Someclass &amp; Someclass::operator(Someclass &amp;&amp;);       // defaulted move assignment

					  </pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Finally, the compiler provides a destructor if you don’t.</p>
<p class="docText">There are various exceptions
 to this description. If you do provide a destructor or a copy 
constructor or a copy assignment operator, the compiler does not 
automatically provide a move constructor or a move assignment operator. 
If you do provide a move constructor or a move assignment operator, the 
compiler does not automatically provide a copy constructor or a copy 
assignment operator.</p>
<p class="docText">Also
 the defaulted move constructor and defaulted move assignment operator 
work similarly to their copy counterparts, doing memberwise 
initialization and copying for built-in types. For members that are 
class objects, constructors and assignment operators for those classes 
are used as if the parameters were rvalues. This, in turn, invokes move 
constructors and assignment operators, if defined, and copy constructors
 and assignment operators otherwise, if defined.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EDYAM">Defaulted and Deleted Methods</h4>
<p class="docText">C++11 provides more 
control over which methods are used. Suppose that you wish to use a 
defaulted function that, due to circumstances, isn’t created 
automatically. For example, if you provide a move constructor, then the 
default constructor, the copy constructor, and the copy assignment 
operator are not provided. In that case, you can use the keyword <tt>default</tt> to explicitly declare the defaulted versions of these methods:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedWidth">class Someclass
{
public:
   Someclass(Someclass &amp;&amp;);
   Someclass() = default;      // use compiler-generated default constructor
   Someclass(const Someclass &amp;) = default;
   Someclass &amp; operator=(const Someclass &amp;) = default;
...
};

					  </pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The compiler provides the same constructor that it would have provided automatically had you not provided the move constructor.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>delete</tt>
 keyword, on the other hand, can be used to prevent the compiler from 
using a particular method. For example, to prevent an object from being 
copied, you can disable the copy constructor and copy assignment 
operator:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedWidth">class Someclass
{
public:
   Someclass() = default;      // use compiler-generated default constructor
// disable copy constructor and copy assignment operator:
   Someclass(const Someclass &amp;) = delete;
   Someclass &amp; operator=(const Someclass &amp;) = delete;
// use compiler-generated move constructor and move assignment operator:
   Someclass(Someclass &amp;&amp;) = default;
   Someclass &amp; operator=(Someclass &amp;&amp;) = default;
   Someclass &amp; operator+(const Someclass &amp;) const;
...
};

					  </pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">You may recall (from Chapter 12) that you can disable copying by placing the copy constructor and assignment operator in the <tt>private</tt> section of a class. But using <tt>delete</tt> is a less devious and more easily understood way to accomplish that end.</p>
<p class="docText">What is the effect of 
disabling copy methods while enabling move methods? Recall that an 
rvalue reference, such as used by move operations, binds only to rvalue 
expressions. This implies the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Someclass one;
Someclass two;
Someclass three(one);       // not allowed, one an lvalue
Someclass four(one + two);  // allowed, expression is an rvalue</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Only the six special member functions can be defaulted, but you can use <tt>delete</tt> with any member function. One possible use is to disable certain conversions. Suppose, for example, that the <tt>Someclass</tt> class has a method with a type <tt>double</tt> parameter:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>class Someclass
{
public:
...
    void redo(double);
...
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Then suppose we have the following code:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Someclass sc;
sc.redo(5);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>int</tt> value <tt>5</tt> will be promoted to <tt>5.0</tt>, and the <tt>redo()</tt> method will execute.</p>
<p class="docText">Now suppose the <tt>Someclass</tt> definition is modified thusly:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>class Someclass
{
public:
...
    void redo(double);
    void redo(int) = delete;
...
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In this case, the method call <tt>sc.redo(5)</tt> matches the <tt>redo(int)</tt> prototype. The compiler will detect that fact and also detect that <tt>redo(int)</tt>
 is deleted, and it will then flag the call as a compile-time error. 
This illustrates an important fact about deleted functions. They do 
exist as far as function look-up is concerned, but to use them is an 
error.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EZ3AM">Delegating Constructors</h4>
<p class="docText">If you provide a class with 
several constructors, you may find yourself writing the same code over 
and over. That is, some of the constructors may require you to duplicate
 code already
 present in other constructors. To make coding simpler and more 
reliable, C++11 allows to you use a constructor as part of the 
definition of another constructor. This process is termed <span class="docEmphasis">delegation</span>
 because one constructor temporarily delegates responsibility to another
 constructor to work on the object it is constructing. Delegation uses a
 variant of the member initialization list syntax:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>class Notes {
    int k;
    double x;
    std::string st;
public:
    Notes();
    Notes(int);
    Notes(int, double);
    Notes(int, double, std::string);
};
Notes::Notes(int kk, double xx, std::string stt) : k(kk),
             x(xx), st(stt) {/*do stuff*/}
Notes::Notes() : Notes(0, 0.01, "Oh") {/* do other stuff*/}
Notes::Notes(int kk) : Notes(kk, 0.01, "Ah") {/* do yet other stuff*/ }
Notes::Notes( int kk, double xx ) : Notes(kk, xx, "Uh") {/* ditto*/ }</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The default constructor, 
for example, uses the first constructor in the list to initialize the 
data members and to also do whatever the body of that constructor 
requests. Then it finishes up doing whatever its own body requests.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EY5AM">Inheriting Constructors</h4>
<p class="docText">In another move to simplify
 coding, C++11 provides a mechanism for derived classes to inherit 
constructors from the base class. C++98 already had a syntax for making 
functions from a namespace available:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>namespace Box
{
    int fn(int) { ... }
    int fn(double) { ... }
    int fn(const char *) { ... }
}
using Box::fn;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This makes all the overloaded <tt>fn</tt>
 functions available. The same technique works for making nonspecial 
member functions of a base class available to a derived class. For 
example, consider the following code:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>class C1
{
...
public:
...
    int fn(int j) { ... }
    double fn(double w) { ... }
    void fn(const char * s) { ... }
};
class C2 : public C1
{
...
public:
...
    using C1::fn;
    double fn(double) { ... };
};
...
C2 c2;
int k = c2.fn(3);       // uses C1::fn(int)
double z = c2.fn(2.4);  // uses C2::fn(double)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>using</tt> declaration in <tt>C2</tt> makes the three <tt>fn()</tt> methods in <tt>C1</tt> available to a <tt>C2</tt> object. However, the <tt>fn(double)</tt> method defined in <tt>C2</tt> is chosen over the one from <tt>C1</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">C++11 brings the same technique 
to constructors. All the constructors of the base class, other than the 
default, copy, and move constructors, are brought in as possible 
constructors for the derived class, but the ones that have function 
signatures matching derived class constructors aren’t used:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedHeight">class BS
{
    int q;
    double w;
public:
    BS() : q(0), w(0) {}
    BS(int k) : q(k), w(100) {}
    BS(double x) : q(-1), w(x) {}
    B0(int k, double x) : q(k), w(x) {}
    void Show() const {std::cout &lt;&lt; q &lt;&lt;", " &lt;&lt; w &lt;&lt; '\n';}
};

class DR : public BS
{
    short j;
public:
    using BS::BS;
    DR() : j(-100) {}      // DR needs its own default constructor
    DR(double x) : BS(2*x), j(int(x)) {}
    DR(int i) : j(-2), BS(i, 0.5* i) {}
    void Show() const {std::cout &lt;&lt; j &lt;&lt; ", "; BS::Show();}
};
int main()
{
    DR o1;          // use DR()
    DR o2(18.81);   // use DR(double) instead of BS(double)
    DR o3(10, 1.8); // use BS(int, double)
    ...
}

					  </pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Because there is no <tt>DR(int, double)</tt> constructor, the inherited <tt>BS(int, double)</tt> is used for <tt>03</tt>.
 Note that an inherited base-class constructor only initializes 
base-class members. If you need to initialize derived class members too,
 you can use the member list initialization syntax instead of 
inheritance:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>    DR(int i, int k, double x) : j(i), BS(k,x) {}</pre></div><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E2CBM">Managing Virtual Methods: <tt>override</tt> and <tt>final</tt></h4>
<p class="docText">Virtual 
methods are an important component of implementing polymorphic class 
hierarchies, in which a base class reference or pointer can invoke the 
particular method appropriate to the type of object referred to. Virtual
 methods do pose some programming pitfalls. For instance, suppose the 
base class declares a particular virtual method, and you decide to 
provide a different version for a derived class. This is called <span class="docEmphasis">overriding</span> the old version. But, as discussed in Chapter 13, “Class Inheritance,” if you mismatch the function signature, you hide rather than override the old version:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>class Action
{
    int a;
public:
    Action(int i = 0) : a(i) {}
    int val() const {return a;};
    virtual void f(char ch) const { std::cout &lt;&lt; val() &lt;&lt; ch &lt;&lt; "\n";}
};
class Bingo : public Action
{
public:
    Bingo(int i = 0) : Action(i) {}
    virtual void f(char * ch) const { std::cout &lt;&lt; val() &lt;&lt; ch  &lt;&lt; "!\n"; }
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Because class <tt>Bingo</tt> uses <tt>f(char * ch)</tt> instead of <tt>f(char ch)</tt>, <tt>f(char ch)</tt> is hidden to a <tt>Bingo</tt> object. This prevents a program from using code like the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Bingo b(10);
b.f('@');  // works for Action object, fails for Bingo object</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">With C++11, you can use the virtual specifier <tt>override</tt>
 to indicate that you intend to override a virtual function. Place it 
after the parameter list. If your declaration does not match a base 
method, the compiler objects. Thus, the following version of <tt>Bingo::f()</tt> would generate a compile-time error message:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>virtual void f(char * ch) const override { std::cout &lt;&lt; val()
                                          &lt;&lt; ch  &lt;&lt; "!\n"; }</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">For example, Microsoft Visual C++ 2010 has this to say:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>method with override specifier 'override' did not override any
base class methods</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The specifier <tt>final</tt> 
addresses a different issue. You may find that you want to prohibit 
derived classes from overriding a particular virtual method. To do so, 
place <tt>final</tt> after the parameter list. For example, the following code would prevent classes based on <tt>Action</tt> to redefine the <tt>f()</tt> function:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>virtual void f(char ch) const final { std::cout &lt;&lt; val() &lt;&lt; ch &lt;&lt; "\n";}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The specifiers <tt>override</tt> and <tt>final</tt>
 do not quite have the status of keywords. Instead, they are labeled 
“identifiers with special meaning.” This means that the compiler uses 
the context in which they appear to decide if they have a special 
meaning. In other contexts, they can be used as ordinary identifiers 
(for example, as variable names or enumerations).</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
