<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Variadic Templates</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Variadic Templates</h3>
<p class="docText">Variadic templates 
provide a means to create template functions and template classes that 
accept a variable number of arguments. We’ll look at variadic template 
functions here. For example, suppose we want a function that will accept
 any number of parameters of any type, providing the type can be 
displayed with <tt>cout</tt>, and display the arguments as a comma-separated list. For instance, consider this code:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int n = 14;
double x = 2.71828;
std::string mr = "Mr. String objects!";
show_list(n, x);
show_list(x*x, '!', 7, mr);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The goal is to be able to define <tt>show_list()</tt> in such a way that this code would compile and lead to this output:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>14, 2.71828
7.38905, !, 7, Mr. String objects!</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">There are a few key points to understand in order to create variadic templates:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">Template parameter packs</p></li><li><p class="docList">Function parameter packs</p></li><li><p class="docList">Unpacking a pack</p></li><li><p class="docList">Recursion</p></li></ul>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EY5AM">Template and Function Parameter Packs</h4>
<p class="docText">As a starting point to 
see how parameter packs work, let’s consider a simple template function,
 one that displays a list consisting of just one item:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template&lt;typename T&gt;
void show_list0(T value)
{
    std::cout &lt;&lt; value &lt;&lt; ", ";
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This definition has two parameter lists. The template parameter list is just <tt>T</tt>. The function parameter list is just <tt>value</tt>. A function call such as the following sets <tt>T</tt> in the template parameter list to <tt>double</tt> and <tt>value</tt> in the function parameter list to <tt>2.15</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>show_list0(2.15);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">C++11 provides an ellipsis 
meta-operator that enables you to declare an identifier for a template 
parameter pack, essentially a list of types. Similarly, it lets you 
declare an identifier for a function parameter pack, essentially a list 
of values. The syntax looks like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template&lt;typename... Args&gt;    // Args is a template parameter pack
void show_list1(Args... args) // args is a function parameter pack
{
...
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText"><tt>Args</tt> is a template parameter pack, and <tt>args</tt>
 is a function parameter pack. (As with other parameter names, any name 
satisfying C++ identifier rules can be used for these packs.) The 
difference between <tt>Args</tt> and <tt>T</tt> is that <tt>T</tt> matches a single type, whereas <tt>Args</tt> matches any number of types, including none. Consider the following function call:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>show_list1('S', 80, "sweet", 4.5);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In this case the parameter pack <tt>Args</tt> contains the types matching the parameters in the function call: <tt>char</tt>, <tt>int</tt>, <tt>const char *</tt>, and <tt>double</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Next, much as</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>void show_list0(T value)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">states that <tt>value</tt> is of type <tt>T</tt>, the line</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>void show_list1(Args... args)  // args is a function parameter pack</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">states that <tt>args</tt> is of type <tt>Args</tt>. More precisely, this means that the function pack <tt>args</tt> contains a list of values that matches the list of types in the template pack <tt>Args</tt>, both in type and in number. In this case, <tt>args</tt> contains the values <tt>'S'</tt>, <tt>80</tt>, <tt>"sweet"</tt>, and <tt>4.5</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">In this manner, the <tt>show_list1()</tt> variadic template can match any of the following function calls:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>show_list1();
show_list1(99);
show_list1(88.5, "cat");
show_list1(2,4,6,8, "who do we", std::string("appreciate));</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In the last case, the <tt>Args</tt> template parameter pack would contain the types <tt>int</tt>, <tt>int</tt>, <tt>int</tt>, <tt>int</tt>, <tt>const char *</tt>, and <tt>std::string</tt>, and the <tt>args</tt> function parameter pack would contain the matching values <tt>2</tt>, <tt>4</tt>, <tt>6</tt>, <tt>8</tt>, <tt>"who do we"</tt>, and <tt>std::string("appreciate")</tt>.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EMGBM">Unpacking the Packs</h4>
<p class="docText">But how can the function 
access the contents of these packs? There is no indexing feature. That 
is, you can’t use something like <tt>Args[2]</tt> to access the third type in a pack. Instead,
 you can unpack the pack by placing the ellipsis to the right of the 
function parameter pack name. For example, consider the following flawed
 code:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template&lt;typename... Args&gt;    // Args is a template parameter pack
void show_list1(Args... args) // args is a function parameter pack
{
    show_list1(args...); // passes unpacked args to show_list1()
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">What does this mean, and why is it flawed? Suppose we have this function call:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>show_list1(5,'L',0.5);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The call packs the values <tt>5</tt>, <tt>'L'</tt>, and <tt>0.5</tt> into <tt>args</tt>. Within the function, the call</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>show_list1(args...);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">expands to the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>show_list1(5,'L',0.5);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">That is, the single entity <tt>args</tt> is replaced by the three values stored within the pack. So the notation <tt>args...</tt>
 expands to a list of discrete function arguments. Unfortunately, the 
new call is the same as the original function call, so it will call 
itself again with the same arguments, initiating an infinite and futile 
recursion. (That would be the flaw.)</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EBKBM">Using Recursion in Variadic Template Functions</h4>
<p class="docText">Although recursion dooms <tt>show_list1()</tt>
 aspirations to be a useful function, properly used recursion provides a
 solution to accessing pack items. The central idea is to unpack the 
function parameter pack, process the first item in the list, then pass 
the rest of the list on to a recursive call, and so on, until the list 
is empty. As usual with recursion, it’s important to make sure that 
there is a call that terminates the recursion. Part of the trick 
involves changing the template heading to this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template&lt;typename T, typename... Args&gt;
void show_list3( T value, Args... args)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">With this definition, the first argument to <tt>show_list3()</tt> gets picked up as type <tt>T</tt> and is assigned to <tt>value</tt>. The remaining arguments are picked up by <tt>Args</tt> and <tt>args</tt>. This allows the function to do something with <tt>value</tt>, such as display it. Then the remaining arguments, in the form <tt>args...</tt>, can be passed to a recursive call of <tt>show_list3()</tt>. Each recursive call then prints a value and passes on a shortened list until the list is exhausted.</p>
<p class="docText">Listing 18.9 presents an implementation that, although not perfect, illustrates the technique.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ERLBM">Listing 18.9. <tt>variadic1.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>//variadic1.cpp -- using recursion to unpack a parameter pack
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;
// definition for 0 parameters -- terminating call
void show_list3() {}

// definition for 1 or more parameters
template&lt;typename T, typename... Args&gt;
void show_list3( T value, Args... args)
{
    std::cout &lt;&lt; value &lt;&lt; ", ";
    show_list3(args...);
}

int main()
{
    int n = 14;
    double x = 2.71828;
    std::string mr = "Mr. String objects!";
    show_list3(n, x);
    show_list3(x*x, '!', 7, mr);
    return 0;
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E6LBM">Program Notes</h5>
<p class="docText">Consider this function call:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>show_list3(x*x, '!', 7, mr);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The first argument matches <tt>T</tt> to <tt>double</tt> and <tt>value</tt> to <tt>x*x</tt>. The remaining three types (<tt>char</tt>, <tt>int</tt>, and <tt>std::string</tt>) are placed in the <tt>Args</tt> pack, and the remaining three values (<tt>'!'</tt>, <tt>7</tt>, and <tt>mr</tt>) are placed in the <tt>args</tt> pack.</p>
<p class="docText">Next, the <tt>show_list3()</tt> function uses <tt>cout</tt> to display <tt>value</tt> (approximately <tt>7.38905</tt>) and the string <tt>", "</tt>. That takes care of displaying the first item in the list.</p>
<p class="docText">Next comes this call:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>show_list3(args...);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This, given the expansion of <tt>args...</tt>, is the same as the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>show_list3('!', 7, mr);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">As promised, the list is shortened by one item. This time <tt>T</tt> and <tt>value</tt> become <tt>char</tt> and <tt>'!'</tt>, and the remaining two types and values are packed into <tt>Args</tt> and <tt>args</tt>, respectively. The next recursive call processes these reduced packs. Finally, when <tt>args</tt> is empty, the version of <tt>show_list3()</tt> with no arguments is called, and the process terminates.</p>
<p class="docText">Here is the output for the two function calls in Listing 18.5:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>14, 2.71828, 7.38905, !, 7, Mr. String objects!,</pre></div><br/>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ERPBM">Improvements</h5>
<p class="docText">We can improve <tt>show_list3()</tt>
 with a couple of changes. As it stands, the function displays a comma 
after every item in the list, but it would be better to omit the comma 
after the last item. This can be accomplished by adding a template for 
just one item and having it behave slightly differently from the general
 template:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>// definition for 1 parameter
template&lt;typename T&gt;
void show_list3(T value)
{
    std::cout &lt;&lt; value &lt;&lt; '\n';
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Thus, when the <tt>args</tt>
 pack is reduced to one item, this version is called, and it prints a 
newline instead of a comma. Because it lacks a recursive call to <tt>show_list3()</tt>, it also terminates the recursion.</p>
<p class="docText">The second area for 
improvement is that the current version passes everything by value. This
 is okay for the simple types we’ve used, but it’s inefficient for 
classes of large size that might be printable by <tt>cout</tt>. It would be better to use <tt>const</tt> references. With variadic templates, you can impose a <span class="docEmphasis">pattern</span> on the unpacking. Instead of using</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>show_list3(Args... args);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">you can use this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>show_list3(const Args&amp;... args);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">That will cause each function parameter to have the <tt>const&amp;</tt> pattern applied. Thus, instead of <tt>std::string mr</tt>, the final paring of parameters becomes <tt>const std::string&amp; mr</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Listing 18.10 incorporates these two changes.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ECSBM">Listing 18.10. <tt>variadic2.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// variadic2.cpp
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;

// definition for 0 parameters
void show_list() {}

// definition for 1 parameter
template&lt;typename T&gt;
void show_list(const T&amp; value)
{
    std::cout &lt;&lt; value &lt;&lt; '\n';
}

// definition for 2 or more parameters
template&lt;typename T, typename... Args&gt;
void show_list(const T&amp; value, const Args&amp;... args)
{
    std::cout &lt;&lt; value &lt;&lt; ", ";
    show_list(args...);
}

int main()
{
    int n = 14;
    double x = 2.71828;
    std::string mr = "Mr. String objects!";
    show_list(n, x);
    show_list(x*x, '!', 7, mr);
    return 0;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here is the output:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>14, 2.71828
7.38905, !, 7, Mr. String objects!</pre></div><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
