<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>More C++11 Features</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">More C++11 Features</h3>
<p class="docText">C++11 adds many more features
 than this book can cover, even ignoring the fact that many of them are 
not widely implemented at the time this book was written. Still, it’s 
worth taking a quick look at the nature of some of these features.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EW6AM">Concurrent Programming</h4>
<p class="docText">These days it’s easier to 
improve computer performance by adding processors than it is to increase
 processor speed. So computers with dual-core or quad-core processors or
 even with multiple multicore processors are the norm. This enables 
computers to run multiple threads of execution simultaneously. One 
processor might handle a video download while another processor handles 
your spreadsheet.</p>
<p class="docText">Some activities can benefit
 from multiple threads, whereas others don’t. Consider searching for 
something in a singly linked list. A program has to start at the 
beginning and follow the links, in order, to the end of the list; 
there’s nothing much a second thread could do to help. Now consider an 
unsorted array. Using the random access feature of arrays, you could 
start one thread from the beginning of the array and one from the 
middle, thus halving the search time.</p>
<p class="docText">Multiple threads do raise many
 problems. What happens if one thread hangs up or if two threads try to 
access the same data simultaneously? C++11 addresses concurrency by defining a memory model that supports threaded execution, by adding the keyword <tt>thread_local</tt>, and by providing library support. The keyword <tt>thread_local</tt>
 is used to declare variables having static storage duration relative to
 a particular thread; that is, they expire when the thread in which they
 are defined expires.</p>
<p class="docText">The library support consists of the atomic operations library, which specifies the <tt>atomic</tt> header file, and the thread support library, which specifies the <tt>thread</tt>, <tt>mutex</tt>, <tt>condition_variable</tt>, and <tt>future</tt> header files.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EFCBM">Library Additions</h4>
<p class="docText">C++11 adds several specialized libraries. An extensible random number library, supported by the <tt>random</tt> header file, provides much more extensive and sophisticated random number facilities than <tt>rand()</tt>. For example, it offers a choice of random-number generators and a choice of distributions, including uniform (like <tt>rand()</tt>), binomial, normal, and several others.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>chrono</tt> header file supports ways to deal with time duration.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>tuple</tt> header file supports the <tt>tuple</tt> template. A <tt>tuple</tt> object is a generalization of a <tt>pair</tt> object. Whereas a <tt>pair</tt> object can hold two values whose types need not be the same, a <tt>tuple</tt> can hold an arbitrary number of items of different types.</p>
<p class="docText">The compile-time rational arithmetic library, supported by the <tt>ratio</tt>
 header file, allows the exact representation of any rational number 
whose numerator and denominator can be represented by the widest integer
 type. It also provides arithmetic operations for these numbers.</p>
<p class="docText">One of the most interesting additions is a regular expression library, supported by the <tt>regex</tt>
 header file. A regular expression specifies a pattern that can be used 
to match contents in a text string. For example, a bracket expression 
matches any single character in the brackets. Thus, <tt>[cCkK]</tt> matches a single <tt>c</tt>, <tt>C</tt>, <tt>k</tt>, or <tt>K</tt>, and <tt>[cCkK]at</tt> matches the words <tt>cat</tt>, <tt>Cat</tt>, <tt>kat</tt>, and <tt>Kat</tt>. Other patterns include <tt>\d</tt> for a digit, <tt>\w</tt> for a word, <tt>\t</tt>
 for a tab, and many, many others. The fact that a backslash has a 
special meaning in C++ as the first character in an escape sequence 
requires a pattern like <tt>\d\t\w\d</tt> (that is, digit-tab-word-digit) to be written as the string literal <tt>"\\d\\t\\w\\d"</tt>, using <tt>\\</tt> to represent <tt>\</tt>. This is one reason the raw string was introduced (see Chapter 4); it enables you to write the same pattern as <tt>R"\d\t\w\t"</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Unix utilities such as <tt>ed</tt>, <tt>grep</tt>, and <tt>awk</tt>
 used regular expressions, and the interpreted language Perl extended 
their capabilities. The C++ regular expressions library allows you to 
choose from several flavors of regular expressions.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EIFBM">Low-Level Programming</h4>
<p class="docText">The “low level” in 
low-level programming refers to the level of abstraction, not to the 
quality of the programming. Low level means closer to the bits and bytes
 of computer hardware and machine language. Low-level programming is 
important for embedded programming and for increasing the efficiency of 
some operations. C++11 offers some aids to those who do low-level 
programming.</p>
<p class="docText">One
 change is relaxing the constraints on what qualifies as “Plain Old 
Data,” or POD. In C++98, a POD is a scalar type (a one-value type, such 
as <tt>int</tt> or <tt>double</tt>) or an 
old-fashioned structure with no constructors, base classes, private 
data, virtual functions, and so on. The idea was that a POD is something
 for which it’s safe to make a byte-by-byte copy. That is still the 
idea, but C++11 recognizes one can remove some the C++98 restrictions 
and still have a viable POD. This helps low-level programming because 
some low-level operations, such as using the C functions for byte-wise 
copying or binary I/O, required PODs.</p>
<p class="docText">Another change is making 
unions more flexible by allowing them to have members that have 
constructors and destructors, but with some restrictions on other 
properties, for example, not allowing virtual functions. Unions are 
often utilized when minimizing the amount of memory used is important, 
and the new rules allow programmers to bring more flexibility and 
capability to these situations.</p>
<p class="docText">C++11 addresses memory 
alignment issues. Computer systems can restrict how data is stored in 
memory. For example, one system might require that a <tt>double</tt>
 value be stored at an even-numbered memory location, whereas another 
might require the storage to begin at a location that is a multiple of 
eight. The <tt>alignof()</tt> operator (see Appendix E, “Other Operators”) provides information on the alignment requirements for a type or object. The <tt>alignas</tt> specifier provides some control over the alignment used.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>constexpr</tt> 
mechanism expands the ability of the compiler to evaluate during compile
 time expressions that evaluate to a constant value. The low-level 
aspect of this is to allow <tt>const</tt> variables to be stored in read-only memory, which can be particularly useful in embedded programming. (Variables, <tt>const</tt> or otherwise, that are initialized during runtime, are stored in random-access memory.)</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EEIBM">Miscellaneous</h4>
<p class="docText">C++11 follows the lead of
 C99 in allowing for implementation-dependent extended integer types. 
Such types, for example, could be used on a system with 128-bit 
integers. Extended types are supported in the C header file <tt>stdint.h</tt> and in the C++ version, <tt>cstdint</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">C++11 provides a mechanism, the <span class="docEmphasis">literal operator</span>, for creating user-defined literals. Using this mechanism, for instance, one can define binary literals, such as <tt>1001001b</tt>, which the corresponding literal operator will convert to an integer value.</p>
<p class="docText">C++ has a debugging tool called <tt>assert</tt>. It is a macro that checks during runtime if an assertion is true and which displays a message and calls <tt>abort()</tt>
 if the assertion is false. The assertion would typically be about 
something the programmer thinks should be true at that point in the 
program. C++11 adds the keyword <tt>static_assert</tt>,
 which can be used to test assertions during compile time. The primary 
motivation is to make it easier to debug templates for which 
instantiation takes place during compile time, not runtime.</p>
<p class="docText">C++11 provides more support
 for metaprogramming, which is creating programs that create or modify 
other programs or even themselves. In C++ this can be done during 
compile time using templates.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
