<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Language Change</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Language Change</h3>
<p class="docText">How
 does a computer language grow and evolve? after usage of C++ became 
sufficiently widespread, the need for an international standard became 
clear, and control of the language essentially passed to a standards 
committee—first the ANSI committee, then the joint ISO/ANSI committees, 
and currently to ISO/IEC JTC1/SC22/WG21 (the C++ Standards Committee). 
ISO is the International Organization for Standardization, IEC is the 
International Electrotechnical Commission, JTC1 is the Joint Technical 
Committee 1 of the preceding two organizations, SC22 is the JTC1 
subcommittee for programming languages, and WG21 is the SC22 working 
group for C++.</p>
<p class="docText">The committee considers 
defect reports and proposals for changes in and extensions to the 
language, and it attempts to reach a consensus. This is neither a speedy
 nor a simple process. <span class="docEmphasis">The Design and Evolution of C++</span>
 (Stroustrup, Addison-Wesley, 1994) provides some insight on this 
subject. Anyway, the possibly contentious and ponderous dynamics of a 
consensus-seeking committee are not the best way to encourage the 
blossoming of a multitude of innovations. Nor is that the proper role of
 a standards committee.</p>
<p class="docText">But with C++ there is a 
second avenue for change: direct action by the creative C++ programming 
community. Programmers can’t independently change the language, but they
 can create useful libraries. Well-designed libraries can extend the 
usefulness and versatility of the language, increase reliability, and 
make programming easier and more enjoyable. Libraries build on the 
existing features of a language, so they don’t require any additional 
compiler support. And if they are implemented through templates, they 
can be distributed as text files in the form of header files.</p>
<p class="docText">One example of this sort of 
change is the STL, primarily created by Alexander Stepanov, and made 
freely available by Hewlett-Packard. Its success with the programming 
community made it a candidate for the first ANSI/ISO standard. Indeed, 
its design influenced other aspects of the emerging standard.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EBDBM">The Boost Project</h4>
<p class="docText">More recently, the Boost 
library has become an important part of C++ programming and has had a 
significant influence on C++11. The Boost project began in 1998 when 
Beman Dawes, the then-chairman of the C++ library working group, brought
 together a few other members of the group and developed a plan to 
generate new libraries outside the confines of the standards committee. 
The basic idea was to provide a website that acts as an open forum for 
people to post free C++ libraries. The project provides guidelines for 
licensing and programming practices, and it requires peer review of 
proposed libraries. The result is a group of highly praised and highly 
used libraries. The project provides an environment in which the 
programming community can test and evaluate programming ideas and 
provide feedback.</p>
<p class="docText">Boost has over 100 libraries at the time of this writing, and they can be downloaded as a set from www.boost.org, as can documentation. Most of the libraries can be used by including the appropriate header files.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ESDBM">The TR1</h4>
<p class="docText">The
 Technical Report 1, or TR1, was a project of a subset of the C++ 
Standards committee. TR1 was a compilation of library extensions that 
were compatible with the C++98 standard, but which were not required by 
the standard. They were candidates for the next iteration of the 
standard. The TR1 library enabled the C++ community to test the 
worthiness of the library components. Thus, when the standards committee
 incorporated most of TR1 into C++11, it was dealing with known and 
proven libraries.</p>
<p class="docText">The Boost libraries contributed much to TR1. Examples include the <tt>tuple</tt> template class, the <tt>array</tt> template class, the <tt>bind</tt> and <tt>function</tt> templates, smart pointers (with some name and implementation changes), <tt>static_assert</tt>, the <tt>regex</tt> library, and the <tt>random</tt>
 library. Furthermore, the experiences of the Boost community and of 
users of the TR1 led to actual language changes, such as the deprecation
 of exception specifications, and the addition of variadic templates, 
which allows for a better implementation of the <tt>tuple</tt> template class and of the <tt>function</tt> template.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EUFBM">Using Boost</h4>
<p class="docText">Although you now can access 
many Boost-developed libraries as part of the C++11 standard, there are 
many additional Boost libraries to explore. For example, <tt>lexical_cast</tt> from the Conversion library provides simple conversions between numeric and string types. The syntax is modeled after <tt>dynamic_cast</tt>, in which you provide the target type as a template parameter. Listing 18.11 shows a simple example.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EKGBM">Listing 18.11. <tt>lexcast.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>// lexcast.cpp -- simple cast from float to string
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;
#include "boost/lexical_cast.hpp"
int main()
{
    using namespace std;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Enter your weight: ";
    float weight;
    cin &gt;&gt; weight;
    string gain = "A 10% increase raises ";
    string wt = boost::lexical_cast&lt;string&gt;(weight);
    gain = gain + wt + " to ";  // string operator+()
    weight = 1.1 * weight;
    gain = gain + boost::lexical_cast&lt;string&gt;(weight) + ".";
    cout &lt;&lt; gain &lt;&lt; endl;
    return 0;
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here are a couple of sample runs:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Enter your weight: <span class="docEmphStrong">150</span>
A 10% increase raises 150 to 165.

Enter your weight: <span class="docEmphStrong">156</span>
A 10% increase raises 156 to 171.600006.</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The second sample run shows one of the limitations of <tt>lexical_cast</tt>;
 it doesn’t provide fine control over floating-point formatting. To get 
that, you need to use the more elaborate incore formatting facilities 
discussed in Chapter 17, “Input, Output, and Files.”</p>
<p class="docText">You also can use <tt>lexical_cast</tt> to convert strings to numeric values.</p>
<p class="docText">Obviously, there is much, 
much more to Boost. For example, the Any library allows you to store 
(and recover) a heterogeneous collection of values and objects of 
different types in an STL container, using the <tt>Any</tt>
 template as a wrapper for the various values. The Boost Math library 
extends the list of math functions beyond that of the standard math 
library. The Boost Filesystem library facilitates writing code that is 
portable across platforms using different file systems. You can refer to
 the Boost website (www.boost.org)
 to get more information about the contents of the library and how to 
add it to various platforms. Also some C++ distributions, such as the 
one from Cygwin, come with the Boost library included.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
