<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>What Now?</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">What Now?</h3>
<p class="docText">If you have worked your way 
through this book, you should have a good grasp of the rules of C++. 
However, that’s just the beginning in learning this language. The second
 stage is learning to use the language effectively, and that is the 
longer journey. The best situation is to be in a work or learning 
environment that brings you into contact with good C++ code and 
programmers. Also now that you know C++, you can read books that 
concentrate on more advanced topics and on object-oriented programming. Appendix H, “Selected Readings and Internet Resources,” lists some of these resources.</p>
<p class="docText">One promise of OOP is to 
facilitate the development and enhance the reliability of large 
projects. One of the essential activities of the OOP approach is to 
invent the classes that represent the situation (called the <span class="docEmphasis">problem domain</span>)
 that you are modeling. Because real problems are often complex, finding
 a suitable set of classes can be challenging. Creating a complex system
 from scratch usually doesn’t work; instead, it’s best to take an 
iterative, evolutionary approach. Toward this end, practitioners in the 
field have developed several techniques and strategies. In particular, 
it’s important to do as much of the iteration and evolution in the 
analysis and design stages as possible instead of writing and rewriting 
actual code.</p>
<p class="docText">Two common techniques are <span class="docEmphasis">use-case analysis</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">CRC cards</span>.
 In use-case analysis, the development team lists the common ways, or 
scenarios, in which it expects the final system to be used, identifying 
elements, actions, and responsibilities that suggest possible classes
 and class features. Using CRC (short for 
Class/Responsibilities/Collaborators) cards is a simple way to analyze 
such scenarios. The development team creates an index card for each 
class. On the card are the class name; class responsibilities, such as 
data represented and actions performed; and class collaborators, such as
 other classes with which the class must interact. Then the team can 
walk through a scenario, using the interface provided by the CRC cards. 
This can lead to suggestions for new classes, shifts of responsibility, 
and so on.</p>
<p class="docText">On a larger scale are the 
systematic methods for working on entire projects. The most recent of 
these is the Unified Modeling Language (UML). UML is not a programming 
language; rather, it is a language for representing the analysis and 
design of a programming project. It was developed by Grady Booch, Jim 
Rumbaugh, and Ivar Jacobson, who had been the primary developers of 
three earlier modeling languages: the Booch Method, OMT (Object Modeling
 Technique), and OOSE (Object-Oriented Software Engineering), 
respectively. UML is the evolutionary successor of these three, and 
ISO/IEC published a standard for it in 2005.</p>
<p class="docText">In addition to increasing your 
understanding of C++ in general, you might want to learn about specific 
class libraries. Microsoft and Embarcadero, for example, offer extensive
 class libraries to facilitate programming for the Windows environment, 
and Apple Xcode offers similar facilities for Apple products, including 
the iPhone.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
