<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Summary</h3>
<p class="docText">The new C++ standard adds many 
features to the language. Some are intended to make the language easier 
to learn and easier to use. Examples include uniform braced list 
initialization, automatic type deduction with <tt>auto</tt>, in-class member initialization, and the range-based <tt>for</tt>
 loop. Other changes expand and clarify class design. These changes 
include defaulted and deleted methods, delegated constructors, inherited
 constructors, and the <tt>override</tt> and <tt>final</tt> specifiers for clarifying virtual function design.</p>
<p class="docText">Several additions aim to make 
programs and the act programming more efficient. Lambda expressions 
provide advantages over function pointers and functors. The <tt>function</tt>
 template can be used to reduce the number of template instantiations. 
The rvalue reference enables move semantics and allows for move 
constructors and move assignment operators.</p>
<p class="docText">Other changes 
deliver better ways of doing things. Scoped enumerations provide better 
control over the scope and underlying types for enumerations. The <tt>unique_ptr</tt> and <tt>shared_ptr</tt> templates provide better ways of handling memory allocated with <tt>new</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Template design has been enhanced with the addition of <tt>decltype</tt>, trailing return types, template aliases, and variadic templates.</p>
<p class="docText">Modified rules for unions, PODs, the <tt>alignof()</tt> operator, the <tt>alignas</tt> specifier, and the <tt>constexpr</tt> mechanism support low-level programming.</p>
<p class="docText">Several library additions, including the new STL classes, the <tt>tuple</tt> template, and the <tt>regex</tt> library, provide solutions to many common programming needs.</p>
<p class="docText">The new standard addresses concurrent programming with the <tt>thread_local</tt> keyword and the <tt>atomic</tt> library.</p>
<p class="docText">All in all, the new standard improves the usability and reliability of C++, both for novices and for experts.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
