<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Programming Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Programming Exercises</h3>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1.</b></td><td class="docText">Here is part of a short program:
<div class="docText"><pre>int main()
{
    using namespace std;
 // list of double deduced from list contents
    auto q = average_list({15.4, 10.7, 9.0});
    cout &lt;&lt; q &lt;&lt; endl;
// list of int deduced from list contents
    cout &lt;&lt; average_list({20, 30, 19, 17, 45, 38} ) &lt;&lt; endl;
// forced list of double
    auto ad = average_list&lt;double&gt;({'A', 70, 65.33});
    cout &lt;&lt; ad &lt;&lt; endl;
    return 0;
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Complete the program by supplying the <tt>average_list()</tt> function. It should be a template function, with the type parameter being used to specify the kind of <tt>initialized_list</tt> template to be used as the function parameter and also to give the function return type.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2.</b></td><td class="docText">Here is declaration for the <tt>Cpmv</tt> class:
<div class="docText"><pre>class Cpmv
{
public:
    struct Info
    {
        std::string qcode;
        std::string zcode;
    };
private:
    Info *pi;
public:
    Cpmv();
    Cpmv(std::string q, std::string z);
    Cpmv(const Cpmv &amp; cp);
    Cpmv(Cpmv &amp;&amp; mv);
    ~Cpmv();
    Cpmv &amp; operator=(const Cpmv &amp; cp);
    Cpmv &amp; operator=(Cpmv &amp;&amp; mv);
    Cpmv operator+(const Cpmv &amp; obj) const;
    void Display() const;
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>operator+()</tt> function should create an object whose <tt>qcode</tt> and <tt>zcode</tt>
 members concatenate the corresponding members of the operands. Provide 
code that implements move semantics for the move constructor and the 
move assignment operator. Write a program that uses all the methods. For
 testing purposes, make the various methods verbose so that you can see 
when they are used.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3.</b></td><td class="docText">Write and test a variadic template function <tt>sum_values()</tt>
 that accepts an arbitrarily long list of arguments with numeric values 
(they can be a mixture of types) and returns the sum as a <tt>long double</tt> value.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4.</b></td><td class="docText">Redo Listing 16.5 using lambdas. In particular, replace the <tt>outint()</tt> function with a named lambda and replace the two uses of a functor with two anonymous lambda expressions.</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
<p class="docText"> </p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
