<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>C++ Library Reserved Names</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">C++ Library Reserved Names</h3>
<p class="docText">The compiler won’t let you
 use keywords and alternative tokens as names. There’s another class of 
forbidden names for which the protection is not as absolute—<span class="docEmphasis">reserved names</span>,
 which are names reserved for use by the C++ library. If you use one of 
these as an identifier, the effect is undefined. That is, it might 
generate a compiler error, it might generate a warning, it might cause a
 program to run incorrectly, or it might cause no problems at all.</p>
<p class="docText">The C++ language 
reserves macro names used in a library header file. If a program 
includes a particular header file, then you shouldn’t use the names of 
macros defined in that header (or in headers included by that header 
file, and so on) for other purposes. For example, if you include the 
header file <tt>&lt;climits&gt;</tt> directly or indirectly, you shouldn’t use <tt>CHAR_BIT</tt> as an identifier because that name is already used as a macro in that header file.</p>
<p class="docText">The C++ language 
reserves names beginning with two underscores or a single underscore 
followed by an uppercase letter for any use, and it reserves names 
beginning with a single underscore for use as a global variable. So 
don’t create names such as <tt>__gink</tt> or <tt>__Lynx</tt> in any case and names such as <tt>_lynx</tt> in the global namespace.</p>
<p class="docText">The
 C++ language reserves names declared with external linkage in library 
header files. For functions, this includes the function signature (name 
and parameter list). For example, suppose you have this code:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>#include &lt;cmath&gt;
using namespace std;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In this case, the function signature <tt>tan(double)</tt> is reserved. That means your program should not declare a function that has this prototype:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int tan(double);  // don't do it</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This doesn’t match the library <tt>tan()</tt> prototype, which returns type <tt>double</tt>, but it does match the signature portion. However, it would be okay to have the following prototype:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>char * tan(char *);  // ok</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">That’s because even though it matches the <tt>tan()</tt> identifier, it doesn’t match the signature.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
