<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Identifiers With Special Meaning</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Identifiers With Special Meaning</h3>
<p class="docText">The C++ community is loath to add
 new keywords because they could conflict with existing code. That is 
why the standards committee has, for example, repurposed the <tt>auto</tt> keyword and provided more than one use for others, such as <tt>virtual</tt> and <tt>delete</tt>.
 C++11 has implemented another way to avoid adding keywords, and that is
 to use identifiers with special meanings. These identifiers, override 
and final, are not keywords, but they are used to implement language 
features. The compiler uses the context to determine whether they are 
used as ordinary identifiers or as language features:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>class F
{
    int final;                          // #1
public:
...
    virtual void unfold() {...} = final;  // #2
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here the <tt>final</tt> on line #1 is used as an ordinary identifier, and the <tt>final</tt> on line #2 is used to invoke a language feature. The two uses do not conflict with one another.</p>
<p class="docText">Also C++ has many 
identifiers that commonly appear in programs but that are not reserved. 
These include header file names, library function names, and <tt>main</tt>,
 the name of the required function with which execution begins. As long 
as you avoid namespace conflicts, you can use these identifiers for 
other purposes, although there is no reason to do so. That is, nothing 
except a lack of common sense prevents code like the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>// allowable but silly
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
int iostream(int a);
int main ()
{
    std::
cout &lt;&lt; iostream(5) &lt;&lt; '\n';
    return 0;
}

int iostream(int a)
{
    int main = a + 1;
    int cout = a -1;
    return main*cout;
}</pre></div><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
