<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Member Dereferencing Operators</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Member Dereferencing Operators</h3>
<p class="docText">C++ lets you define pointers 
to members of a class. These pointers involve special notations to 
declare them and to dereference them. To see what’s involved, let’s 
start with a sample class:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>class Example
{
private:
    int feet;
    int inches;
public:
    Example();
    Example(int ft);
    ~Example();
    void show_in() const;
    void show_ft() const;
    void use_ptr() const;
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Consider the <tt>inches</tt> member. Without a specific object, <tt>inches</tt> is a label. That is, the class defines <tt>inches</tt> as a member identifier, but you need an object before you actually have memory allocated:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Example ob;  // now ob.inches exists</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Thus, you specify an actual memory location by using the identifier <tt>inches</tt>
 in conjunction with a specific object. (In a member function, you can 
omit the name of the object, but then the object is understood to be the
 one pointed to by the pointer.)</p>
<p class="docText">C++ lets you define a member pointer to the identifier <tt>inches</tt> like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int Example::*pt = &amp;Example::inches;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This pointer is a bit different from a regular pointer. A regular pointer points to a specific memory location. But the <tt>pt</tt> pointer doesn’t point to a specific memory location because the declaration doesn’t identify a specific object. Instead, the pointer <tt>pt</tt> identifies the location of <tt>inches</tt> member within any <tt>Example</tt> object. Like the identifier <tt>inches</tt>, <tt>pt</tt> is designed to be used in conjunction with an object identifier. In essence, the expression <tt>*pt</tt> assumes the role of the identifier <tt>inches</tt>. Therefore, you can use an object identifier to specify which object to access and the <tt>pt</tt> pointer to specify the <tt>inches</tt> member of that object. For example, a class method could use this code:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int Example::*pt = &amp;Example::inches;
Example ob1;
Example ob2;
Example *pq = new Example;
cout &lt;&lt; ob1.*pt &lt;&lt; endl; // display inches member of ob1
cout &lt;&lt; ob2.*pt &lt;&lt; endl; // display inches member of ob2
cout &lt;&lt; po-&gt;*pt &lt;&lt; endl; // display inches member of *po</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here <tt>.*</tt> and <tt>-&gt;*</tt> are <span class="docEmphasis">member dereferencing operators</span>. When you have a particular object, such as <tt>ob1</tt>, then <tt>ob1.*pi</tt> identifies the <tt>inches</tt> member of the <tt>ob1</tt> object. Similarly, <tt>pq-&gt;*pt</tt> identifies the <tt>inches</tt> member of an object pointed to by <tt>pq</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Changing the object in the preceding example changes which <tt>inches</tt> member is used. But you can also change the <tt>pt</tt> pointer itself. Because <tt>feet</tt> is of the same type as <tt>inches</tt>, you can reset <tt>pt</tt> to point to the <tt>feet</tt> member instead of the <tt>inches</tt> member; then <tt>ob1.*pt</tt> will refer to the feet member of <tt>ob1</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>pt = &amp;Example::feet;      // reset pt
cout &lt;&lt; ob1.*pt &lt;&lt; endl;  // display feet member of ob1</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In essence, the combination <tt>*pt</tt> takes the place of a member name and can be used to identify different member names (of the same type).</p>
<p class="docText">You can also use member 
pointers to identify member functions. The syntax for this is relatively
 involved. Recall that declaring a pointer to an ordinary type <tt>void</tt> function with no arguments looks like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>void (*pf)();  // pf points to a function</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Declaring a pointer to a member 
function has to indicate that the function belongs to a particular 
class. Here, for instance, is how to declare a pointer to an <tt>Example</tt> class method:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>void (Example::*pf)() const;  // pf points to an Example member function</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This indicates that <tt>pf</tt> can be used the same places that <tt>Example</tt> method can be used. Note that the term <tt>Example:</tt> <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>:</tt></span><tt>*pf</tt> has to be in parentheses. You can assign the address of a particular member function to this pointer:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>pf = &amp;Example::show_inches;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Note that unlike in the case 
of ordinary function pointer assignment, here you can and must use the 
address operator. Having made this assignment, you can then use an 
object to invoke the member function:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Example ob3(20);
(ob3.*pf)();     // invoke show_inches() using the ob3 object</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">You need to enclose the entire <tt>ob3.*pf</tt> construction in parentheses in order to clearly identify the expression as representing a function name.</p>
<p class="docText">Because <tt>show_feet()</tt> has the same prototype form as <tt>show_inches()</tt>, you can use <tt>pf</tt> to access the <tt>show_feet()</tt> method, too:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>pf = &amp;Example::show_feet;
(ob3.*pf)();     // apply show_feet() to the ob3 object</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The class definition presented in Listing E.1 has a <tt>use_ptr()</tt> method that uses member pointers to access both data members and function members of the <tt>Example</tt> class.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EW5BM">Listing E.1. <tt>memb_pt.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// memb_pt.cpp -- dereferencing pointers to class members
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
using namespace std;

class Example
{
private:
    int feet;
    int inches;
public:
    Example();
    Example(int ft);
    ~Example();
    void show_in() const;
    void show_ft() const;
    void use_ptr() const;
};

Example::Example()
{
    feet = 0;
    inches = 0;
}

Example::Example(int ft)
{
    feet = ft;
    inches = 12 * feet;
}

Example::~Example()
{
}

void Example::show_in() const
{
    cout &lt;&lt; inches &lt;&lt; " inches\n";
}

void Example::show_ft() const
{
    cout &lt;&lt; feet &lt;&lt; " feet\n";
}

void Example::use_ptr() const
{
    Example yard(3);
    int Example::*pt;
    pt = &amp;Example::inches;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Set pt to &amp;Example::inches:\n";
    cout &lt;&lt; "this-&gt;pt: " &lt;&lt; this-&gt;*pt &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "yard.*pt: " &lt;&lt; yard.*pt &lt;&lt; endl;
    pt = &amp;Example::feet;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Set pt to &amp;Example::feet:\n";
    cout &lt;&lt; "this-&gt;pt: " &lt;&lt; this-&gt;*pt &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "yard.*pt: " &lt;&lt; yard.*pt &lt;&lt; endl;
    void (Example::*pf)() const;
    pf = &amp;Example::show_in;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Set pf to &amp;Example::show_in:\n";
    cout &lt;&lt; "Using (this-&gt;*pf)(): ";
    (this-&gt;*pf)();
    cout &lt;&lt; "Using (yard.*pf)(): ";
    (yard.*pf)();
}

int main()
{
    Example car(15);
    Example van(20);
    Example garage;

    cout &lt;&lt; "car.use_ptr() output:\n";
    car.use_ptr();
    cout &lt;&lt; "\nvan.use_ptr() output:\n";
    van.use_ptr();

    return 0;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here is a sample run of the program in Listing E.1:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>car.use_ptr() output:
Set pt to &amp;Example::inches:
this-&gt;pt: 180
yard.*pt: 36
Set pt to &amp;Example::feet:
this-&gt;pt: 15
yard.*pt: 3
Set pf to &amp;Example::show_in:
Using (this-&gt;*pf)(): 180 inches
Using (yard.*pf)(): 36 inches

van.use_ptr() output:
Set pt to &amp;Example::inches:
this-&gt;pt: 240
yard.*pt: 36
Set pt to &amp;Example::feet:
this-&gt;pt: 20
yard.*pt: 3
Set pf to &amp;Example::show_in:
Using (this-&gt;*pf)(): 240 inches
Using (yard.*pf)(): 36 inches</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This example assigned pointer 
values at compile time. In a more sophisticated class, you can use 
member pointers to data members and methods for which the exact member 
associated with the pointer is determined at runtime.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
