<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>alignof (C++11)</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000"><tt>alignof</tt> (C++11)</h3>
<p class="docText">Computer systems can have restrictions on how data is stored in memory. For example, one system might require that a <tt>double</tt>
 value be stored at an even-numbered memory location, whereas another 
might require the storage to begin at a location that is a multiple of 
eight. The <tt>alignof</tt> operator takes a type 
as an argument and returns an integer indicating the required alignment 
type. Alignment requirements can, for example, determine how information
 is arranged within a structure, as Listing E.2 shows.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EVYBM">Listing E.2. <tt>align.cpp</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// align.cpp -- checking alignment
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
using namespace std;
struct things1
{
    char ch;
    int a;
    double x;

};
struct things2
{

    int a;
    double x;
    char ch;
};

int main()
{
    things1 th1;
    things2 th2;
    cout &lt;&lt; "char alignment: " &lt;&lt; alignof(char) &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "int alignment: " &lt;&lt; alignof(int) &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "double alignment: " &lt;&lt; alignof(double) &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "things1 alignment: " &lt;&lt; alignof(things1) &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "things2 alignment: " &lt;&lt; alignof(things2) &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "things1 size: " &lt;&lt; sizeof(things1) &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "things2 size: " &lt;&lt; sizeof(things2) &lt;&lt; endl;
    return 0;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here is the output on one system:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>char alignment: 1
int alignment: 4
double alignment: 8
things1 alignment: 8
things2 alignment: 8
things1 size: 16
things2 size: 24</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Both structures have an 
alignment requirement of eight. One implication is that the structure 
size should be a multiple of eight so that one can create arrays of 
structures with each element adjacent to the next and also starting on 
an alignment boundary that’s a multiple of eight. The individual members
 of each structure in Listing E.2
 use only a total of 13 bits, but the requirement of using a multiple of
 eight bits means each structure needs some padding in it. Next, within 
each structure, the <tt>double</tt> member needs to align on a multiple of eight. The different arrangement of members within <tt>things1</tt> and <tt>things2</tt> results in <tt>things2</tt> needing more internal padding to make the boundaries come out right.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
