<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>F. The string Template Class</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h2 class="docAppendixTitle" id="title-ID0EXZBM">F. The <tt>string</tt> Template Class</h2>
<p class="docText">Much of this appendix is a bit technical. However, if you just want to know the capabilities of the <tt>string</tt> template class, you can concentrate on the descriptions of the various <tt>string</tt> methods.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>string</tt> class is based on a template definition:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template&lt;class charT, class traits = char_traits&lt;charT&gt;,
                 class Allocator = allocator&lt;charT&gt; &gt;
class basic_string {...};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here <tt>charT</tt> represents the type stored in the string. The <tt>traits</tt>
 parameter represents a class that defines necessary properties that a 
type must possess to be represented as a string. For example, it should 
have a <tt>length()</tt> method that returns the length of a string, represented as an array of type <tt>charT</tt>. The end of such an array is indicated by the value <tt>charT(0)</tt>, the generalization of the null character. (The expression <tt>charT(0)</tt> is a type cast of <tt>0</tt> to type <tt>charT</tt>. It could be just <tt>0</tt>, as it is for type <tt>char</tt>, or more generally, it could be an object created by a <tt>charT</tt> constructor.) The class also includes methods for comparing values, and so on. The <tt>Allocator</tt> parameter represents a class to handle memory allocation for the string. The default <tt>allocator&lt;charT&gt;</tt> template uses <tt>new</tt> and <tt>delete</tt> in the standard ways.</p>
<p class="docText">There are four predefined specializations:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>typedef basic_string&lt;char&gt; string;
typedef basic_string&lt;char16_t&gt; u16string;
typedef basic_string&lt;char32_t&gt; u32string;
typedef basic_string&lt;wchar_t&gt; wstring;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">These specializations, in turn, use the following specializations:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>char_traits&lt;char&gt;
allocator&lt;char&gt;
char_traits&lt;char16_t&gt;
allocator&lt;char_16&gt;
char_traits&lt;char_32&gt;
allocator&lt;char_32&gt;
char_traits&lt;wchar_t&gt;
allocator&lt;wchar_t&gt;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">You can create a <tt>string</tt> class for some type other than <tt>char</tt> or <tt>wchar_t</tt> by defining a <tt>traits</tt> class and using the <tt>basic_string</tt> template.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
