<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Data Information, Constructors, and Odds and Ends</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Data Information, Constructors, and Odds and Ends</h3>
<p class="docText">Constructors can be 
described in terms of the effects they have. Because the private 
portions of a class can be implementation dependent, these effects 
should be described in terms of information available as part of the 
public interface. Table F.1
 lists several methods whose return values can be used to describe the 
effects of constructors and of other methods. Note that much of the 
terminology is from the STL.</p>
<p></p><table cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0" frame="hsides" rules="none"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table F.1. Some <tt>string</tt> Data Methods</h5></caption><colgroup align="left" span="2"><col width="200"></col><col width="400"></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Method</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Returns</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>begin()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">An iterator to the first character in a string.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>cbegin()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">A <tt>const</tt>_<tt>iterator</tt> to the first character in a string (C++11).</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>end()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">An iterator that is the past-the-end value.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>cend()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">A <tt>const_iterator</tt> that is the past-the-end value (C++11).</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>rbegin()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">A reverse iterator that is the past-the-end.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>crbegin()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">A reverse <tt>const_iterator</tt> that is the past-the-end (C++11).</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>rend()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">A reverse iterator that refers to the first character.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>crend()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">A reverse <tt>const_iterator</tt> that refers to the first character (C++11).</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>size()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">The number of elements in a string, equal to the distance from <tt>begin()</tt> to <tt>end()</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>length()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">The same as <tt>size()</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>capacity()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">The allocated number of elements in a string. This can be greater than the actual number of characters. The value of <tt>capacity()</tt> - <tt>size()</tt> represents the number of characters that can be appended to a string before more memory needs be allocated.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>max_size()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">The maximum allowable size of a string.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>data()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">A pointer of type <tt>const charT*</tt> that points to the first element of an array whose first <tt>size()</tt> elements equal the corresponding elements in the string controlled by <tt>*this</tt>. The pointer should not be assumed to be valid after the <tt>string</tt> object itself has been modified.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>c_str()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">A pointer of type <tt>const charT*</tt> that points to the first element of an array whose first <tt>size()</tt> elements equal the corresponding elements in the string controlled by <tt>*this</tt> and whose next element is the <tt>charT(0)</tt> character (end-of-string marker) for the <tt>charT</tt> type. The pointer should not be assumed to be valid after the string object itself has been modified.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>get_allocator()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">A copy of the <tt>allocator</tt> object that is used to allocate memory for the <tt>string</tt> object.</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">Be careful of the differences among <tt>begin()</tt>, <tt>rend()</tt>, <tt>data()</tt>, and <tt>c_str()</tt>. All relate to the first character in a string, but in different ways. The <tt>begin()</tt> and <tt>rend()</tt> methods return iterators, which are generalizations of pointers, as described in Chapter 16, “The <tt>string</tt> Class and the Standard Template Library.” In particular, <tt>begin()</tt> returns a model of a forward iterator, and <tt>rend()</tt> returns a copy of a reverse iterator. Both refer to the actual string managed by the <tt>string</tt> object. (Because the <tt>string</tt> class uses dynamic memory allocation, the actual string contents need not be inside the object, so we use the term <span class="docEmphasis">manage</span>
 to describe the relationship between object and string.) You can use 
the methods that return iterators with the iterator-based algorithms of 
the STL. For example, you can use the STL <tt>reverse()</tt> function to reverse the contents of a string:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>string word;
cin &gt;&gt; word;
reverse(word.begin(), word.end());</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>data()</tt> and <tt>c_str()</tt> methods, on the other hand, do return ordinary pointers. Furthermore, the returned pointers point to the first element of an <span class="docEmphasis">array</span> that holds the string characters. This array can but need not be a copy of the original string managed by the <tt>string</tt> object. (The internal representation used by the <tt>string</tt>
 object can be an array, but it doesn’t have to be.) Because it is 
possible that the returned pointers point to the original data, they are
 <tt>const</tt>, so they can’t be used to alter 
the data. Also the pointers are not guaranteed to be valid after the 
string is modified; this reflects that they may point to the original 
data. The difference between <tt>data()</tt> and <tt>c_str()</tt> is that the array <tt>c_str()</tt> points to is terminated with a null character (or equivalent), whereas <tt>data()</tt> just guarantees that the actual string characters are present. Thus, the <tt>c_str()</tt> method can be used, for example, as an argument to a function that expects to receive a C-style string:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>string file("tofu.man");
ofstream outFile(file.c_str());</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Similarly, <tt>data()</tt> and <tt>size()</tt>
 could be used with a function that expects to receive a pointer to an 
array element and a value that represents the number of elements to 
process:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>string vampire("Do not stake me, oh my darling!");
int vlad = byte_check(vampire.data(), vampire.size());</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">A C++ implementation could choose to represent a <tt>string</tt> object’s string as a dynamically allocated C-style string and to implement the forward iterator as a <tt>char *</tt> pointer. In that case, the implementation could choose to have <tt>begin()</tt>, <tt>data()</tt>, and <tt>c_str()</tt>
 all return the same pointer. But it could just as legitimately (if not 
as easily) return references to three different data objects.</p>
<p class="docText">C++11 has 11 constructors for the <tt>basic_string</tt> template class, up from the six of C++98, and one destructor:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedWidth">explicit basic_string(const Allocator&amp; a = Allocator());
basic_string(const charT* s, const Allocator&amp; a = Allocator());
basic_string(const charT* s, size_type n, const Allocator&amp; a = Allocator());
basic_string(const basic_string&amp; str);
basic_string(const basic_string&amp; str, const Allocator&amp;);
basic_string(const basic_string&amp; str, size_type pos,
    size_type n = npos, const Allocator&amp; a = Allocator());
basic_string(basic_string&amp;&amp; str) noexcept;
basic_string(const basic_string&amp;&amp; str, const Allocator&amp;);
basic_string(size_type n, charT c, const Allocator&amp; a = Allocator());
template&lt;class InputIterator&gt;
basic_string(InputIterator begin, InputIterator end,
    const Allocator&amp; a = Allocator());
basic_string(initializer_list&lt;charT&gt;, const Allocator&amp; = Allocator());
~basic_string();

					  </pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Some of the increase in constructors comes from handling arguments differently. For example, C++98 had this copy constructor:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>basic_string(const basic_string&amp; str, size_type pos = 0,
    size_type n = npos, const Allocator&amp; a = Allocator());</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">C++11 replaces it with three 
constructors—the second, third, and fourth items in the preceding list. 
This allows the most common uses of the C++98 version to be coded more 
efficiently. The really new additions are the move constructors (those 
with rvalue references, as discussed in Chapter 18, “Visiting with the New C++ Standard”) and the constructor with the <tt>initializer_list</tt> parameter.</p>
<p class="docText">Note that most of the constructors have an argument of the following form:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>const Allocator&amp; a = Allocator()</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Recall that the term <tt>Allocator</tt> is the template parameter name for an <tt>allocator</tt> class to manage memory. The term <tt>Allocator()</tt> is the default constructor for that class. Thus, the constructors, by default, use the default version of the <tt>allocator</tt> object, but they give you the option of using some other version of the <tt>allocator</tt> object. The following sections examine the constructors individually.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ECMCM">Default Constructor</h4>
<p class="docText">This is the prototype for the default constructor:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>explicit basic_string(const Allocator&amp; a = Allocator());</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Typically, you would accept the default argument for the <tt>allocator</tt> class and would use the constructor to create empty strings:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>string bean;
wstring theory;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The following relationships hold after the default constructor is called:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">The <tt>data()</tt> method returns a non-null pointer to which <tt>0</tt> can be added.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>size()</tt> method returns <tt>0</tt>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The return value for <tt>capacity()</tt> is not specified.</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">Suppose you assign the value returned by <tt>data()</tt> to the pointer <tt>str</tt>. In this case, the first condition means <tt>str + 0</tt> is valid.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EFSCM">Constructors That Use C-Style Strings</h4>
<p class="docText">Constructors that use C-style strings let you initialize a <tt>string</tt> object from a C-style string; more generally, they let you initialize a <tt>charT</tt> specialization from an array of <tt>charT</tt> values:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>basic_string(const charT* s, const Allocator&amp; a = Allocator());</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">To determine how many characters to copy, the constructor applies the <tt>traits::length()</tt> method to the array pointed to by <tt>s</tt>. (The pointer <tt>s</tt> should not be a null pointer.) For example, the following statement initializes the <tt>toast</tt> object, using the indicated character string:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>string toast("Here's looking at you, kid.");</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>traits::length()</tt> method for type <tt>char</tt> uses the null character to determine how many characters to copy.</p>
<p class="docText">The following relationships hold after the constructor is called:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">The <tt>data()</tt> method returns a pointer to the first element of a copy of the array <tt>s</tt>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>size()</tt> method returns a value equal to <tt>traits::length()</tt>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>capacity()</tt> method returns a value at least as large as <tt>size()</tt>.</p></li></ul>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EWUCM">Constructors That Use Part of a C-Style String</h4>
<p class="docText">Constructors that use part of a C-style string let you initialize a <tt>string</tt> object from part of a C-style string; more generally, they let you initialize a <tt>charT</tt> specialization from part of an array of <tt>charT</tt> values:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedWidth">basic_string(const charT* s, size_type n, const Allocator&amp; a = Allocator());

					  </pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This constructor copies to the constructed object a total of <tt>n</tt> characters from the array pointed to by <tt>s</tt>. Note that it doesn’t stop copying if <tt>s</tt> has fewer characters than <tt>n</tt>. If <tt>n</tt> exceeds the length of <tt>s</tt>, the constructor interprets the contents of memory following the string as if they held data of type <tt>charT</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">This constructor requires that <tt>s</tt> is not a null pointer and that <tt>n &lt; npos</tt>. (Recall that <tt>npos</tt> is a static class constant equal to the maximum possible number of elements in a string.) If <tt>n</tt> equals <tt>npos</tt>, the constructor throws an <tt>out_of_range</tt> exception. (Because <tt>n</tt> is of type <tt>size_type</tt> and <tt>npos</tt> is the maximum <tt>size_type</tt> value, <tt>n</tt> cannot be greater than <tt>npos</tt>.) Otherwise, the following relationships hold after the constructor is called:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">The <tt>data()</tt> method returns a pointer to the first element of a copy of the array <tt>s</tt>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>size()</tt> method returns <tt>n</tt>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>capacity()</tt> method returns a value at least as large as <tt>size(</tt>).</p></li></ul>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ECZCM">Constructors That Use an Lvalue Reference</h4>
<p class="docText">The copy constructor looks like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>basic_string(const basic_string&amp; str);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">It initializes a new <tt>string</tt> object using a <tt>string</tt> argument:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>string mel("I'm ok!");
string ida(mel);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here, <tt>ida</tt> would get a copy of the string managed by <tt>mel</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">The next constructor additionally requires that you specify an allocator:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>basic_string(const basic_string&amp; str, const Allocator&amp;);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The following relationships hold after either of these two constructors is called:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">The <tt>data()</tt> method returns a pointer to an allocated copy of the array whose first element is pointed to by <tt>str.data()</tt>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>size()</tt> method returns the value of <tt>str.size()</tt>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>capacity()</tt> method returns a value at least as large as <tt>size()</tt>.</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">Moving along, the next constructor lets you set several items:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>basic_string(const basic_string&amp; str, size_type pos, size_type n = npos,
    const Allocator&amp; a = Allocator());</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The second argument <tt>pos</tt> specifies a location in the source string from which to begin the copying:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>string att("Telephone home.");
string et(att, 4);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Position numbers begin with <tt>0</tt>, so position <tt>4</tt> is the <tt>p</tt> character. Thus, <tt>et</tt> is initialized to <tt>"phone home."</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">The optional third argument <tt>n</tt> specifies the maximum number of characters to copy. Thus, this initializes <tt>pt</tt> to the string <tt>"phone"</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>string att("Telephone home.");
string pt(att, 4, 5);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">However, this constructor does 
not go past the end of the source string; for example, the following 
stops after copying the period:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>string pt(att, 4, 200)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Thus, the constructor actually copies a number of characters equal to the lesser of <tt>n</tt> and <tt>str.size() - pos</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">This constructor requires that <tt>pos &lt;= str.size()</tt>—that is, that the initial position copied to is inside the source string; if this is not the case, the constructor throws an <tt>out_of_range</tt> exception. Otherwise, if <tt>copy_len</tt> represents the lesser of <tt>n</tt> and <tt>str.size() - pos</tt>, the following relationships hold after the constructor is called:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">The <tt>data()</tt> method returns a pointer to a copy of <tt>copy_len</tt> elements copied from the string <tt>str</tt>, starting with position <tt>pos</tt> in <tt>str</tt>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>size()</tt> method returns <tt>copy_len</tt>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>capacity()</tt> method returns a value at least as large as <tt>size()</tt>.</p></li></ul>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EKADM">Constructors That Use an Rvalue Reference (C++11)</h4>
<p class="docText">C++11 adds move semantics to the <tt>string</tt> class. As described in Chapter 18, this involves adding a move constructor, which uses an rvalue reference instead of an lvalue reference:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>basic_string(basic_string&amp;&amp; str) noexcept;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This constructor is invoked when the actual argument is a temporary object:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>string one("din");     // C-style string constructor
string two(one);       // copy constructor – one is an lvalue
string three(one+two); // move constructor, sum is an rvalue</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">As discussed in Chapter 18, the intent is that string <tt>three</tt> takes ownership of the object constructed by <tt>operator+()</tt> rather than copying the object and then letting the original be destroyed.</p>
<p class="docText">The second rvalue constructor additionally allows you to specify an allocator:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>basic_string(const basic_string&amp;&amp; str, const Allocator&amp;);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The following relationships hold after either of these two constructors is called:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">The <tt>data()</tt> method returns a pointer to an allocated copy of the array whose first element is pointed to by <tt>str.data()</tt>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>size()</tt> method returns the value of <tt>str.size()</tt>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>capacity()</tt> method returns a value at least as large as <tt>size()</tt>.</p></li></ul>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EDDDM">Constructor That Uses <tt>n</tt> Copies of a Character</h4>
<p class="docText">A constructor that uses <tt>n</tt> copies of a character creates a <tt>string</tt> object that consists of <tt>n</tt> consecutive characters, all having the value <tt>c</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>basic_string(size_type n, charT c, const Allocator&amp; a = Allocator());</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This constructor requires that <tt>n &lt; npos</tt>. If <tt>n</tt> equals <tt>npos</tt>, the constructor throws an <tt>out_of_range</tt> exception. Otherwise, the following relationships hold after the constructor is called:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">The <tt>data()</tt> method returns a pointer to the first element of a string of <tt>n</tt> elements, each set to <tt>c</tt>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>size()</tt> method returns <tt>n</tt>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>capacity()</tt> method returns a value at least as large as <tt>size(</tt>).</p></li></ul>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E6HDM">Constructor That Uses a Range</h4>
<p class="docText">A constructor that uses a range uses an iterator-defined range in the style of the STL:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template&lt;class InputIterator&gt;
basic_string(InputIterator begin, InputIterator end,
                const Allocator&amp; a = Allocator());</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>begin</tt> iterator points to the element in the source at which copying begins, and <tt>end</tt> points to one past the last location to be copied.</p>
<p class="docText">You can use this form with arrays, strings, or STL containers:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>char cole[40] = "Old King Cole was a merry old soul.";
string title(cole + 4, cole + 8);
vector&lt;char&gt; input;
char ch;
while (cin.get(ch) &amp;&amp; ch != '\n')
    input.push_back(ch);
string str_input(input.begin(), input.end());</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In the first use, <tt>InputIterator</tt> is evaluated to type <tt>const char *</tt>. In the second use, <tt>InputIterator</tt> is evaluated to type <tt>vector&lt;char&gt;::iterator</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">The following relationships hold after the constructor is called:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">The <tt>data()</tt> method returns a pointer to the first element of a string formed by copying elements from the range [<tt>begin</tt>, <tt>end</tt>).</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>size()</tt> method returns the distance between <tt>begin</tt> and <tt>end</tt>. (The distance is measured in units equal to the size of data type obtained when the iterator is dereferenced.)</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>capacity()</tt> method returns a value at least as large as <tt>size()</tt>.</p></li></ul>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EPKDM">Constructor That Uses an Initialization List (C++11)</h4>
<p class="docText">This constructor takes an <tt>initializer_list&lt;charT&gt;</tt> parameter:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>basic_string(initializer_list&lt;charT&gt; il, const Allocator&amp; a = Allocator());</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">You can use it with a braced list of characters:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>string slow({'s', 'n', 'a', 'i', 'l'});</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This isn’t the most convenient way to initialize a <tt>string</tt>, but it keeps the <tt>string</tt> interface similar to that of the STL container classes.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>initializer_list</tt> class has <tt>begin()</tt> and <tt>end()</tt> members, and the effect of using this constructor is the same using the range constructor:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>basic_string(il.begin(), il.end(), a);</pre></div><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EFQDM">Memory Miscellany</h4>
<p class="docText">Several methods deal 
with memory—for example, clearing memory contents, resizing a string, or
 adjusting the capacity of a string. Table F.2 lists some memory-related methods.</p>
<p></p><table cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0" frame="hsides" rules="none"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table F.2. Some Memory-Related Methods</h5></caption><colgroup align="left" span="2"><col width="200"></col><col width="400"></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Method</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Effect</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>void resize(size_type n)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Throws an <tt>out_of_range</tt> exception if <tt>n &gt; npos</tt>. Otherwise, changes the size of a string to <tt>n</tt>, truncating the end of the string if <tt>n &lt; size()</tt> and padding the string with <tt>charT(0)</tt> characters if <tt>n &gt; size()</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>void resize(size_type n, charT c)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Throws an <tt>out_of_range</tt> exception if <tt>n &gt; npos</tt>. Otherwise, changes the size of a string to <tt>n</tt>, truncating the end of the string if <tt>n &lt; size()</tt> and padding the string with the character <tt>c</tt> if <tt>n &gt; size()</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>void reserve(size_type res_arg = 0)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Sets <tt>capacity()</tt> to greater than or equal to <tt>res_arg</tt>. Because this reallocates the string, it voids previous references, iterators, and pointers into the string.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>void shrink_to_fit()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Non-binding request to reduce <tt>capacity()</tt> to <tt>size()</tt> (C++11).</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>void clear() noexcept</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Removes all characters from a string.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>bool empty() const noexcept</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Returns <tt>true</tt> if <tt>size() == 0</tt>.</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
