<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Comparison Methods and Functions</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Comparison Methods and Functions</h3>
<p class="docText">The <tt>string</tt> class offers methods and functions for comparing two strings. First, here are the method prototypes:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int compare(const basic_string&amp; str) const noexcept;

int compare(size_type pos1, size_type n1,
            const basic_string&amp; str) const;
int compare(size_type pos1, size_type n1,
            const basic_string&amp; str,
            size_type pos2, size_type n2) const;
int compare(const charT* s) const;
int compare(size_type pos1, size_type n1, const charT* s) const;
int compare(size_type pos1, size_type n1,
            const charT* s, size_type n2 ) const;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">These methods use a <tt>traits::compare()</tt>
 method that is defined for the particular character type used for the 
string. The first method returns a value less than 0 if the first string
 precedes the second string according to the ordering supplied by <tt>traits::compare()</tt>. It returns <tt>0</tt>
 if the two strings are the same, and it returns a value greater than 0 
if the first string follows the second. If two strings are identical to 
the end of the shorter of the two strings, the shorter string precedes 
the longer string.</p>
<p class="docText">The following examples compare strings <tt>s1</tt> with <tt>s3</tt> and <tt>s1</tt> with <tt>s2</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>string s1("bellflower");
string s2("bell");
string s3("cat");
int a13 = s1.compare(s3); // a13 is &lt; 0
int a12 = s1.compare(s2); // a12 is &gt; 0</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The second method is like the first, except that it just uses <tt>n1</tt> characters, starting from position <tt>pos1</tt> in the first string for the comparison.</p>
<p class="docText">The following example compares the first four characters in <tt>s1</tt> with <tt>s2</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>string s1("bellflower");
string s2("bell");
int a2 = s1.compare(0, 4, s2); // a2 is 0</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The third method is like the first, except that it just uses <tt>n1</tt> characters, starting from position <tt>pos1</tt> in the first string, and <tt>n2</tt> characters, starting from position <tt>pos2</tt> in the second string, for the comparison. For example, the following compares the <tt>out</tt> in <tt>stout</tt> to the <tt>out</tt> in <tt>about</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>string st1("stout boar");
string st2("mad about ewe");
int a3 = st1.compare(2, 3, st2, 6, 3);  // a3 is 0</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The fourth method is like the first, except that it uses a character array instead of a <tt>string</tt> object for the second string.</p>
<p class="docText">The fifth and sixth methods essentially are like the third, except that they use a character array instead of a <tt>string</tt> object for the second string.</p>
<p class="docText">The non-member comparison functions are overloaded relational operators:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>operator==()
operator&lt;()
operator&lt;=()
operator&gt;()
operator&gt;=()
operator!=()</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Each operator is overloaded so that it can compare a <tt>string</tt> object to a <tt>string</tt> object, a <tt>string</tt> object to a C-style string, and a C-style string to a <tt>string</tt> object. These operators are defined in terms of the <tt>compare()</tt> method, so they provide a notationally more convenient way of making comparisons.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
