<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>String Modifiers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">String Modifiers</h3>
<p class="docText">The <tt>string</tt>
 class provides several methods for modifying strings. Most come with an
 abundance of overloaded versions so that they can be used with <tt>string</tt> objects, string arrays, individual characters, and iterator ranges.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ESCCM">Methods for Appending and Adding</h4>
<p class="docText">You can append one string to another by using the overloaded <tt>+=</tt> operator or by using an <tt>append()</tt> method. All throw a <tt>length_error</tt> exception if the result would be longer than the maximum string size. The <tt>+=</tt> operators let you append a <tt>string</tt> object, a string array, or an individual character to another string:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>basic_string&amp; operator+=(const basic_string&amp; str);
basic_string&amp; operator+=(const charT* s);
basic_string&amp; operator+=(charT c);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>append()</tt> methods also let you append a <tt>string</tt> object, a string array, or an individual character to another string. In addition, they let you append part of a <tt>string</tt>
 object by specifying an initial position and a number of characters to 
append or else by specifying a range. You can append part of a string by
 specifying how many characters of the string to use. The version for 
appending a character lets you specify how many instances of that 
character to copy. Here are the prototypes for the various <tt>append()</tt> methods:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>basic_string&amp; append(const basic_string&amp; str);
basic_string&amp; append(const basic_string&amp; str, size_type pos,
                     size_type n);
template&lt;class InputIterator&gt;
  basic_string&amp; append(InputIterator first, InputIterator last);
basic_string&amp; append(const charT* s);
basic_string&amp; append(const charT* s, size_type n);
basic_string&amp; append(size_type n, charT c);  // append n copies of c
void push_back(charT c);                     // appends 1 copy of c</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here are a couple examples:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>string test("The");
test.append("ory");  // test is "Theory"
test.append(3,'!');  // test is "Theory!!!"</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>operator+()</tt>
 function is overloaded to enable string concatenation. The overloaded 
functions don’t modify a string; instead, they create a new string that 
consists of one string appended to a second. The addition functions are 
not member functions, and they allow you to add a <tt>string</tt> object to a <tt>string</tt> object, a string array to a <tt>string</tt> object, a <tt>string</tt> object to a string array, a character to a <tt>string</tt> object, and a <tt>string</tt> object to a character. Here are some examples:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>string st1("red");
string st2("rain");
string st3 = st1 + "uce";  // st3 is "reduce"
string st4 = 't' + st2;    // st4 is "train"
string st5 = st1 + st2;    // st5 is "redrain"</pre></div><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EWJCM">More Assignment Methods</h4>
<p class="docText">In addition to the basic assignment operator, the <tt>string</tt> class provides <tt>assign()</tt> methods, which allow you to assign a whole string or a part of a string or a sequence of identical characters to a <tt>string</tt> object. Here are the prototypes for the various <tt>assign()</tt> methods:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>basic_string&amp; assign(const basic_string&amp; str);
basic string&amp; assign(basic_string&amp;&amp; str) noexcept;   // C++11
basic_string&amp; assign(const basic_string&amp; str, size_type pos,
                     size_type n);
basic_string&amp; assign(const charT* s, size_type n);
basic_string&amp; assign(const charT* s);
basic_string&amp; assign(size_type n, charT c); // assign n copies of c
template&lt;class InputIterator&gt;
  basic_string&amp; assign(InputIterator first, InputIterator last);
basic_string&amp; assign(initializer_list&lt;charT&gt;);  // C++11</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here are a couple examples:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>string test;
string stuff("set tubs clones ducks");
test.assign(stuff, 1, 5);   // test is "et tu"
test.assign(6, '#");        // test is "######"</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>assign()</tt> method with an rvalue reference (added by C++11) allows for move semantics, and the second new <tt>assign()</tt> method allows one to assign an <tt>initializer_list</tt> to a <tt>string</tt> object.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EVPCM">Insertion Methods</h4>
<p class="docText">The <tt>insert()</tt> methods let you insert a <tt>string</tt> object, a string array, a character, or several characters into a <tt>string</tt> object. The methods are similar to the <tt>append()</tt>
 methods, except that they take an additional argument, indicating where
 to insert the new material. This argument may be a position or an 
iterator. The material is inserted before the insertion point. Several 
of the methods return a reference to the resulting string. If <tt>pos1</tt> is beyond the end of the target string or if <tt>pos2</tt> is beyond the end of the string to be inserted, a method throws an <tt>out_of_range</tt> exception. If the resulting string will be larger than the maximum size, a method throws a <tt>length_error</tt> exception. Here are the prototypes for the various <tt>insert()</tt> methods:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>basic_string&amp; insert(size_type pos1, const basic_string&amp; str);
basic_string&amp; insert(size_type pos1, const basic_string&amp; str,
                     size_type pos2, size_type n);
basic_string&amp; insert(size_type pos, const charT* s, size_type n);
basic_string&amp; insert(size_type pos, const charT* s);
basic_string&amp; insert(size_type pos, size_type n, charT c);
iterator insert(const_iterator p, charT c);
iterator insert(const_iterator p, size_type n, charT c);
template&lt;class InputIterator&gt;
  void insert(iterator p, InputIterator first, InputIterator last);
iterator insert(const_iterator p, initializer_list&lt;charT&gt;); // C++11</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">For example, the following code inserts the string <tt>"former "</tt> before the <tt>b</tt> in <tt>"The banker."</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>string st3("The banker.");
st3.insert(4, "former ");</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Then the following code inserts the string <tt>" waltzed"</tt> (not including the <tt>!</tt>, which would be the ninth character) just before the period at the end of <tt>"The former banker."</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>st3.insert(st3.size() - 1, " waltzed!", 8);</pre></div><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E1RCM">Erase Methods</h4>
<p class="docText">The <tt>erase()</tt> methods remove characters from a string. Here are their prototypes:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>basic_string&amp; erase(size_type pos = 0, size_type n = npos);
iterator erase(const_iterator position);
iterator erase(const_iterator first, iterator last);
void pop_back();</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The first form removes the character from position <tt>pos</tt> to <tt>n</tt>
 characters later or the end of the string, whichever comes first. The 
second removes the single character referenced by the iterator position 
and returns an iterator to the next element or if there are no more 
elements, returns <tt>end()</tt>. The third removes the characters in the range [<tt>first</tt>, <tt>last</tt>); that is, including <tt>first</tt> and up to but not including <tt>last</tt>. The method returns an iterator to the element following the last element erased. Finally, the <tt>pop_back()</tt> method removes the last character in the string.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EKVCM">Replacement Methods</h4>
<p class="docText">The various <tt>replace()</tt>
 methods identify part of a string to be replaced and identify the 
replacement. The part to be replaced can be identified by an initial 
position and a character count or by an iterator range. The replacement 
can be a <tt>string</tt> object, a string array, or a particular character duplicated several times. Replacement <tt>string</tt>
 objects and arrays can further be modified by indicating a particular 
portion, using a position and a count, just a count, or an iterator 
range. Here are the prototypes for the various <tt>replace()</tt> methods:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedWidth">basic_string&amp; replace(size_type pos1, size_type n1, const basic_string&amp; str);
basic_string&amp; replace(size_type pos1, size_type n1, const basic_string&amp; str,
                      size_type pos2, size_type n2);
basic_string&amp; replace(size_type pos, size_type n1, const charT* s,
                      size_type n2);
basic_string&amp; replace(size_type pos, size_type n1, const charT* s);
basic_string&amp; replace(size_type pos, size_type n1, size_type n2, charT c);
basic_string&amp; replace(const_iterator i1, const_iterator i2,
                      const basic_string&amp; str);
basic_string&amp; replace(const_iterator i1, const_iterator i2,
                      const charT* s, size_type n);
basic_string&amp; replace(const_iterator i1, const_iterator i2,
                      const charT* s);
basic_string&amp; replace(const_iterator i1, const_iterator i2,
                      size_type n, charT c);
template&lt;class InputIterator&gt;
  basic_string&amp; replace(const_iterator i1, const_iterator i2,
                        InputIterator j1, InputIterator j2);
basic_string&amp; replace(const_iteraor i1, const_iteator i2,
                      initializer)list&lt;charT&gt; il);

					  </pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here is an example:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>string test("Take a right turn at Main Street.");
test.replace(7,5,"left"); // replace right with left</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Note that you can use <tt>find()</tt> to find the positions used in <tt>replace</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>string s1 = "old";
string s2 = "mature";
string s3 = "The old man and the sea";
string::size_type pos = s3.find(s1);
if (pos != string::npos)
    s3.replace(pos, s1.size(), s2);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This example would replace <tt>old</tt> with <tt>mature</tt>.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EL3CM">Other Modifying Methods: <tt>copy()</tt> and <tt>swap()</tt></h4>
<p class="docText">The <tt>copy()</tt> method copies a <tt>string</tt> object, or part thereof, to a designated character array:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>size_type copy(charT* s, size_type n, size_type pos = 0) const;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In this case, <tt>s</tt> points to the destination array, <tt>n</tt> indicates the number of characters to copy, and <tt>pos</tt> indicates the position in the <tt>string</tt> object from which copying begins. Copying proceeds for <tt>n</tt> characters or until the last character in the <tt>string</tt>
 object, whichever comes first. The function returns the number of 
characters copied. The method does not append a null character, and it 
is up to the programmer to see that the array is large enough to hold 
the copy.</p>
<div class="docNote"><p class="docNoteTitle">Caution</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>copy()</tt> method does not append a null character, nor does it check whether the destination array is large enough.</p>
</div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>swap()</tt> method swaps the contents of two <tt>string</tt> objects by using a constant time algorithm:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>void swap(basic_string&amp; str);</pre></div><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
