<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>The STL and C++11</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">The STL and C++11</h3>
<p class="docText">Just as the changes brought by 
C++11 to the C++ language are too extensive to cover completely in this 
book, so are the changes to the STL too extensive to cover completely in
 this appendix. However, we can summarize many of the additions.</p>
<p class="docText">C++11 brings several new 
elements to the STL. First, it adds several new containers. Second, it 
adds a few new features to the old containers. Third, it adds a few new 
template functions to its family of algorithms. All these changes are 
incorporated into this appendix, but you may find an overview of the 
first two categories helpful.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EZFCM">New Containers</h4>
<p class="docText">C++11 adds the following containers: <tt>array</tt>, <tt>forward_list</tt>, <tt>unordered_set</tt>, and the unordered associative containers <tt>unordered_multiset</tt>, <tt>unordered_map</tt>, and <tt>unordered_multimap</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">An <tt>array</tt> container, 
once declared, is fixed in size and uses static or stack memory rather 
than dynamically allocated memory. It’s intended as a substitute for the
 built-in array type; it’s more limited than <tt>vector</tt>, but more efficient.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>list</tt> container 
is a bidirectional linked list, with each item, other than the two ends,
 linked to the item before it and the one after. The <tt>forward_list</tt>
 is a singly linked list, with each item, other than the last, linked to
 the next item. It provides a more compact, but more limited, 
alternative for <tt>list</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Like <tt>set</tt>
 and the other associative containers, the unordered associative 
containers allow fast data retrieval through the use of keys. The 
difference is that the associative containers use trees as the 
underlying data structure, whereas the unordered associative containers 
use hash tables.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EGHCM">Changes to C++98 Containers</h4>
<p class="docText">C++11 brings three main changes to the container class methods.</p>
<p class="docText">First, the addition of rvalue references makes it possible to provide move semantics (Chapter 18,
 “Visiting with the New C++ Standard”) for containers. Accordingly, the 
STL now provides move constructors and move assignment operators for 
containers. These methods take an rvalue reference argument.</p>
<p class="docText">Second, the addition of the <tt>initializer_list</tt> template class (Chapter 18) has led to constructors and assignment operators that accept an <tt>initializer_list</tt> argument. This makes code like the following possible:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>vector&lt;int&gt; vi{100, 99, 97, 98};
vi = {96, 99, 94, 95, 102};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Third, the addition of variadic templates and function parameter packs (Chapter 18)
 makes emplacement methods possible. What does this mean? Like move 
semantics, emplacement is a means to increase efficiency. Consider the 
following code snippets:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>class Items
{
    double x;
    double y;
    int m;
public:
    Items();                             // #1
    Items (double xx, double yy, int mm); // #2
    ...
};
...
vector&lt;Items&gt; vt(10);
...
vt.push_back(Items(8.2, 2.8, 3));  //</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The call to <tt>insert()</tt> causes the memory allocation function to create a default <tt>Items</tt> object at the end of <tt>vt</tt>. Next, the <tt>Items()</tt> constructor creates a temporary <tt>Items</tt> object; this object is copied to a location at the front of the vector <tt>vt</tt> and then the temporary object is deleted. With C++11, you can do this instead:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>vi.emplace_back(8.2, 2.8, 3);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>emplace_back()</tt> method is a variadic template with a function parameter pack as its argument:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template &lt;class... Args&gt; void emplace_back(Args&amp;&amp;... args);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The three arguments 8.2, 2.8, and 3 are packed into the <tt>args</tt> parameter. These parameters are passed along to the allocation function, which then can unpack the parameters and use the <tt>Items</tt> constructor with three arguments (#2) instead of the default constructor (#1). That is, it can use <tt>Items(args...)</tt>, which, in this example, expands to <tt>Items(8.2, 2.8, 3)</tt>.
 Thus, the desired object is constructed in place in the vector rather 
than at a temporary location and then copied to the vector.</p>
<p class="docText">The STL uses this technique with several emplacement methods.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
