<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Members Common to All or Most Containers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Members Common to All or Most Containers</h3>
<p class="docText">All containers define the types in Table G.1. In this table, <tt>X</tt> is a container type, such as <tt>vector&lt;int&gt;</tt>, and <tt>T</tt> is the type stored in the container, such as <tt>int</tt>. The examples following the table clarify the meanings.</p>
<p></p><table cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0" frame="hsides" rules="none"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table G.1. Types Defined for All Containers</h5></caption><colgroup align="left" span="2"><col width="200"></col><col width="400"></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Type</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Value</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>X::value_type</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>T</tt>, the element type.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>X::reference</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>T &amp;</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>X::const_reference</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>const T &amp;</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>X::iterator</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Iterator type pointing to <tt>T</tt>, behaves like type <tt>T *</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>X::const_iterator</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Iterator type pointing to <tt>const T</tt>; behaves like type <tt>const T *</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>X::difference_type</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Signed
 integral type used to represent the distance from one iterator to 
another (for example, the difference between two pointers).</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>X::size_type</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Unsigned integral type <tt>size_type</tt> can represent size of data objects, number of elements, and subscripts.</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">The class definition uses a <tt>typedef</tt>
 to define these members. You can use these types to declare suitable 
variables. For example, the following code uses a roundabout way to 
replace the first occurrence of <tt>"bonus"</tt> in a vector of <tt>string</tt> objects with <tt>"bogus"</tt> in order to show how you can use member types to declare variables:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>using namespace std;
vector&lt;string&gt; input;
string temp;
while (cin &gt;&gt; temp &amp;&amp; temp != "quit")
    input.push_back(temp);
vector&lt;string&gt;::iterator want=
    find(input.begin(), input.end(), string("bonus"));
if (want != input.end())
{
    vector&lt;string&gt;::reference r = *want;
    r = "bogus";
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This code makes <tt>r</tt> a reference to the element in <tt>input</tt> to which <tt>want</tt> points. Similarly, continuing with the preceding example, you can write code like the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>vector&lt;string&gt;::value_type s1 = input[0];  // s1 is type string
vector&lt;string&gt;::reference s2 = input[1];   // s2 is type string &amp;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This results in <tt>s1</tt> being a new <tt>string</tt> object that’s a copy of <tt>input[0]</tt> and in <tt>s2</tt> being a reference to <tt>input[1]</tt>. In this example, given that you already know that the template is based on the <tt>string</tt> type, it would be simpler to write the following code, which is equivalent in its effect:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>string s1 = input[0];     // s1 is type string
string &amp; s2 = input[1];   // s2 is type string &amp;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">However, the more elaborate types from Table G.1 can also be used in more general code in which the type of container and element are generic. For example, suppose you want a <tt>min()</tt>
 function that takes as its argument a reference to a container and 
returns the smallest item in the container. This assumes that the <tt>&lt;</tt> operator is defined for the value type used to instantiate the template and that you don’t want to use the STL <tt>min_element()</tt> algorithm, which uses an iterator interface. Because the argument could be <tt>vector&lt;int&gt;</tt> or <tt>list&lt;string&gt;</tt> or <tt>deque&lt;double&gt;</tt>, you use a template with a template parameter, such as <tt>Bag</tt>, to represent the container. (That is, <tt>Bag</tt> is a template type that might be instantiated as <tt>vector&lt;int&gt;</tt>, <tt>list&lt;string&gt;</tt>, or some other container type.) So the argument type for the function is <tt>const Bag &amp; b</tt>. What about the return type? It should be the value type for the container—that is, <tt>Bag::value_type</tt>. However, at this point, <tt>Bag</tt> is just a template parameter, and the compiler has no way of knowing that the <tt>value_type</tt> member is actually a type. But you can use the <tt>typename</tt> keyword to clarify that a class member is a <tt>typedef</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>vector&lt;string&gt;::value_type st;    // vector&lt;string&gt; a defined class
typename Bag::value_type m;       // Bag an as yet undefined type</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">For the first definition here, the compiler has access to the <tt>vector</tt> template definition, which states that <tt>value_type</tt> is a <tt>typedef</tt>. For the second definition, the <tt>typename</tt> keyword promises that, whatever <tt>Bag</tt> may turn out to be, the combination <tt>Bag::value_type</tt> is the name of a type. These considerations lead to the following definition:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>template&lt;typename Bag&gt;
typename Bag::value_type min(const Bag &amp; b)
{
    typename Bag::const_iterator it;
    typename Bag::value_type m = *b.begin();
    for (it = b.begin(); it != b.end(); ++it)
        if (*it &lt; m)
            m = *it;
    return m;
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">You then could use this template function as follows:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>vector&lt;int&gt; temperatures;
// input temperature values into the vector
int coldest = min(temperatures);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>temperatures</tt> parameter would cause <tt>Bag</tt> to be evaluated as <tt>vector&lt;int&gt;</tt> and <tt>typename Bag::value_type</tt> to be evaluated as <tt>vector&lt;int&gt;::value_type</tt>, which, in turn, is <tt>int</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">All containers also contain the member functions or operations listed in Table G.2. Again, <tt>X</tt> is a container type, such as <tt>vector&lt;int&gt;</tt>, and <tt>T</tt> is the type stored in the container, such as <tt>int</tt>. Also <tt>a</tt> and <tt>b</tt> are values of type <tt>X</tt>, <tt>u</tt> is an identifier, <tt>r</tt> is a non-<tt>const</tt> value of type <tt>X</tt>, and <tt>rv</tt> is a non-<tt>const</tt> rvalue of type <tt>X</tt>. The move operations were added by C++11.</p>
<p></p><table cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0" frame="hsides" rules="none"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table G.2. Operations Defined for All Containers</h5></caption><colgroup align="left" span="2"><col width="200"></col><col width="400"></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Operation</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Description</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>X u;</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Constructs an empty object <tt>u</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>X()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Constructs an empty object.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>X(a)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Constructs a copy of object <tt>a</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>X u(a)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>u</tt> is a copy of <tt>a</tt> (copy constructor).</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>X u = a;</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>u</tt> is a copy of <tt>a</tt> (copy constructor).</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>r = a</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>r</tt> equals the value of <tt>a</tt> (copy assignment).</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>X u(rv)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>u</tt> equals the value that <tt>rv</tt> had before construction (move constructor).</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>X u = rv;</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>u</tt> equals the value that <tt>rv</tt> had before construction (move constructor).</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a = rv</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a</tt> equals the value that <tt>rv</tt> had before construction (move assignment).</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>(&amp;a)-&gt;~X()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Destructor applied to every element of <tt>a</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>begin()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Returns an iterator to the first element.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>end()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Returns an iterator to past the end.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>cbegin()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Returns a <tt>const</tt> iterator to the first element.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>cend()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Returns a <tt>const</tt> iterator to past the end.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>size()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Returns the number of elements.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>maxsize()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Returns the size of the largest possible container.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>empty()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Returns <tt>true</tt> if the container is empty.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>swap()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Swaps the contents of two containers.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>==</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Returns <tt>true</tt> if two containers are the same size and have the same elements in the same order.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>!=</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a != b</tt> returns <tt>!(a == b)</tt>.</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">Containers that use a bi-directional or random iterator (<tt>vector</tt>, <tt>list</tt>, <tt>deque</tt>, <tt>queue</tt>, <tt>array</tt>, <tt>set</tt>, and <tt>map</tt>) are reversible and provide the methods in Table G.3.</p>
<p></p><table cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0" frame="hsides" rules="none"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table G.3. Types and Operations Defined for Reversible Containers</h5></caption><colgroup align="left" span="2"><col width="200"></col><col width="400"></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Operation</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Description</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>X::reverse_iterator</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Reverse iterator that points to type <tt>T</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>X::const_reverse_iterator</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>const</tt> reverse iterator that points to type <tt>T</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.rbegin()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Returns a reverse iterator to past the end of <tt>a</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.rend()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Returns a reverse iterator to the beginning of <tt>a</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.crbegin()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Returns a <tt>const</tt> reverse iterator to past the end of <tt>a</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.crend()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Returns a <tt>const</tt> reverse iterator to the beginning of <tt>a</tt>.</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">The unordered set and unordered map containers are not required to support the optional container operations in Table G.4, but the remaining containers do support them.</p>
<p></p><table cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0" frame="hsides" rules="none"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table G.4. Optional Container Operations</h5></caption><colgroup align="left" span="2"><col width="200"></col><col width="400"></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Operation</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Description</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>&lt;</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a &lt; b</tt> returns <tt>true</tt> if <tt>a</tt> lexicographically precedes <tt>b</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>&gt;</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a &gt; b</tt> returns <tt>b &lt; a</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>&lt;=</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a &lt;= b</tt> returns <tt>!(a &gt; b)</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>&gt;=</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a &gt;= b</tt> returns <tt>!(a &lt; b)</tt>.</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>&gt;</tt> operator for a container assumes that the <tt>&gt;</tt>
 operator is defined for the value type. A lexicographic comparison is a
 generalization of alphabetical sorting. It compares two containers, 
element-by-element, until it encounters an element in one container that
 doesn’t equal the corresponding element in the other container. In that
 case, the containers are considered to be in the same order as the 
noncorresponding pair of elements. For example, if two containers are 
identical through the first 10 elements, but the 11th element in the 
first container is less than the 11th element in the second container, 
the first container 
precedes the second. If two containers compare equally until one runs 
out of elements, the shorter container precedes the longer.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
