<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Additional Members for Sequence Containers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Additional Members for Sequence Containers</h3>
<p class="docText">The <tt>vector</tt>, <tt>forward_list</tt>, <tt>list</tt>, <tt>deque,</tt> and <tt>array</tt> template classes are all sequence containers, and they all have the methods listed previously, with the exception that <tt>forward_list</tt> isn’t reversible and doesn’t support the methods of Table G.3.
 A sequence container, not surprisingly, holds a homogeneous set of 
items in linear order. If the sequence has a fixed number of elements, <tt>array</tt> is the usual choice. Otherwise, <tt>vector</tt>, which combines the random access of <tt>array</tt>
 with the ability to add and delete items should be your first recourse.
 However, if there are frequent additions in the middle of the sequence,
 consider using <tt>list</tt> or <tt>forward_list</tt>. And if additions and deletions primarily occur at the two ends of the sequence, consider <tt>deque</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">The fixed size of an <tt>array</tt> object prevents <tt>array</tt> from using many of the sequence methods. Table G.5 lists additional methods available for sequence containers other than <tt>array</tt>. (<tt>forward_list</tt> has somewhat different definitions for <tt>resize()</tt>.) Again, <tt>X</tt> is a container type, such as <tt>vector&lt;int&gt;</tt>, and <tt>T</tt> is the type stored in the container, such as <tt>int</tt>. <tt>a</tt> is a value of type <tt>X</tt>. <tt>t</tt> is an lvalue or <tt>const</tt> rvalue of <tt>type X::value_type</tt>. <tt>rv</tt> is a non-<tt>const</tt> rvalue of that same type. <tt>i</tt> and <tt>j</tt> are input iterators. [<tt>i</tt>, <tt>j</tt>) is a valid range. <tt>il</tt> is an object of type <tt>initializer_list&lt;value_type&gt;</tt>. <tt>p</tt> is a valid <tt>const</tt> iterator to <tt>a</tt>. <tt>q</tt> is a valid dereferenceable <tt>const</tt> iterator to <tt>a</tt>. <tt>[q1,q2)</tt> is a valid range of const iterators. <tt>n</tt> is an integer of <tt>X::size_type</tt>. <tt>Args</tt> is a template parameter pack, and <tt>args</tt> is a function parameter pack with the pattern <tt>Args&amp;&amp;</tt>.</p>
<p></p><table cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0" frame="hsides" rules="none"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table G.5. Additional Operations Defined for Sequence Containers</h5></caption><colgroup align="left" span="2"><col width="200"></col><col width="400"></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Operation</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Description</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>X(n, t)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Constructs a sequence container with <tt>n</tt> copies of <tt>t</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>X a(n, t)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Constructs a sequence container <tt>a</tt> with <tt>n</tt> copies of <tt>t</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>X(i, j)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Constructs a sequence container equal to the range <tt>[i,j)</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>X a(i, j)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Constructs a sequence container <tt>a</tt> equal to the range <tt>[i,j)</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>X(il);</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Constructs a sequence container initialized to the contents of <tt>il</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a = il;</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Copies the values in <tt>il</tt> to <tt>a</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.emplace(p, args);</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Inserts an object of type <tt>T</tt> before <tt>p</tt> using the <tt>T</tt> constructor with the arguments packed into <tt>args</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.insert(p,t)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Inserts a copy of <tt>t</tt> before <tt>p</tt>; returns an iterator pointing to the inserted copy of <tt>t</tt>. The default value for <tt>t</tt> is <tt>T()</tt>—that is, the value used for type <tt>T</tt> in the absence of explicit initialization.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.insert(p,rv)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Inserts a copy of <tt>rv</tt> before <tt>p</tt>; returns an iterator pointing to the inserted copy of <tt>t</tt>; move semantics may be used.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.insert(p,n,t)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Inserts <tt>n</tt> copies of <tt>t</tt> before <tt>p</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.insert(p,i,j)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Inserts copies of the elements in the range [<tt>i</tt>, <tt>j</tt>) before <tt>p</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.insert(p, il);</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Same as <tt>a.insert(p, il.begin(), il.end())</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.resize(n)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">If <tt>n &gt; a.size()</tt>, inserts <tt>n - a.size()</tt> elements before <tt>a.end()</tt>; the value used for new elements is the value used for type <tt>T</tt> in the absence of explicit initialization. If <tt>n &lt; a.size()</tt>, the elements following the <tt>n</tt>th element are erased.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.resize(n,t)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">If <tt>n &gt; a.size()</tt>, inserts <tt>n - a.size()</tt> copies of <tt>t</tt> before <tt>a.end()</tt>. If <tt>n &lt; a.size()</tt>, the elements following the <tt>n</tt>th element are erased.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.assign(i,j)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Replaces the current contents of <tt>a</tt> with copies of the elements in the range [<tt>i</tt>, <tt>j</tt>).</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.assign(n,t)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Replaces the current contents of <tt>a</tt> with <tt>n</tt> copies of <tt>t</tt>. The default value for <tt>t</tt> is <tt>T()</tt>, the value used for type <tt>T</tt> in the absence of explicit initialization.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.assign(il);</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Same as <tt>a.assign(il.begin(), il.end()).</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.erase(q)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Erases the element pointed to by <tt>q</tt>; returns an iterator to the element that had followed <tt>q</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.erase(q1,q2)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Erases the elements in the range [<tt>q1</tt>, <tt>q2</tt>); returns an iterator pointing to the element that <tt>q2</tt> originally pointed to.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.clear()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Does the same thing as <tt>erase(a.begin(), a.end())</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.front()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Returns <tt>*a.begin()</tt> (the first element).</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">Table G.6 lists methods common to some of the sequence classes (<tt>vector</tt>, <tt>forward_list</tt>, <tt>list</tt>, and <tt>deque</tt>).</p>
<p></p><table cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0" frame="hsides" rules="none"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table G.6. Operations Defined for Some Sequences</h5></caption><colgroup align="left" span="3"><col width="200"></col><col width="200"></col><col width="200"></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Operation</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Description</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Container</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.back()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Returns <tt>*—a.end()</tt> (the last element).</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>vector</tt>, <tt>list</tt>, <tt>deque</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.push_back(t)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Inserts <tt>t</tt> before <tt>a.end()</tt>.</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>vector</tt>, <tt>list</tt>, <tt>deque</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.push_back(rv)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Inserts <tt>t</tt> before <tt>a.end()</tt>. May use move semantics.</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>vector</tt>, <tt>list</tt>, <tt>deque</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.pop_back()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Erases the last element.</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>vector</tt>, <tt>list</tt>, <tt>deque</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.emplace_back(args)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Appends an object of type <tt>T</tt> using the <tt>T</tt> constructor with the arguments packed into <tt>args</tt>.</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>vector</tt>, <tt>list</tt>, <tt>deque</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.push_front(t)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Inserts a copy of <tt>t</tt> before the first element.</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>forward_list</tt>, <tt>list</tt>, <tt>deque</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.push_front(rv)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Inserts a copy of <tt>rv</tt> before the first element. Move semantics may be used.</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>forward_list</tt>, <tt>list</tt>, <tt>deque</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.emplace_front()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Inserts in the front an object of type <tt>T</tt> using the <tt>T</tt> constructor with the arguments packed into <tt>args</tt>.</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>forward_list</tt>, <tt>list</tt>, <tt>deque</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.pop_front()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Erases the first element.</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>forward_list</tt>, <tt>list</tt>, <tt>deque</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a[n]</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Returns <tt>*(a.begin() + n)</tt>.</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>vector</tt>, <tt>deque</tt>, <tt>array</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.at(n)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Returns <tt>*(a.begin() + n)</tt>; throws <tt>out_of_range</tt> exception if <tt>n &gt; a.size()</tt>.</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>vector</tt>, <tt>deque</tt>, <tt>array</tt></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>vector</tt> template additionally has the methods in Table G.7. Here, <tt>a</tt> is a <tt>vector</tt> container and <tt>n</tt> is an integer of <tt>X::size_type</tt>.</p>
<p></p><table cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0" frame="hsides" rules="none"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table G.7. Additional Operations for Vectors</h5></caption><colgroup align="left" span="2"><col width="200"></col><col width="400"></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Operation</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Description</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.capacity()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Returns the total number of elements the vector can hold without requiring reallocation.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.reserve(n)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Alerts object <tt>a</tt> that memory for at least <tt>n</tt> elements is needed. After the method call, the capacity will be at least <tt>n</tt> elements. Reallocation occurs if <tt>n</tt> is greater than the current capacity. If <tt>n</tt> is greater than <tt>a.max_size()</tt>, the method throws a <tt>length_error</tt> exception.</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>list</tt> template additionally has the methods in Table G.8. Here, <tt>a</tt> and <tt>b</tt> are <tt>list</tt> containers, and <tt>T</tt> is the type stored in the list, such as <tt>int</tt>, <tt>t</tt> is a value of type <tt>T</tt>, <tt>i</tt> and <tt>j</tt> are input iterators, <tt>q2</tt> and <tt>p</tt> are iterators, <tt>q</tt> and <tt>q1</tt> are dereferenceable iterators, and <tt>n</tt> is an integer of <tt>X::size_type</tt>. The table uses the standard STL notation [<tt>i</tt>, <tt>j</tt>), meaning the range from <tt>i</tt> up to, but not including, <tt>j</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText"></p><p></p><table cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0" frame="hsides" rules="none"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table G.8. Additional Operations for Lists</h5></caption><colgroup align="left" span="2"><col width="200"></col><col width="400"></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Operation</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Description</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.splice(p,b)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Moves the contents of list <tt>b</tt> to list <tt>a</tt>, inserting them before <tt>p</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.splice(p,b,i)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Moves the element in list <tt>b</tt> pointed to by <tt>i</tt> to before position <tt>p</tt> in list <tt>a</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.splice(p,b,i,j)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Moves the elements in the range [<tt>i</tt>, <tt>j</tt>) of list <tt>b</tt> to before position <tt>p</tt> in list <tt>a</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.remove(const T&amp; t)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Erases all elements in list <tt>a</tt> that have the value <tt>t</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.remove_if(Predicate pred)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Given that <tt>i</tt> is an iterator into list <tt>a</tt>, erases all values for which <tt>pred(*i)</tt> is <tt>true</tt>. (<tt>Predicate</tt> is a Boolean function or function object, as discussed in Chapter 15, “Friends, Exceptions, and More.”)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.unique()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Erases all but the first element from each group of consecutive equal elements.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.unique(BinaryPredicate bin_pred)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Erases all but the first element from each group of consecutive elements for which <tt>bin_pred(*i, *(i - 1))</tt> is <tt>true</tt>. (<tt>BinaryPredicate</tt> is a Boolean function or function object, as discussed in Chapter 15.)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.merge(b)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Merges the contents of list <tt>b</tt> with list <tt>a</tt>, using the <tt>&lt;</tt> operator defined for the value type. If an element in <tt>a</tt> is equivalent to an element in <tt>b</tt>, the element from <tt>a</tt> is placed first. List <tt>b</tt> is empty after the merge.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.merge(b, Compare comp)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Merges the contents of list <tt>b</tt> with list <tt>a</tt>, using the <tt>comp</tt> function or function object. If an element in <tt>a</tt> is equivalent to an element in <tt>b</tt>, the element from <tt>a</tt> is placed first. List <tt>b</tt> is empty after the merge.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.sort()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Sorts list <tt>a</tt>, using the <tt>&lt;</tt> operator.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.sort(Compare comp)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Sorts list <tt>a</tt>, using the <tt>comp</tt> function or function object.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.reverse()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Reverses the order of the elements in list <tt>a</tt>.</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>forward-list</tt> operations are similar. However, because a <tt>forward_list</tt> template class iterator can’t go backwards, some methods have to be adjusted. Thus, the <tt>insert()</tt>, <tt>erase()</tt>, and <tt>splice()</tt> methods are replaced with the <tt>insert_after()</tt>, <tt>erase_after()</tt>, and <tt>splice_after()</tt> methods, all of which operate on the position following an iterator position rather than preceding it.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
