<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Additional Operations for Sets and Maps</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Additional Operations for Sets and Maps</h3>
<p class="docText">Associative containers, of which sets and maps are models, have a <tt>Key</tt> template parameter and a <tt>Compare</tt> template parameter, which indicate, respectively, the type of the <tt>key</tt> used to order the contents and the function object, termed a <span class="docEmphasis">comparison object</span>, used to compare key values. For the <tt>set</tt> and <tt>multiset</tt> containers, the stored keys are the stored values, so the key type is the same as the value type. For the <tt>map</tt> and <tt>multimap</tt> containers, the stored values of one type (template parameter <tt>T</tt>) are associated with a key type (template parameter <tt>Key</tt>), and the value type is <tt>pair&lt;const Key, T&gt;</tt>. Associative containers have additional members to describe these features, as listed in Table G.9.</p>
<p></p><table cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0" frame="hsides" rules="none"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table G.9. Types Defined for Associative Containers</h5></caption><colgroup align="left" span="2"><col width="200"></col><col width="400"></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Type</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Value</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>X::key_type</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>Key</tt>, the key type</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>X::key_compare</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>Compare</tt>, which has a default value of <tt>less&lt;key_type&gt;</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>X::value_compare</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">A binary predicate type that is the same as <tt>key_compare</tt> for <tt>set</tt> and <tt>multiset</tt> and that supplies ordering for the <tt>pair&lt;const Key, T&gt;</tt> values in a <tt>map</tt> or <tt>multimap</tt> container</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>X::mapped_type</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>T</tt>, the type of the associated data (<tt>map</tt> and <tt>multimap</tt> only)</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">Associative containers provide the methods listed in Table G.10. In general, the comparison object need not require that values with the same key be identical; the term <span class="docEmphasis">equivalent keys</span> means that two values, which may or may not be equal, have the same key. In the table, <tt>X</tt> is a container class, and <tt>a</tt> is an object of type <tt>X</tt>. If <tt>X</tt> uses unique keys (that is, is <tt>set</tt> or <tt>map</tt>), <tt>a_uniq</tt> is an object of type <tt>X</tt>. If <tt>X</tt> uses multiple keys (that is, is <tt>multiset</tt> or <tt>multimap</tt>), <tt>a_eq</tt> is an object of type <tt>X</tt>. As before, <tt>i</tt> and <tt>j</tt> are input iterators referring to elements of <tt>value_type</tt>, [<tt>i</tt>, <tt>j</tt>) is a valid range, <tt>p</tt> and <tt>q2</tt> are iterators to <tt>a</tt>, <tt>q</tt> and <tt>q1</tt> are dereferenceable iterators to <tt>a</tt>, [<tt>q1</tt>, <tt>q2</tt>) is a valid range, <tt>t</tt> is a value of <tt>X::value_type</tt> (which may be a pair), and <tt>k</tt> is a value of <tt>X::key_type</tt>. Also <tt>il</tt> is an <tt>initializer_list&lt;value_type&gt;</tt> object.</p>
<p class="docText"></p><p></p><table cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0" frame="hsides" rules="none"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table G.10. Operations Defined for Sets, Multisets, Maps, and Multimaps</h5></caption><colgroup align="left" span="2"><col width="200"></col><col width="400"></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Operation</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Description</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>X(i,j,c)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Constructs an empty container, inserts the elements from the range <tt>[i,j)</tt>, and uses <tt>c</tt> as the comparison object.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>X a(i,j,c)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Constructs an empty container (<tt>a</tt>), inserts the elements from the range <tt>[i,j)</tt>, and uses <tt>c</tt> as the comparison object.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>X(i,j)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Constructs an empty container, inserts the elements from the range <tt>[i,j)</tt>, and uses <tt>Compare()</tt> as the comparison object.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>X a(i,j)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Constructs an empty container (<tt>a</tt>), inserts the elements from the range <tt>[i,j)</tt>, and uses <tt>Compare()</tt> as the comparison object.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>X(il);</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Same as <tt>X(il.begin(), il.end())</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a = il</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Assigns the range <tt>il.begin(), il.end()</tt> to <tt>a</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.key_comp()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Returns the comparison object used in constructing <tt>a</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.value_comp()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Returns an object of the <tt>value_compare</tt> type.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a_uniq.insert(t)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Inserts the value <tt>t</tt> into the container <tt>a</tt> if and only if <tt>a</tt> does not yet contain a value with an equivalent key. The method returns a value of type <tt>pair&lt;iterator,bool&gt;</tt>. The <tt>bool</tt> component is <tt>true</tt> if insertion occurred and <tt>false</tt> otherwise. The iterator component points to the element whose key is equivalent to the key of <tt>t</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a_eq.insert(t)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Inserts <tt>t</tt> and returns an iterator that points to its location.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.insert(p,t)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Inserts <tt>t</tt>, using <tt>p</tt> as a hint to where <tt>insert()</tt> should begin its search. If <tt>a</tt> is a container with unique keys, insertion takes place if and only if <tt>a</tt>
 doesn’t contain an element with an equivalent key; otherwise, insertion
 takes place. Whether or not insertion takes place, the method returns 
an iterator that points to the location with an equivalent key.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.insert(i,j)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Inserts elements from the range [<tt>i</tt>, <tt>j</tt>) into <tt>a</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.insert(il)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Inserts elements from the <tt>initializer_list il</tt> into <tt>a</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a_uniq.emplace(args)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Like <tt>a_uniq.insert(t)</tt>, but uses the <tt>T</tt> constructor whose parameter list matches the contents of the <tt>args</tt> parameter pack.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a_eq.emplace(args</tt>)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Like <tt>a_eq.insert(t)</tt>, but uses the <tt>T</tt> constructor whose parameter list matches the contents of the <tt>args</tt> parameter pack.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.emplace_hint(args)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Like <tt>a.insert(p,t)</tt>, but uses the <tt>T</tt> constructor whose parameter list matches the contents of the <tt>args</tt> parameter pack.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.erase(k)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Erases all elements in <tt>a</tt> whose keys are equivalent to <tt>k</tt> and returns the number of elements erased.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.erase(q)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Erases the element pointed to by <tt>q</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.erase(q1,q2)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Erases the elements in the range [<tt>q1</tt>, <tt>q2</tt>).</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.clear()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Does the same thing as <tt>erase(a.begin(), a.end())</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.find(k)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Returns an iterator that points to an element whose key is equivalent to <tt>k</tt>; returns <tt>a.end()</tt> if no such element is found.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.count(k)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Returns the number of elements that have keys equivalent to <tt>k</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.lower_bound(k)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Returns an iterator to the first element that have a key not less than <tt>k</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.upper_bound(k)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Returns an iterator to the first element that have a key greater than <tt>k</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.equal_range(k)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Returns a pair whose first member is <tt>a.lower_bound(k)</tt><a name="second member"></a> and whose second member is <tt>a.upper_bound(k)</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.operator[](k)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Returns a reference to the value associated with the key <tt>k</tt> (<tt>map</tt> containers only).</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
