<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Unordered Associative Containers (C++11)</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Unordered Associative Containers (C++11)</h3>
<p class="docText">As mentioned earlier, the unordered associative containers (<tt>unordered_set</tt>, <tt>unordered_multiset</tt>, <tt>unordered_map</tt>, and <tt>unordered_multimap</tt>) use keys and hash tables to provide rapid access to data. Let’s take a simple look at these concepts. A <span class="docEmphasis">hash function</span> converts a key to an index value. For example, if the key were a <tt>string</tt>, the hash function could sum the numeric codes for the characters in the <tt>string</tt> and take that sum modulus 13, thus giving an index in the range 0–12. The unordered container would use 13 <span class="docEmphasis">buckets</span> to store <tt>string</tt>s. Any <tt>string</tt>
 with, say, an index of 4 would be placed in bucket 4. If you wished to 
search the container for a key, you would apply the hash function to the
 key and just search the bucket with the corresponding index. Ideally, 
you would have enough buckets that each one would contain only a few <tt>string</tt>s.</p>
<p class="docText">The C++11 library provides a <tt>hash&lt;Key&gt;</tt>
 template that the unordered associative containers use by default. 
Specializations are defined for the various integer and floating-point 
types, for pointers, and for some template classes, such as <tt>string</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Table G.11 lists types used for these containers.</p>
<p></p><table cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0" frame="hsides" rules="none"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table G.11. Types Defined for Unordered Associative Containers</h5></caption><colgroup align="left" span="2"><col width="200"></col><col width="400"></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Type</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Value</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>X::key_type</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>Key</tt>, the key type</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>X::key_equal</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>Pred</tt>, which is a binary predicate that tests if two arguments of type <tt>Key</tt> are equivalent</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>X::hasher</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>Hash</tt>, a unary function object type such that if <tt>hf</tt> is type <tt>Hash</tt> and <tt>k</tt> is type <tt>Key</tt>, then <tt>hf(k)</tt> is type <tt>std::size_t</tt></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>X::local_iterator</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">An iterator of the same type as <tt>X::iterator</tt> but which can be used only within a single bucket</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>X::const_local_iterator</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">An iterator of the same type as <tt>X::const_iterator</tt> but which can be used only within a single bucket</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>X::mapped_type</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>T</tt>, the type of the associated data (<tt>map</tt> and <tt>multimap</tt> only)</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">The interface for the unordered associative containers is similar to that of the associative containers. In particular, Table G.10 also applies to the unordered associative containers with the following exceptions: The <tt>lower_bound()</tt> and <tt>upper_bound()</tt> methods are not required, nor is the <tt>X(i,j,c)</tt>
 constructor. The fact that the regular associative containers are 
ordered allows them to use a comparison predicate that expresses the 
“less than”
 concept. Such a comparison doesn’t apply to unordered associative 
containers, so, instead, they use a comparison predicate that is based 
on the “is equivalent to” concept.</p>
<p class="docText">In addition to the Table G.10 methods, the unordered associative containers require several more methods, as listed in Table G.12. In this table, <tt>X</tt> is an unordered associative container class, <tt>a</tt> is an object of type <tt>X</tt>, <tt>b</tt> is a possibly constant object of type <tt>X</tt>, <tt>a_uniq</tt> is an object of type <tt>unordered_set</tt> or <tt>unordered_map</tt>, <tt>a_eq</tt> is an object of type <tt>unordered_multiset</tt> or <tt>unordered_multimap</tt>, <tt>hf</tt> is a value of type <tt>hasher</tt>, <tt>eq</tt> is a value of type <tt>key_equal</tt>, <tt>n</tt> is a value of type <tt>size_type</tt>, and <tt>z</tt> is a value of type <tt>float</tt>. As before, <tt>i</tt> and <tt>j</tt> are input iterators referring to elements of <tt>value_type</tt>, [<tt>i</tt>, <tt>j</tt>) is a valid range, <tt>p</tt> and <tt>q2</tt> are iterators to <tt>a</tt>, <tt>q</tt> and <tt>q1</tt> are dereferenceable iterators to <tt>a</tt>, [<tt>q1</tt>, <tt>q2</tt>) is a valid range, <tt>t</tt> is a value of <tt>X::value_type</tt> (which may be a pair), and <tt>k</tt> is a value of <tt>X::key_type</tt>. Also <tt>il</tt> is an <tt>initializer_list&lt;value_type&gt;</tt> object.</p>
<p></p><table cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0" frame="hsides" rules="none"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table G.12. Additional Operations Defined for Unordered Sets, Multisets, Maps, and Multimaps</h5></caption><colgroup align="left" span="2"><col width="200"></col><col width="400"></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Operation</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Description</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>X(n,hf,eq)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Constructs an empty container with at least <tt>n</tt> buckets, using <tt>hf</tt> as the hash function and <tt>eq</tt> as the key equality predicate. If <tt>eq</tt> is omitted, <tt>key_equal()</tt> is used as the key equality predicate. If <tt>hf</tt> also is omitted, <tt>hasher()</tt> is used as the hash function.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>X a(n,hf,eq)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Constructs an empty container, <tt>a</tt>, with at least <tt>n</tt> buckets, using <tt>hf</tt> as the hash function and <tt>eq</tt> as the key equality predicate. If <tt>eq</tt> is omitted, <tt>key_equal()</tt> is used as the key equality predicate. If <tt>hf</tt> also is omitted, <tt>hasher()</tt> is used as the hash function.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>X(i,j,n,hf,eq)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Constructs an empty container with at least <tt>n</tt> buckets, using <tt>hf</tt> as the hash function and <tt>eq</tt> as the key equality predicate, and inserts the elements from [<tt>i</tt>,<tt>j</tt>). If <tt>eq</tt> is omitted, <tt>key_equal()</tt> is used as the key equality predicate. If <tt>hf</tt> also is omitted, <tt>hasher()</tt> is used as the hash function. If <tt>n</tt> also is omitted, an unspecified number of buckets is used.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>X a(i,j,n,hf,eq)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Constructs an empty container <tt>a</tt> with at least <tt>n</tt> buckets, using <tt>hf</tt> as the hash function and <tt>eq</tt> as the key equality predicate and inserts the elements from [<tt>i</tt>,<tt>j</tt>). If <tt>eq</tt> is omitted, <tt>key_equal()</tt> is used as the key equality predicate. If <tt>hf</tt> also is omitted, <tt>hasher()</tt> is used as the hash function. If <tt>n</tt> also is omitted, an unspecified number of buckets is used.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>b.hash_function()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Returns the hash function used by <tt>b</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>b.key_eq()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Returns the key equality predicate used in constructing <tt>b</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>b.bucket_count()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Returns the number of buckets in <tt>b</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>b.max_bucket_count()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Returns an upper bound for the number of buckets <tt>b</tt> might contain.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>b.bucket(k)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Returns the index of the bucket that would contain an item with a key equivalent to <tt>k</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>b.bucket_size(n)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Returns the number of elements in the bucket having index <tt>n</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>b.begin(n)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Returns an iterator to the first element of the bucket having index <tt>n</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>b.end(n)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Returns an iterator to the past-the-end element of the bucket having index <tt>n</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>b.cbegin(n)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Returns a constant iterator to the first element of the bucket having index <tt>n</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>b.cbegin(n)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Returns a constant iterator to the past-the-end element of the bucket having index <tt>n</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>b.load_factor()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Returns the average number of elements per bucket.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>b.max_load_factor()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Returns
 the value used as an upper limit for the load factor; the container 
increases the number of buckets if the load factor exceeds this value.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>b.max_load_factor(z)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">May change the maximum load factor, using <tt>z</tt> as a hint.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.rehash(n)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Resets the bucket count to &gt;= <tt>n</tt> with the requirement <tt>a.bucket_count()</tt> &gt; <tt>a.size()/a.max_load.factor()</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>a.reserve(n)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Same as <tt>a.rehash(ceil(n/a.max_load_factor()))</tt>, where <tt>ceil(x)</tt> is the smallest integer <tt>&gt;= x</tt>.</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
