<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Use Alternatives for Some Preprocessor Directives</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Use Alternatives for Some Preprocessor Directives</h3>
<p class="docText">The C/C++ preprocessor provides 
an array of directives. In general, C++ practice is to use those 
directives that are designed to manage the compilation process and to 
avoid using directives as a substitute for code. For example, the <tt>#include</tt> directive is an essential component for managing program files. Other directives, such as <tt>#ifndef</tt> and <tt>#endif</tt>, let you control whether particular blocks of code get compiled. The <tt>#pragma</tt>
 directive lets you control compiler-specific compilation options. These
 are all useful, sometimes necessary, tools. You should exercise 
caution, however, when it comes to the <tt>#define</tt> directive.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ES5CM">Use <tt>const</tt> Instead of <tt>#define</tt> to Define Constants</h4>
<p class="docText">Symbolic constants make 
code more readable and maintainable. The constant’s name indicates its 
meaning, and if you need to change the value, you just have to change 
the value once, in the definition, and then recompile. C uses the 
preprocessor to create symbolic names for a constant:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>#define MAX_LENGTH 100</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The preprocessor then does a text substitution in your source code, replacing occurrences of <tt>MAX_LENGTH</tt> with <tt>100</tt> prior to compilation.</p>
<p class="docText">The C++ approach is to apply the <tt>const</tt> modifier to a variable declaration:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>const int MAX_LENGTH = 100;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This treats <tt>MAX_LENGTH</tt> as a read-only <tt>int</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">There are several advantages to using the <tt>const</tt> approach. First, the declaration explicitly names the type. With <tt>#define</tt>, you must use various suffixes to a number to indicate types other than <tt>char</tt>, <tt>int</tt>, or <tt>double</tt>; for example, you use <tt>100L</tt> to indicate a <tt>long</tt> type and <tt>3.14F</tt> to indicate a <tt>float</tt> type. More importantly, the <tt>const</tt> approach can just as easily be used with compound types, as in this example:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>const int base_vals[5] = {1000, 2000, 3500, 6000, 10000};
const string ans[3] = {"yes", "no", "maybe"};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Finally, <tt>const</tt> 
identifiers obey the same scope rules as variables. Thus, you can create
 constants with global scope, named namespace scope, and block scope. 
If, say, you define a constant in a particular function, you don’t have 
to worry about the definition conflicting with a global constant used 
elsewhere in a program. For example, consider the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>#define n 5
const int dz = 12;
...
void fizzle()
{
    int n;
    int dz;
    ...
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The preprocessor will replace</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int n;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">with</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int 5;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">and induce a compilation error. The <tt>dz</tt> defined in <tt>fizzle()</tt>, however, will be a local variable. Also if necessary, <tt>fizzle()</tt> can use the scope-resolution operator (<tt>::</tt>) and access the constant as <tt>::dz</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">C++ has borrowed the <tt>const</tt> keyword from C, but the C++ version is more useful. For example, the C++ version has internal linkage for external <tt>const</tt> values rather than the default external linkage used by variables and by the C <tt>const</tt>. This means that each file in a program using a <tt>const</tt> needs that <tt>const</tt>
 defined in that particular file. This might sound like extra work, but,
 in fact, it makes life easier. With internal linkage, you can place <tt>const</tt>
 definitions in a header file used by various files in a project. That 
is a compiler error for external linkage but not for internal linkage. 
Also because a <tt>const</tt> must be defined in the file that uses it (being in a header file used by that file satisfies the requirement), you can use <tt>const</tt> values as array size arguments:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>const int MAX_LENGTH = 100;
...
double loads[MAX_LENGTH];
for (int i = 0; i &lt; MAX_LENGTH; i++)
    loads[i] = 50;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This won’t work in C because the defining declaration for <tt>MAX_LENGTH</tt>
 could be in a separate file and not be available when this particular 
file is compiled. In fairness, it should be added that, in C, you could 
use the <tt>static</tt> modifier to create constants with internal linkage. It’s just that C++, by making <tt>static</tt> the default, requires one fewer thing for you to remember.</p>
<p class="docText">Incidentally, the revised C Standard (C99) allows you to use a <tt>const</tt> as an array size specification, but the array is treated as a new form of array, called a <span class="docEmphasis">variable array</span>, that is not part of the C++ Standard.</p>
<p class="docText">One role for the <tt>#define</tt> directive is still quite useful—the standard idiom for controlling when a header file is compiled:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>// blooper.h
#ifndef _BLOOPER_H_
#define _BLOOPER_H_
// code goes here
#endif</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">For typical symbolic constants, however, you should get into the habit of using <tt>const</tt> instead of <tt>#define</tt>. Another good alternative, particularly when you have a set of related integer constants, is to use <tt>enum</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>enum {LEVEL1 = 1, LEVEL2 = 2, LEVEL3 = 4, LEVEL4 = 8};</pre></div><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ERHDM">Use <tt>inline</tt> Instead of <tt>#define</tt> to Define Short Functions</h4>
<p class="docText">The traditional C way to create the near-equivalent of an inline function is to use a <tt>#define</tt> macro definition:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>#define Cube(X) X*X*X</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This leads the preprocessor to do text substitution, with <tt>X</tt> being replaced by the corresponding argument to <tt>Cube()</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>y = Cube(x);      // replaced with y = x*x*x;
y = Cube(x + z++);  // replaced with x + z++*x + z++*x + z++;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Because the preprocessor uses 
text substitution instead of true passing of arguments, using such 
macros can lead to unexpected and incorrect results. Such errors can be 
reduced by using lots of parentheses in the macro to ensure the correct 
order of operations:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>#define Cube(X) ((X)*(X)*(X))</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Even this, however, doesn’t deal with cases such as using values like <tt>z++</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">The C++ approach of using the keyword <tt>inline</tt>
 to identify inline functions is much more dependable because it uses 
true argument passing. Furthermore, C++ inline functions can be regular 
functions or class methods:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>class dormant
{
private:
    int period;
    ...
public:
    int Period() const { return period; } // automatically inline
    ...
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">One positive feature of the <tt>#define</tt>
 macro is that it is typeless, so it can be used with any type for which
 the operation makes sense. In C++ you can create inline templates to 
achieve type-independent functions while retaining argument passing.</p>
<p class="docText">In short, you should use C++ inlining instead of C <tt>#define</tt> macros.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
