<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Use Type Casts</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Use Type Casts</h3>
<p class="docText">One of Stroustrup’s pet peeves 
about C is its undisciplined type cast operator. True, type casts are 
often necessary, but the standard type cast is too unrestrictive. For 
example, consider the following code:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>struct Doof
{
    double feeb;
    double steeb;
    char sgif[10];
};
Doof leam;
short * ps = (short *) &amp; leam;  // old syntax
int * pi = int * (&amp;leam);       // new syntax</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Nothing in the C language prevents you from casting a pointer of one type to a pointer to a totally unrelated type.</p>
<p class="docText">In a way, the situation is similar to that of the <tt>goto</tt> statement. The problem with the <tt>goto</tt>
 statement was that it was too flexible, leading to twisted code. The 
solution was to provide more limited, structured versions of <tt>goto</tt> to handle the most common tasks for which <tt>goto</tt> was needed. This was the genesis of language elements such as <tt>for</tt> and <tt>while</tt> loops and <tt>if else</tt>
 statements. Standard C++ provides a similar solution for the problem of
 the undisciplined type cast—namely, restricted type casts to handle the
 most common situations requiring type casts. The following are the type
 cast operators discussed in Chapter 15, “Friends, Exceptions, and More”:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>dynamic_cast
static_cast
const_cast
reinterpret_cast</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">So if you are doing a 
type cast involving pointers, you should use one of these operators if 
possible. Doing so both documents the intent of the type cast and 
provides checking that the type cast is being used as intended.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
