<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Use the string Class</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Use the <tt>string</tt> Class</h3>
<p class="docText">The traditional C-style
 string suffers from not being a real type. You can store a string in a 
character array, and you can initialize a character array to a string. 
But you can’t use the assignment operator to assign a string to a 
character array; instead, you must remember to use <tt>strcpy()</tt> or <tt>strncpy()</tt>. You can’t use the relational operators to compare C-style strings; instead, you must remember to use <tt>strcmp()</tt>. (And if you forget and use, say, the <tt>&gt;</tt> operator, you don’t get a syntax error; instead, the program compares string addresses instead of string contents.)</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>string</tt> class (see Chapter 16, “The <tt>string</tt> Class and the Standard Template Library,” and Appendix F, “The <tt>string</tt>
 Template Class”), on the other hand, lets you use objects to represent 
strings. Assignment operators, relational operators, and the addition 
operator (for concatenation) are all defined. Furthermore, the <tt>string</tt>
 class provides automatic memory management so that you normally don’t 
have to worry about someone entering a string that either overruns an 
array or gets truncated before being stored.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>string</tt> class provides many convenience methods. For example, you can append one <tt>string</tt> object to another, but you can also append a C-style string or even a <tt>char</tt> value to a <tt>string</tt> object. For functions that require a C-style string argument, you can use the <tt>c_str()</tt> method to return a suitable pointer-to-<tt>char</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Not only does the <tt>string</tt>
 class provide a well-designed set of methods for handling 
string-related tasks, such as finding substrings, but it also features a
 design that is compatible with the Standard Template Library (STL) so 
that you can use STL algorithms with <tt>string</tt> objects.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
