<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Use the STL</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Use the STL</h3>
<p class="docText">The STL (see Chapter 16 and Appendix G,
 “The STL methods and Functions”) provides ready-made solutions to many 
programming needs, so you should use it. For example, instead of 
declaring an array of <tt>double</tt> or of <tt>string</tt> objects, you can create a <tt>vector&lt;double&gt;</tt> object or a <tt>vector&lt;string&gt;</tt> object. The advantages are similar to those of using <tt>string</tt> objects instead of C-style strings. Assignment is defined, so you can use the assignment operator to assign one <tt>vector</tt> object to another. You can pass a <tt>vector</tt> object by reference, and a function receiving such an object can use the <tt>size()</tt> method to determine the number of elements in the <tt>vector</tt> object. Built-in memory management allows for automatic resizing when you use the <tt>pushback()</tt> method to add elements to a <tt>vector</tt>
 object. And of course, several useful class methods and general 
algorithms are at your service. Or with C++11, if a fixed-size array is a
 better fit, use <tt>array&lt;double&gt;</tt> or <tt>array&lt;string&gt;</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">If you need a list, a 
double-ended queue (or deque), a stack, a regular queue, a set, or a 
map, you should use the STL, which provides useful container templates. 
The algorithm library is designed so that you can easily copy the 
contents of a vector to a list or compare the contents of a set to a 
vector. This design makes the STL a toolkit that provides basic units 
that you can assemble as needed.</p>
<p class="docText">The extensive algorithm 
library was designed with efficiency as one of the main design goals, so
 you can get top-flight results with relatively little programming 
effort on your part. And the iterator concept used to implement the 
algorithms means that the algorithms aren’t limited to being used with 
STL containers. In particular, they can be applied to traditional 
arrays, too.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
