<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Answers to Chapter Review for Chapter 3</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Answers to Chapter Review for Chapter 3</h3>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1.</b></td><td class="docText">Having more than one integer type lets you choose the type that is best suited to a particular need. For example, you could use <tt>short</tt> to conserve space or <tt>long</tt> to guarantee storage capacity or to find that a particular type speeds up a particular calculation.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2.</b></td><td class="docText"><div class="docText"><pre>short rbis = 80;            // or short int rbis = 80;
unsigned int q = 42110;     // or unsigned q = 42110;
unsigned long ants = 3000000000;
// or long long ants = 3000000000;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Note: Don’t count on <tt>int</tt> being large enough to hold 3,000,000,000. Also if your system supports universal list-initialization, you could use it:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>short rbis = {80};          // = is optional
unsigned int q {42110};     // could use = {42110}
long long ants {3000000000};</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3.</b></td><td class="docText">C++ provides no automatic safeguards to keep you from exceeding integer limits; you can use the <tt>climits</tt> header file to determine what the limits are.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4.</b></td><td class="docText">The constant <tt>33L</tt> is type <tt>long</tt>, whereas the constant <tt>33</tt> is type <tt>int</tt>.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5.</b></td><td class="docText">The
 two statements are not really equivalent, although they have the same 
effect on some systems. Most importantly, the first statement assigns 
the letter A to <tt>grade</tt> only on a system using the ASCII code, while the second statement also works for other codes. Second, 65 is a type <tt>int</tt> constant, whereas <tt>'A'</tt> is a type <tt>char</tt> constant.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6.</b></td><td class="docText">Here are four ways:
<div class="docText"><pre>char c = 88;
cout &lt;&lt; c &lt;&lt; endl;          // char type prints as character

cout.put(char(88));         // put() prints char as character

cout &lt;&lt; char(88) &lt;&lt; endl;    // new-style type cast value to char

cout &lt;&lt; (char)88 &lt;&lt; endl;    // old-style type cast value to char</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>7.</b></td><td class="docText">The answer depends on how large the two types are. If <tt>long</tt> is 4 bytes, there is no loss. That’s because the largest <tt>long</tt> value would be about 2 billion, which is 10 digits. Because <tt>double</tt> provides at least 13 significant figures, no rounding would be needed. The <tt>long long</tt> type, on the other hand, can reach 19 digits, which exceeds the 13 significant figures guaranteed for <tt>double</tt>.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>8.</b></td><td class="docText"><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">8 * 9 + 2 is 72 + 2 is 74</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">6 * 3 / 4 is 18 / 4 is 4</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">3 / 4 * 6 is 0 * 6 is 0</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">6.0 * 3 / 4 is 18.0 / 4 is 4.5</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">15 % 4 is 3</p></div></li></ol></div></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9.</b></td><td class="docText">Either of the following would work for the first task:
<div class="docText"><pre>int pos = (int) x1 + (int) x2;
int pos = int(x1) + int(x2);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">To add them as type <tt>double</tt> and then convert, you could do either of the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>int pos = (int) (x1 + x2);
int pos = int(x1 + x2);</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>10.</b></td><td class="docText"><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">int</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>float</tt></p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>char</tt></p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>char32_t</tt></p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>double</tt></p></div></li></ol></div></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
