<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Answers to Chapter Review for Chapter 5</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Answers to Chapter Review for Chapter 5</h3>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1.</b></td><td class="docText">An entry-condition loop evaluates a test expression before entering the body of the loop. If the condition is initially <tt>false</tt>,
 the loop never executes its body. An exit-condition loop evaluates a 
test expression after processing the body of the loop. Thus, the loop 
body is executed once, even if the test expression is initially <tt>false</tt>. The <tt>for</tt> and <tt>while</tt> loops are entry-condition loops, and the <tt>do while</tt> loop is an exit-condition loop.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2.</b></td><td class="docText">It would print the following:
<div class="docText"><pre>01234</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Note that <tt>cout &lt;&lt; endl;</tt> is not part of the loop body (because there are no braces).</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3.</b></td><td class="docText">It would print the following:
<div class="docText"><pre>0369
12</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4.</b></td><td class="docText">It would print the following:
<div class="docText"><pre>6
8</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5.</b></td><td class="docText">It would print the following:
<div class="docText"><pre>k = 8</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6.</b></td><td class="docText">It’s simplest to use the <tt>*=</tt> operator:
<div class="docText"><pre>for (int num = 1; num &lt;= 64; num *= 2)
    cout &lt;&lt; num &lt;&lt; " ";</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>7.</b></td><td class="docText">You enclose the statements within paired braces to form a single compound statement, or block.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>8.</b></td><td class="docText">Yes,
 the first statement is valid. The expression 1,024 consists of two 
expressions—1 and 024—joined by a comma operator. The value is the value
 of the right-hand expression. This is 024, which is octal for 20, so 
the declaration assigns the value <tt>20</tt> to <tt>x</tt>. The second statement is also valid. However, operator precedence causes it to be evaluated as follows:
<div class="docText"><pre>(y = 1), 024;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">That is, the left expression sets <tt>y</tt> to <tt>1</tt>, and the value of the entire expression, which isn’t used, is <tt>024</tt>, or <tt>20</tt>.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9.</b></td><td class="docText">The <tt>cin &gt;&gt; ch</tt> form skips over spaces, newlines, and tabs when it encounters them. The other two forms read those characters.</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
