<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Answers to Chapter Review for Chapter 7</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Answers to Chapter Review for Chapter 7</h3>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1.</b></td><td class="docText">The three steps are defining the function, providing a prototype, and calling the function.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2.</b></td><td class="docText"><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>void igor(void); // or void igor()</tt></p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>float tofu(int n); // or float tofu(int);</tt></p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>double mpg(double miles, double gallons);</tt></p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>long summation(long harray[], int size);</tt></p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>double doctor(const char * str);</tt></p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>void ofcourse(boss dude);</tt></p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>char * plot(map *pmap);</tt></p></div></li></ol></div></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3.</b></td><td class="docText"><div class="docText"><pre>void set_array(int arr[], int size, int value)
{
    for (int i = 0; i &lt; size; i++)
        arr[i] = value;
}</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4.</b></td><td class="docText"><div class="docText"><pre>void set_array(int * begin, int * end, int value)
{
    for (int * pt = begin; pt != end; pt++)
        pt* = value;
}</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5.</b></td><td class="docText"><div class="docText"><pre>double biggest (const double foot[], int size)
{
    double max;
    if (size &lt; 1)
    {
        cout &lt;&lt; "Invalid array size of " &lt;&lt; size &lt;&lt; endl;
        cout &lt;&lt; "Returning a value of 0\n";
        return 0;
    }
    else    // not necessary because return terminates program
    {
        max = foot[0];
        for (int i = 1; i &lt; size; i++)
            if (foot[i] &gt; max)
                max = foot[i];
        return max;
    }
}</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6.</b></td><td class="docText">You use the <tt>const</tt>
 qualifier with pointers to protect the original pointed-to data from 
being altered. When a program passes a fundamental type such as an <tt>int</tt> or a <tt>double</tt>, it passes it by value so that the function works with a copy. Thus, the original data is already protected.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>7.</b></td><td class="docText">A string can be stored in a <tt>char</tt>
 array, it can be represented by a string constant in double quotation 
marks, and it can be represented by a pointer pointing to the first 
character of a string.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>8.</b></td><td class="docText"><div class="docText"><pre>int replace(char * str, char c1, char c2)
{
    int count = 0;
    while (*str)      // while not at end of string
    {
        if (*str == c1)
        {
            *str = c2;
            count++;
        }
        str++;        // advance to next character
    }
    return count;
}</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9.</b></td><td class="docText">Because C++ interprets <tt>"pizza"</tt> as the address of its first element, applying the <tt>*</tt> operator yields the value of that first element, which is the character <tt>p</tt>. Because C++ interprets <tt>"taco"</tt> as the address of its first element, it interprets <tt>"taco"[2]</tt> as the value of the element two positions down the line—that is, as the character <tt>c</tt>. In other words, the string constant acts the same as an array name.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>10.</b></td><td class="docText">To pass it by value, you just pass the structure name <tt>glitz</tt>. To pass its address, you use the address operator <tt>&amp;glitz</tt>.
 Passing by the value automatically protects the original data, but it 
takes time and memory. Passing by address saves time and memory but 
doesn’t protect the original data unless you use the <tt>const</tt>
 modifier for the function parameter. Also passing by value means you 
can use ordinary structure member notation, but passing a pointer means 
you have to remember to use the indirect membership operator.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11.</b></td><td class="docText"><tt>int judge (int (*pf)(const char *));</tt></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>12.</b></td><td class="docText"><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Note that if <tt>ap</tt> is an <tt>applicant</tt> structure, then <tt>ap.credit_ratings</tt> is an array name and <tt>ap.credit_ratings[i]</tt> is an array element.</p><div class="docText"><pre>void display(applicant ap)
{
    cout &lt;&lt; ap.name &lt;&lt; endl;
    for (int i = 0; i &lt; 3; i++)
        cout  &lt;&lt; ap.credit_ratings[i] &lt;&lt;  endl;
}</pre></div></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Note that if <tt>pa</tt> is a pointer to an <tt>applicant</tt> structure, then <tt>pa-&gt;credit_ratings</tt> is an array name and <tt>pa-&gt;credit_ratings[i]</tt> is an array element.</p><div class="docText"><pre>void show(const applicant * pa)
{
    cout &lt;&lt; pa-&gt;name &lt;&lt; endl;
    for (int i = 0; i &lt; 3; i++)
        cout  &lt;&lt; pa-&gt;credit_ratings[i] &lt;&lt;  endl;
}</pre></div></div></li></ol></div></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>13.</b></td><td class="docText"><div class="docText"><pre>typedef void (*p_f1)(applicant *);
p_f1 p1 = f1;
typedef const char * (*p_f2)(const applicant *, const applicant *);
p_f2 p2 = f2;
p_f1 ap[5];
p_f2 (*pa)[10];</pre></div><br/></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
