<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Answers to Chapter Review for Chapter 8</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Answers to Chapter Review for Chapter 8</h3>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1.</b></td><td class="docText">Short, nonrecursive functions that can fit in one line of code are good candidates for inline status.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2.</b></td><td class="docText"><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>void song(const char * name, int times = 1);</tt></p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">None. Only prototypes contain the default value information.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Yes, provided that you retain the default value for <tt>times</tt>:</p><div class="docText"><pre>void song(char * name = "O, My Papa", int times = 1);</pre></div></div></li></ol></div></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3.</b></td><td class="docText">You can use either the string ″\″″ or the character ′″′ to print a quotation mark. The following functions show both methods:
<div class="docText"><pre>#include &lt;iostream.h&gt;
void iquote(int n)
{
    cout &lt;&lt; "\"" &lt;&lt; n &lt;&lt; "\"";
}

void iquote(double x)
{
    cout &lt;&lt; '"' &lt;&lt; x &lt;&lt; '"';
}

void iquote(const char * str)
{
    cout &lt;&lt; "\"" &lt;&lt; str &lt;&lt; "\"";
}</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4.</b></td><td class="docText"><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">This function shouldn’t alter the structure members, so use the <tt>const</tt> qualifier:</p><div class="docText"><pre>void show_box(const box &amp; container)
{
    cout &lt;&lt; "Made by " &lt;&lt; container. maker &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Height = " &lt;&lt; container.height &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Width = " &lt;&lt; container.width &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Length = " &lt;&lt; container.length &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Volume = " &lt;&lt; container.volume &lt;&lt; endl;
}</pre></div></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"></p><div class="docText"><pre>void set_volume(box &amp; crate)
{
    crate.volume = crate.height * crate.width * crate.length;
}</pre></div><p></p></div></li></ol></div></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5.</b></td><td class="docText">First, change the prototypes to the following:
<div class="docText"><pre>// function to modify array object
void fill(std::array&lt;double, Seasons&gt; &amp; pa);
// function that uses array object without modifying it
void show(const std::array&lt;double, Seasons&gt; &amp; da);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Note that <tt>show()</tt> should use <tt>const</tt> to protect the object from being modified. Next, within <tt>main()</tt>, change the <tt>fill()</tt> call to this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>fill(expenses);</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">There’s no change to the <tt>show()</tt> call.</p>
<p class="docText">Next, the new <tt>fill()</tt> should look like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>void fill(std::array&lt;double, Seasons&gt; &amp; pa)  // changed
{
    using namespace std;
    for (int i = 0; i &lt; Seasons; i++)
    {
        cout &lt;&lt; "Enter " &lt;&lt; Snames[i] &lt;&lt; " expenses: ";
        cin &gt;&gt; pa[i];     // changed
    }
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Note that <tt>(*pa)[i]</tt> gets changed to the simpler <tt>pa[i]</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Finally, the only change to <tt>show()</tt> is to the function header:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>void show(std::array&lt;double, Seasons&gt; &amp; da)</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6.</b></td><td class="docText"><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">This can be done by using a default value for the second argument:</p><div class="docText"><pre>double mass(double d, double v = 1.0);</pre></div><p class="docList">It can also be done by using function overloading:</p><div class="docText"><pre>double mass(double d, double v);
double mass(double d);</pre></div></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">You
 can’t use a default for the repeat value because you have to provide 
default values from right to left. You can use overloading:</p><div class="docText"><pre>void repeat(int times, const char * str);
void repeat(const char * str);</pre></div></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">You can use function overloading:</p><div class="docText"><pre>int average(int a, int b);
double average(double x, double y);</pre></div></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">You can’t do this because both versions would have the same signature.</p></div></li></ol></div></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>7.</b></td><td class="docText"><div class="docText"><pre>template&lt;class T&gt;
T max(T t1, T t2)  // or T max(const T &amp; t1, const T &amp; t2)
{
    return t1 &gt; t2? t1 : t2;
}</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>8.</b></td><td class="docText"><div class="docText"><pre>template&lt;&gt; box max(box b1, box b2)
{
    return b1.volume &gt; b2.volume? b1 : b2;
}</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9.</b></td><td class="docText"><tt>v1</tt> is type <tt>float</tt>, <tt>v2</tt> is type <tt>float &amp;</tt>, <tt>v3</tt> is type <tt>float &amp;</tt>, <tt>v4</tt> is type <tt>int</tt>, and <tt>v5</tt> is type <tt>double</tt>. The literal <tt>2.0</tt> is type <tt>double</tt>, so the product <tt>2.0 * m</tt> is double.</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
