<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Answers to Chapter Review for Chapter 9</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Answers to Chapter Review for Chapter 9</h3>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1.</b></td><td class="docText"><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>homer</tt> is automatically an automatic variable.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>secret</tt> should be defined as an external variable in one file and declared using <tt>extern</tt><a name="second file"></a> in the second file.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>topsecret</tt> could be defined as a static variable with internal linkage by prefacing the external definition with the keyword <tt>static</tt>. Or it could be defined in an unnamed namespace.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>beencalled</tt> should be defined as a local static variable by prefacing a declaration in the function with the keyword <tt>static</tt>.</p></div></li></ol></div></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2.</b></td><td class="docText">A <tt>using</tt>
 declaration makes available a single name from a namespace, and it has 
the scope corresponding to the declarative region in which the <tt>using</tt> declaration occurs. A <tt>using</tt> directive makes available all the names in a namespace. When you use a <tt>using</tt> directive, it is as if you have declared the names in the smallest declarative region containing both the <tt>using</tt> declaration and the namespace itself.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3.</b></td><td class="docText"><div class="docText"><pre>#include &lt;iostream&gt;
int main()
{
    double x;
    std::cout &lt;&lt; "Enter value: ";
    while (! (std::cin &gt;&gt; x) )
    {
        std::cout &lt;&lt; "Bad input. Please enter a number: ";
        std::cin.clear();
       while (std::cin.get() != '\n')
           continue;
    }
    std::cout &lt;&lt; "Value = " &lt;&lt; x &lt;&lt; std::endl;
    return 0;
}</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4.</b></td><td class="docText">Here is the revised code:
<div class="docText"><pre>#include &lt;iostream&gt;
int main()
{
    using std::cin;
    using std::cout;
    using std::endl;
    double x;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Enter value: ";
    while (! (cin &gt;&gt; x) )
    {
        cout &lt;&lt; "Bad input. Please enter a number: ";
        cin.clear();
       while (cin.get() != '\n')
           continue;
    }
    cout &lt;&lt; "Value = " &lt;&lt; x &lt;&lt; endl;
    return 0;
}</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5.</b></td><td class="docText">You could have separate static function definitions in each file. Or each file could define the appropriate <tt>average()</tt> function in an unnamed namespace.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6.</b></td><td class="docText"><div class="docText"><pre>10
4
0
Other: 10, 1
another(): 10, -4</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>7.</b></td><td class="docText"><div class="docText"><pre>1
4, 1, 2
2
2
4, 1, 2
2</pre></div><br/></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
