<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Answers to Chapter Review for Chapter 10</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Answers to Chapter Review for Chapter 10</h3>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1.</b></td><td class="docText">A
 class is a definition of a user-defined type. A class declaration 
specifies how data is to be stored, and it specifies the methods (class 
member functions) that can be used to access and manipulate that data.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2.</b></td><td class="docText">A
 class represents the operations you can perform on a class object with a
 public interface of class methods; this is abstraction. The class can 
use private visibility (the default) for data members, meaning that the 
data can be accessed only through the member functions; this is data 
hiding. Details of the implementation, such as data representation and 
method code, are hidden; this is encapsulation.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3.</b></td><td class="docText">A class defines a type, including how it can be used. An object is a variable or another data object, such as that produced by <tt>new</tt>,
 which is created and used according to the class definition. The 
relationship between a class and an object is the same as that between a
 standard type and a variable of that type.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4.</b></td><td class="docText">If
 you create several objects of a given class, each object comes with 
storage for its own set of data. But all the objects use the one set of 
member functions. (Typically, methods are public and data members are 
private, but that’s a matter of policy, not of class requirements.)</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5.</b></td><td class="docText">This example use <tt>char</tt> arrays to hold the character data, but you could use <tt>string</tt> class objects instead.
<div class="docText"><pre>// #include &lt;cstring&gt;

// class definition
class BankAccount
{
private:
    char name[40];     // or std::string name;
    char acctnum[25];  // or std::string acctnum;
    double balance;
public:
    BankAccount(const char * client, const char * num, double bal = 0.0);
//or BankAccount(const std::string &amp; client,
//               const std::string &amp; num, double bal = 0.0);

    void show(void) const;
    void deposit(double cash);
    void withdraw(double cash);
};</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6.</b></td><td class="docText">A
 class constructor is called when you create an object of that class or 
when you explicitly call the constructor. A class destructor is called 
when the object expires.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>7.</b></td><td class="docText">These are two possible solutions (note that you must include <tt>cstring</tt> or <tt>string.h</tt> in order to use <tt>strncpy()</tt> or else you must include <tt>string</tt> to use the <tt>string</tt> class):
<div class="docText"><pre>BankAccount::BankAccount(const char * client, const char * num, double bal)
{
    strncpy(name, client, 39);
    name[39] = '\0';
    strncpy(acctnum, num, 24);
    acctnum[24] = '\0';
    balance = bal;
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">or</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>BankAccount::BankAccount(const std::string &amp; client,
                         const std::string &amp; num, double bal)
{
    name = client;
    acctnum = num;
    balance = bal;
}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Keep in mind that default arguments go in the prototype, not in the function definition.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>8.</b></td><td class="docText">A
 default constructor either has no arguments or has defaults for all the
 arguments. Having a default constructor enables you to declare objects 
without initializing them, even if you’ve already defined an 
initializing constructor. It also allows you to declare arrays.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9.</b></td><td class="docText"><div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedHeight">// stock30.h
#ifndef STOCK30_H_
#define STOCK30_H_

class Stock
{
private:
    std::string company;
    long shares;
    double share_val;
    double total_val;
    void set_tot() { total_val = shares * share_val; }
public:
    Stock();            // default constructor
    Stock(const std::string &amp; co, long n, double pr);
    ~Stock() {}         // do-nothing destructor
    void buy(long num, double price);
    void sell(long num, double price);
    void update(double price);
    void show() const;
    const Stock &amp; topval(const Stock &amp; s) const;
    int numshares() const { return shares; }
    double shareval() const { return share_val; }
    double totalval() const { return total_val; }
    const string &amp; co_name() const { return company; }
};

					  </pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>10.</b></td><td class="docText">The <tt>this</tt> pointer is available to class methods. It points to the object used to invoke the method. Thus, <tt>this</tt> is the address of the object, and <tt>*this</tt> represents the object itself.</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
