<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Answers to Chapter Review for Chapter 13</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Answers to Chapter Review for Chapter 13</h3>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1.</b></td><td class="docText">The
 public members of the base class become public members of the derived 
class. The protected members of the base class become protected members 
of the derived class. The private members of the base class are 
inherited but cannot be accessed directly. The answer to Review Question
 2 provides the exceptions to these general rules.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2.</b></td><td class="docText">The
 constructor methods are not inherited, the destructor is not inherited,
 the assignment operator is not inherited, and friends are not 
inherited.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3.</b></td><td class="docText">If the return type were <tt>void</tt>, you would still be able to use single assignment but not chain assignment:
<div class="docText"><pre>baseDMA magazine("Pandering to Glitz", 1);
baseDMA gift1, gift2, gift3;
gift1 = magazine;         // ok
gift 2 = gift3 = gift1;   // no longer valid</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">If the method returned an 
object instead of a reference, the method execution would be slowed a 
bit because the return statement would involve copying the object.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4.</b></td><td class="docText">Constructors
 are called in the order of derivation, with the most ancestral 
constructor called first. Destructors are called in the opposite order.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5.</b></td><td class="docText">Yes,
 every class requires its own constructors. If the derived class adds no
 new members, the constructor can have an empty body, but it must exist.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6.</b></td><td class="docText">Only
 the derived-class method is called. It supersedes the base-class 
definition. A base-class method is called only if the derived class does
 not redefine the method or if you use the scope-resolution operator. 
However, you really should declare as virtual any functions that will be
 redefined.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>7.</b></td><td class="docText">The derived class should define an assignment operator if the derived-class constructors use the <tt>new</tt> or <tt>new []</tt>
 operator to initialize pointers that are members of that class. More 
generally, the derived class should define an assignment operator if the
 default assignment is incorrect for derived-class members.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>8.</b></td><td class="docText">Yes,
 you can assign the address of an object of a derived class to a pointer
 to the base class. You can assign the address of a base-class object to
 a pointer to a derived class (downcasting) only by making an explicit 
type cast, and it is not necessarily safe to use such a pointer.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9.</b></td><td class="docText">Yes,
 you can assign an object of a derived class to an object of the base 
class. Any data members that are new to the derived type are not passed 
to the base type, however. The program uses the base-class assignment 
operator. Assignment in the opposite direction (base to derived) is 
possible only if the derived class defines a conversion operator, which 
is a constructor that has a reference to the base type as its sole 
argument, or else defines an assignment operator with a base-class 
parameter.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>10.</b></td><td class="docText">It can do so because C++ allows a reference to a base type to refer to any type derived from that base.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11.</b></td><td class="docText">Passing
 an object by value invokes the copy constructor. Because the formal 
argument is a base-class object, the base-class copy constructor is 
invoked. The copy constructor has as its argument a reference to the 
base class, and this reference can refer to the derived object passed as
 an argument. The net result is that a new base-class object whose 
members correspond to the base class portion of the derived object is 
produced.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>12.</b></td><td class="docText">Passing
 an object by reference instead of by value enables the function to 
avail itself of virtual functions. Also passing an object by reference 
instead of by value may use less memory and time, particularly for large
 objects. The main advantage of passing by value is that it protects the
 original data, but you can accomplish the same end by passing the 
reference as a <tt>const</tt> type.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>13.</b></td><td class="docText">If <tt>head()</tt> is a regular method, then <tt>ph-&gt;head()</tt> invokes <tt>Corporation::head()</tt>. If <tt>head()</tt> is a virtual function, then <tt>ph-&gt;head()</tt> invokes <tt>PublicCorporation::head()</tt>.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>14.</b></td><td class="docText">First, the situation does not fit the <span class="docEmphasis">is-a</span> model, so public inheritance is not appropriate. Second, the definition of <tt>area()</tt> in <tt>House</tt> hides the <tt>Kitchen</tt> version of <tt>area()</tt> because the two methods have different signatures.</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
