<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Answers to Chapter Review for Chapter 16</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Answers to Chapter Review for Chapter 16</h3>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1.</b></td><td class="docText"><div class="docText"><pre>#include &lt;string&gt;
using namespace std;
class RQ1
{
private:
    string st;       // a string object
public:
    RQ1() : st("") {}
    RQ1(const char * s) : st(s) {}
    ~RQ1() {};
// more stuff
};</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The explicit copy constructor, destructor, and assignment operator are no longer needed because the <tt>string</tt> object provides its own memory management.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2.</b></td><td class="docText">You can assign one <tt>string</tt> object to another. A <tt>string</tt>
 object provides its own memory management so that you normally don’t 
have to worry about a string exceeding the capacity of its holder.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3.</b></td><td class="docText"><div class="docText"><pre>#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;cctype&gt;
using namespace std;
void ToUpper(string &amp; str)
{
    for (int i = 0; i &lt; str.size(); i++)
        str[i] = toupper(str[i]);
}</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4.</b></td><td class="docText"><div class="docText"><pre>auto_ptr&lt;int&gt; pia= new int[20];  // wrong, use with new, not new[]
auto_ptr&lt;string&gt;(new string);    // wrong, no name for pointer
int rigue = 7;
auto_ptr&lt;int&gt;(&amp;rigue);           // wrong, memory not allocated by new
auto_ptr dbl (new double);       // wrong, omits &lt;double&gt;</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5.</b></td><td class="docText">The LIFO aspect of a stack means you might have to remove a lot of clubs before reaching the one you need.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6.</b></td><td class="docText">The set will store just one copy of each value, so, say, five scores of <tt>5</tt> would be stored as a single <tt>5</tt>.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>7.</b></td><td class="docText">Using
 iterators allows you to use objects with a pointer-like interface to 
move through data that is organized in some fashion other than an array 
(for example, data in a doubly linked list).</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>8.</b></td><td class="docText">The
 STL approach allows STL functions to be used with ordinary pointers to 
ordinary arrays as well as with iterators to STL container classes, thus
 increasing generality.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9.</b></td><td class="docText">You can assign one <tt>vector</tt> object to another. A <tt>vector</tt> manages its own memory, so you can insert items into a vector and have it resize itself automatically. By using the <tt>at()</tt> method, you can get automatic bounds checking.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>10.</b></td><td class="docText">The two <tt>sort()</tt> functions and the <tt>random_shuffle()</tt> function require a random access iterator, whereas a <tt>list</tt> object just has a bidirectional iterator. You can use the list template class <tt>sort()</tt> member functions (see Appendix G,
 “The STL Methods and Functions”) instead of the general-purpose 
functions to do the sorting, but there is no member function equivalent 
to <tt>random_shuffle()</tt>. However, you could copy the list to a vector, shuffle the vector, and copy the results back to the list.</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
