<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Answers to Chapter Review for Chapter 17</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Answers to Chapter Review for Chapter 17</h3>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1.</b></td><td class="docText">The <tt>iostream</tt>
 file defines the classes, constants, and manipulators used to manage 
input and output. These objects manage the streams and buffers used to 
handle I/O. The file also creates standard objects (<tt>cin</tt>, <tt>cout</tt>, <tt>cerr</tt>, and <tt>clog</tt> and their wide-character equivalents) used to handle the standard input and output streams connected to every program.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2.</b></td><td class="docText">Keyboard entry generates a series of characters. Typing <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>121</tt></span> generates three characters, each represented by a 1-byte binary code. If the value is to be stored as type <tt>int</tt>, these three characters have to be converted to a single binary representation of the value 121.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3.</b></td><td class="docText">By
 default, both the standard output and the standard error send output to
 the standard output device, typically a monitor. If you have the 
operating system redirect output to a file, however, the standard output
 connects to the file instead of to the screen, but the standard error 
continues to be connected to the screen.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4.</b></td><td class="docText">The <tt>ostream</tt> class defines a version of the <tt>operator&lt;&lt;()</tt> function for each basic C++ type. The compiler interprets an expression like
<div class="docText"><pre>cout &lt;&lt; spot</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">as the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>cout.operator&lt;&lt;(spot)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">It can then match this method call to the function prototype that has the same argument type.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5.</b></td><td class="docText">You can concatenate output methods that return type <tt>ostream &amp;</tt>.
 This causes the invoking of a method with an object to return that 
object. The returned object can then invoke the next method in a 
sequence.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6.</b></td><td class="docText"><div class="docText"><pre>//rq17-6.cpp
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;iomanip&gt;

int main()
{
    using namespace std;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Enter an integer: ";
    int n;
    cin &gt;&gt; n;
    cout &lt;&lt; setw(15) &lt;&lt; "base ten" &lt;&lt; setw(15)
           &lt;&lt; "base sixteen" &lt;&lt; setw(15) &lt;&lt; "base eight" &lt;&lt; "\n";
    cout.setf(ios::showbase);    // or cout &lt;&lt; showbase;
    cout &lt;&lt; setw(15) &lt;&lt; n &lt;&lt; hex &lt;&lt; setw(15) &lt;&lt; n
           &lt;&lt; oct &lt;&lt; setw(15) &lt;&lt; n &lt;&lt; "\n";

    return 0;
}</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>7.</b></td><td class="docText"><div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedHeight">//rq17-7.cpp
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;iomanip&gt;

int main()
{
    using namespace std;
    char name[20];
    float hourly;
    float hours;

    cout &lt;&lt; "Enter your name: ";
    cin.get(name, 20).get();
    cout &lt;&lt; "Enter your hourly wages: ";
    cin &gt;&gt; hourly;
    cout &lt;&lt; "Enter number of hours worked: ";
    cin &gt;&gt; hours;

    cout.setf(ios::showpoint);
    cout.setf(ios::fixed, ios::floatfield);
    cout.setf(ios::right, ios::adjustfield);
// or cout &lt;&lt; showpoint &lt;&lt; fixed &lt;&lt; right;
    cout &lt;&lt; "First format:\n";
    cout &lt;&lt; setw(30) &lt;&lt; name &lt;&lt; ": $" &lt;&lt; setprecision(2)
         &lt;&lt; setw(10) &lt;&lt; hourly &lt;&lt; ":" &lt;&lt; setprecision(1)
         &lt;&lt; setw(5) &lt;&lt; hours &lt;&lt; "\n";
    cout &lt;&lt; "Second format:\n";
    cout.setf(ios::left, ios::adjustfield);
    cout &lt;&lt; setw(30) &lt;&lt; name &lt;&lt; ": $" &lt;&lt; setprecision(2)
         &lt;&lt; setw(10) &lt;&lt; hourly &lt;&lt; ":" &lt;&lt; setprecision(1)
         &lt;&lt; setw(5) &lt;&lt; hours &lt;&lt; "\n";

    return 0;
}

					  </pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>8.</b></td><td class="docText">Here is the output:
<div class="docText"><pre>ct1 = 5; ct2 = 9</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The first part of the program 
ignores spaces and newline characters; the second part doesn’t. Note 
that the second part of the program begins reading at the newline 
character following the first <tt>q</tt>, and it counts that newline character as part of its total.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9.</b></td><td class="docText">The <tt>ignore()</tt> form falters if the input line exceeds 80 characters. In that case, it skips only the first 80 characters.</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
