<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Answers to Chapter Review for Chapter 18</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Answers to Chapter Review for Chapter 18</h3>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1.</b></td><td class="docText"><div class="docText"><pre>class Z200
{
private:
    int j;
    char ch;
    double z;
public:
    Z200(int jv, char chv, zv) : j(jv), ch(chv), z(zv) {}
...
};

double x {8.8};  // or = {8.8}
std::string s {"What a bracing effect!"};
int k{99};
Z200 zip{200,'Z',0.67});
std::vector&lt;int&gt; ai {3, 9, 4, 7, 1};</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2.</b></td><td class="docText"><tt>r1(w)</tt> is valid, and the argument <tt>rx</tt> refers to <tt>w</tt>.
<p class="docText"><tt>r1(w+1)</tt> is valid, and the argument <tt>rx</tt> refers to a temporary initialized to the value of <tt>w+1</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText"><tt>r1(up(w))</tt> is valid, and the argument <tt>rx</tt> refers to a temporary initialized to the return value of <tt>up(w)</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">In general, if an lvalue is passed to a <tt>const</tt> lvalue reference parameter, the parameter is initialized to the lvalue. If an rvalue is passed to the function, a <tt>const</tt> lvalue reference parameter refers to a temporary copy of the value.</p>
<p class="docText"><tt>r2(w)</tt> is valid, and the argument <tt>rx</tt> refers to <tt>w</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText"><tt>r2(w+1)</tt> is an error because <tt>w+1</tt> is an rvalue.</p>
<p class="docText"><tt>r2(up(w))</tt> is an error because the return value of <tt>up(w)</tt> is an rvalue.</p>
<p class="docText">In general, if an lvalue is passed to a non-<tt>const</tt> lvalue reference parameter, the parameter is initialized to the lvalue. But a non-<tt>const</tt> lvalue reference parameter can’t accept an rvalue function argument.</p>
<p class="docText"><tt>r3(w)</tt> is an error because an rvalue reference cannot refer to an lvalue, such as <tt>w</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText"><tt>r3(w+1)</tt> is valid, and <tt>rx</tt> refers to the temporary value of the expression <tt>w+1</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText"><tt>r3(up(w))</tt> is valid, and <tt>rx</tt> refers to the temporary return value of <tt>up(w)</tt></p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3.</b></td><td class="docText"><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"></p><div class="docText"><pre>double &amp; rx
const double &amp; rx
const double &amp; rx</pre></div><p></p><p class="docList">The non-<tt>const</tt> lvalue reference matches the lvalue argument <tt>w</tt>. The other two arguments are rvalues, and the <tt>const</tt> lvalue reference can refer to copies of them.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"></p><div class="docText"><pre>double &amp; rx
double &amp;&amp; rx
double &amp;&amp; rx</pre></div><p></p><p class="docList">The lvalue reference matches the lvalue argument <tt>w</tt>, and the rvalue references matches the two rvalue arguments.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"></p><div class="docText"><pre>const double &amp; rx
double &amp;&amp; rx
double &amp;&amp; rx</pre></div><p></p><p class="docList">The <tt>const</tt> lvalue reference matches the lvalue argument <tt>w</tt>, and the rvalue reference matches the two rvalues.</p><p class="docList">In short, a non-<tt>const</tt> lvalue parameter matches an lvalue argument, a non-<tt>const</tt> rvalue parameter matches an rvalue argument, and a <tt>const</tt>
 lvalue parameter can match either an lvalue or an rvalue argument, but 
the compiler will prefer the first two choices, if available.</p></div></li></ol></div></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4.</b></td><td class="docText">They
 are the default constructor, the copy constructor, the move 
constructor, the destructor, the copy assignment operator, and the move 
assignment operator. They are special because the compiler can 
automatically provide defaulted versions of these functions, depending 
on the context.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5.</b></td><td class="docText">A
 move constructor can be used when it makes sense to transfer ownership 
of data instead of copying it, but there is no mechanism for 
transferring ownership of a standard array. If the <tt>Fizzle</tt>
 class used a pointer and dynamic memory allocation, then one can 
transfer ownership by reassigning the address of the data to a new 
pointer.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6.</b></td><td class="docText"><div class="docText"><pre>#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;algorithm&gt;
template&lt;typename T&gt;
  void show2(double x, T fp) {std::cout &lt;&lt; x &lt;&lt; " -&gt; " &lt;&lt; fp(x) &lt;&lt; '\n';}
int main()
{
    show2(18.0, [](double x){return 1.8*x + 32;});
    return 0;
}</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>7.</b></td><td class="docText"><div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;array&gt;
#include &lt;algorithm&gt;
const int Size = 5;
template&lt;typename T&gt;
  void sum(std::array&lt;double,Size&gt; a, T&amp; fp);
int main()
{
    double total = 0.0;
    std::array&lt;double, Size&gt; temp_c = {32.1, 34.3, 37.8, 35.2, 34.7};
    sum(temp_c, [&amp;total](double w){total += w;});
    std::cout &lt;&lt; "total: " &lt;&lt; total &lt;&lt; '\n';
    std::cin.get();
    return 0;
}
template&lt;typename T&gt;
  void sum(std::array&lt;double,Size&gt; a, T&amp; fp)
{
    for(auto pt = a.begin(); pt != a.end(); ++pt)
    {
        fp(*pt);
    }
}

					  </pre></div><br/></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
