<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 2. Code Coverage</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h2 class="docChapterTitle" id="title-ID0EIKAE">Chapter 2. Code Coverage</h2>
<p class="docText">In this chapter</p>
<p></p><table cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0" frame="void" rules="none"><colgroup align="left" span="3"><col width="10"></col><col width="300"></col><col width="200"></col></colgroup><thead></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">▪</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">What Is Code Coverage Analysis?</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">page 38</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">▪</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">gcov Can’t Find Logic Errors</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">page 39</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">▪</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Types of Code Coverage</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">page 40</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">▪</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">gcc Options Needed for gcov</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">page 41</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">▪</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Summary</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">page 52</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">▪</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Web Resource for gcov</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">page 52</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">Before
 releasing any code, developers usually test their work to tune 
performance and prove that the software works as intended. But often, 
validation is quite difficult, even if the application is simple.</p>
<p class="docText">For example, the 
venerable UNIX/Linux ls utility is conceptually quite simple, yet its 
many options and the myriad vagaries of the underlying file system make 
validating ls quite a challenge.</p>
<p class="docText">To help validate the 
operation of their code, developers often rely on test suites to either 
simulate or re-create operational scenarios. If the test suite is 
thorough, all the code’s features can be exercised and be shown to work.</p>
<p class="docText">But how thorough is 
thorough? In theory, a completely thorough test suite would test all 
circumstances, validate all the results, and exercise every single line 
of code, demonstrating that no code is “dead.” Dead code is a favorite 
hiding place for pesky bugs. Results can be validated in any number of 
ways, because output typically is tangible in one form or another, but 
how is it possible to make sure that all your code was executed? Use 
GNU’s gcov.</p>
<p class="docText">Like an X-ray machine, 
gcov peers into your code and reports on its inner workings. And gcov is
 easy to use. You simply compile your code with gcc and two extra 
options, and your code automatically generates data that highlights 
statement-by-statement runtime coverage. Best of all, gcov is readily 
available: if gcc is installed, gcov is also available, because gcov is a
 standard part of the GNU development tools.</p>
<p class="docText">The next section looks at 
code coverage analysis and shows you how to use gcov to improve the 
quality of your code and the quality and thoroughness of your test 
suites.</p>

<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">What Is Code Coverage Analysis?</h3>
<p class="docText">As mentioned, it’s ideal to 
find dead code and get rid of it. In some cases, it’s appropriate to 
remove dead code because it’s unneeded or obsolete. Dead code can’t 
cause a programming error, but it’s a good idea to find code that can no
 longer be executed and remove it. Removing the dead code increases the 
source code’s readability.</p>
<p class="docText">In other cases, the test suite itself may have to be expanded to be more thorough. <span class="docEmphasis">Code coverage analysis</span>
 is the (often iterative) process of finding and targeting “dead” or 
unexercised code. It’s characterized by the following steps:</p>

<table border="0" class="docText"><tbody><tr><td valign="top" width="25"><div class="docText"><b>1. </b></div></td><td><div class="docText">Find the areas of a program not exercised by the test suite.<br/><br/>
</div></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="25"><div class="docText"><b>2. </b></div></td><td><div class="docText">Create additional test cases to exercise the code, thereby increasing code coverage.<br/><br/>
</div></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="25"><div class="docText"><b>3. </b></div></td><td><div class="docText">Determine a quantitative measure of code coverage, which is an indirect measure of the program’s quality.<br/><br/>
</div></td></tr></tbody></table>
<p class="docText">Code coverage analysis
 is also useful to identify which test cases are appropriate to run when
 changes are made to a program and to identify which test cases do not 
increase coverage.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
