<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>None</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">gcov Can’t Find Logic Errors</h3>
<p class="docText">Unfortunately, code coverage analysis doesn’t find logic errors. Consider the following code:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>10:  rc = call_to_xx ();
11:  if (rc == ERROR_FATAL)
12:    exit(2);    /* exit with error code 2 */
13:  else
14:    /* continue on */</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">When the code coverage 
was checked for this snippet of code, the output from the test coverage 
tool stated that line 11 was never true, so the exit with error code 2 
wasn’t tested. The apparently obvious test case to write is a scenario 
in which the operation fails with ERROR_FATAL. That seems to be 
sufficient—<span class="docEmphasis">unless</span>
 the call to call_to_xx routine returns other error conditions. For 
example, if call_to_xx returns ERROR_HANDLE, the new test would not 
cover the code completely.</p>
<p class="docText">Instead, the code should have been written to handle both error conditions—ERROR_FATAL and ERROR_HANDLE:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>10:  rc  = call_to_xx ();
11:  if (rc == ERROR_FATAL)
12:    exit(2);    /* exit with error code 2 */
13:  else if (rc == ERROR_HANDLE)
14:    /* handle this error condition */
15:  else
16:    /* continue on */</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The test suite should check that the code handles ERROR_HANDLE correctly. But no test does that for this error condition.</p>
<p class="docText">No test coverage tool will
 tell you that this is needed. It can’t. The test coverage tool can only
 identify the coverage on the existing code.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
