<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Debugging Techniques</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Debugging Techniques</h3>
<p class="docText">Now let’s look at some helpful hints for debugging an application more quickly.</p>
<p class="docText">When debugging, it is often a good practice to stop program execution at the bottom of a function so that a <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span>
 or multiple displays can be done to see the current values stored in 
the data the function has altered. There is no simple built-in gdb 
statement to do this, but you can do the following:</p>

<table border="0" class="docText"><tbody><tr><td valign="top" width="25"><div class="docText"><b>1. </b></div></td><td><div class="docText">Do a <span class="docEmphStrong">list funct_name</span>, and find the number of the line (<span class="docEmphStrong">line#</span>) in that function where the function <span class="docEmphStrong">end-block-delimiter</span> (<span class="docEmphStrong">}</span>) is.<br/><br/>
</div></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="25"><div class="docText"><b>2. </b></div></td><td><div class="docText">Set a break point at each of these line numbers using the following:<br/><br/>
<div class="docText"><pre>"break &lt;line#&gt;"</pre></div><br/>
</div></td></tr></tbody></table>
<p class="docText">Use the line numbers that were identified in step 1. When the <span class="docEmphStrong">run</span>
 command is issued in the debugger, the program execution stops at the 
end of each function in the program. At that time you can do a <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> to examine the values currently stored in program data objects (global, local, or parameters passed into the function).</p>
<p class="docText">You can find out where a program is crashing. A <span class="docEmphStrong">segmentation fault - core dumped</span> message, a <span class="docEmphStrong">bus error</span>
 message, and other such messages indicate that the logic at some point 
in a program is incorrect. For this reason, the program execution cannot
 continue—that is, the program stops running, or a crash happens.</p>
<p class="docText">To find out the exact line of source code that caused your program to crash, do the following:</p>

<table border="0" class="docText"><tbody><tr><td valign="top" width="25"><div class="docText"><b>1. </b></div></td><td><div class="docText">Compile your program using the <span class="docEmphStrong">-g</span> compiler option if this hasn’t already been done.<br/><br/>
</div></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="25"><div class="docText"><b>2. </b></div></td><td><div class="docText">Enter <span class="docEmphStrong">gdb executable_file</span> from the Linux command line.<br/><br/>
</div></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="25"><div class="docText"><b>3. </b></div></td><td><div class="docText">Enter the <span class="docEmphStrong">run</span>
 command. The program begins executing and stops at the first line of 
code that has an error (the program may have more than one runtime 
error).<br/><br/>
</div></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="25"><div class="docText"><b>4. </b></div></td><td><div class="docText">Enter the gdb command <span class="docEmphStrong">list</span>. In most cases, gdb lists the line of code that caused the program to crash.<br/><br/>
</div></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="25"><div class="docText"><b>5. </b></div></td><td><div class="docText">Edit
 the source code, and go to the line of code just specified. Fix the 
logical error and then recompile and run the program to see if things 
are now working correctly.<br/><br/>
</div></td></tr></tbody></table>
<p class="docText">Do the following to step through the entire program:</p>

<table border="0" class="docText"><tbody><tr><td valign="top" width="25"><div class="docText"><b>1. </b></div></td><td><div class="docText">Start the executable code by using gdb.<br/><br/>
</div></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="25"><div class="docText"><b>2. </b></div></td><td><div class="docText">Enter <span class="docEmphStrong">break main</span> from the gdb command line.<br/><br/>
</div></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="25"><div class="docText"><b>3. </b></div></td><td><div class="docText">Enter <span class="docEmphStrong">run</span> from the gdb command line. The program begins executing. Execution stops on line 1 of main.<br/><br/>
</div></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="25"><div class="docText"><b>4. </b></div></td><td><div class="docText">Repeatedly enter <span class="docEmphStrong">step</span> from the gdb command line. At each step, you can execute a <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> command to see the values of variables as the program executes.<br/><br/>
</div></td></tr></tbody></table>
</div>
</body>
</html>
