<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 4. Memory Management Debugging</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h2 class="docChapterTitle" id="title-ID0EJ5AE">Chapter 4. Memory Management Debugging</h2>
<p class="docText">In this chapter</p>
<p></p><table cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0" frame="void" rules="none"><colgroup align="left" span="3"><col width="10"></col><col width="300"></col><col width="200"></col></colgroup><thead></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">▪</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Dynamic Memory Functions</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">page 82</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">▪</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">MEMWATCH</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">page 84</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">▪</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">YAMD</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">page 86</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">▪</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Electric Fence</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">page 93</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">▪</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Valgrind</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">page 97</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">▪</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Summary</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">page 109</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">▪</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Web Resources for Memory Checkers</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">page 109</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">Dynamic memory allocation seems straightforward enough: Memory is allocated on demand—using <span class="docEmphStrong">malloc()</span>
 or one of its variants—and memory is freed when it’s no longer needed. 
Memory management would be that easy if programmers never made mistakes.
 Alas, we do make mistakes (from time to time), so memory management 
problems do occur.</p>
<p class="docText">For example, a <span class="docEmphasis">memory leak</span> occurs when memory is allocated but never freed. Leaks can obviously be caused by a <span class="docEmphStrong">malloc()</span> without a corresponding <span class="docEmphStrong">free()</span>, but leaks can also be inadvertently caused if a pointer to dynamically allocated memory is deleted, lost, or overwritten. <span class="docEmphasis">Memory corruption</span>
 can occur when allocated (and in use) memory is overwritten 
accidentally or when using statically allocated memory and stack 
variables (especially if a pointer to stack-allocated memory is returned
 to a calling method). Buffer overruns—caused by writing past the end of
 a block of allocated memory—frequently corrupt memory.</p>
<p class="docText">Regardless of the 
root cause, memory management errors can have unexpected, even 
devastating effects on application and system behavior. With dwindling 
available memory, processes and entire systems can grind to a halt, 
while corrupted memory often leads to spurious crashes. System security 
is also susceptible to buffer overruns. Worse, it might take days before
 evidence of a real problem appears. Today, it’s common for Linux 
systems to have a gigabyte of main memory. If a program leaks a small 
amount of memory, it takes some time before the application and system 
show symptoms of a problem. Memory management errors can be quite 
insidious and very difficult to find and fix.</p>
<p class="docText">This chapter covers four 
memory-management checkers: MEMWATCH, YAMD, Electric Fence, and 
Valgrind. All these tools can help detect common memory management 
errors. We’ll review the basics, write some “buggy” code, and then use 
each of these tools to find the mistakes.</p>

<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Dynamic Memory Functions</h3>
<p class="docText">Of all the library calls (libc) in Linux, only four manage memory: <span class="docEmphStrong">malloc()</span>, <span class="docEmphStrong">calloc()</span>, <span class="docEmphStrong">realloc()</span>, and <span class="docEmphStrong">free()</span>. All these functions have prototypes in the stdlib.h include file.</p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">malloc()</span> allocates a memory block that is uninitialized. Its prototype is</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>void* malloc(size_t size)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The single argument is the number of bytes of memory to allocate.</p>
<p class="docText">If the allocation is successful, <span class="docEmphStrong">malloc()</span> returns a pointer to the memory. If memory allocation fails for some reason (for example, if the system is out of memory), <span class="docEmphStrong">malloc()</span> returns a NULL pointer.</p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">calloc()</span> allocates an array in memory and initializes all the memory to 0 (with <span class="docEmphStrong">malloc()</span>, the allocated memory is uninitialized). Here’s the prototype:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>void* calloc(size_t nmemb, size_t size)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The first argument is the number of elements in the array, and the second argument is the size (in bytes) of each element. Like <span class="docEmphStrong">malloc()</span>, <span class="docEmphStrong">calloc()</span> returns a pointer if the memory allocation was successful, and NULL otherwise.</p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">realloc()</span> is defined as</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>void* realloc (void *ptr, size_t size)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">realloc()</span> changes the size of the object referenced by the pointer to a new size specified by the second argument. <span class="docEmphStrong">realloc()</span> returns a pointer to the moved block of memory.</p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">free()</span> deallocates a memory block. It takes a pointer as an argument, as shown in its prototype, and releases that memory:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>void free (void *ptr),</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">While the API for memory 
management is unusually small, the number and kind of memory errors that
 can occur are substantial. They include:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">Reading and using uninitialized memory</p></li><li><p class="docList">Reading and writing memory after it has been freed</p></li><li><p class="docList">Reading and writing from memory after or in front of (underrun) the allocated size</p></li><li><p class="docList">Reading and writing inappropriate areas on the stack</p></li><li><p class="docList">Memory leaks</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">The
 use of pointers can cause problems in all types of memory. In addition,
 indexes into statically allocated arrays can cause corruption. Stack 
issues can also cause problems with some compilers. Returning a pointer 
to a stack variable in a function is a big no-no.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
