<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 5. System Information (/proc)</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h2 class="docChapterTitle" id="title-ID0EPKAG">Chapter 5. System Information (/proc)</h2>
<p class="docText">In this chapter</p>
<p></p><table cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0" frame="void" rules="none"><colgroup align="left" span="3"><col width="10"></col><col width="300"></col><col width="200"></col></colgroup><thead></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">▪</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">What Is /proc?</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">page 112</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">▪</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Ways an Administrator Can Use /proc</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">page 113</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">▪</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">A Map of /proc</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">page 114</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">▪</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Summary</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">page 148</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">▪</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Web Resources for /proc</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">page 149</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">A
 wealth of information is provided by the /proc file system for the 
Linux kernel, from information about each process to system-wide 
information about CPU, memory, file systems, interrupts, and partitions.
 This chapter covers the /proc file system to help you see the overall 
information that a running system can provide. The two different types 
of information in the /proc file system are read-only and writeable. The
 writeable information can be changed on-the-fly. If you change the 
value of a /proc entry, the system feature could perform in a different 
way.</p>
<p class="docText">The /proc file system is a 
special window into the running Linux kernel. Each file under /proc is 
tied to a kernel that provides the file’s information on-the-fly when 
the file is read. Many utilities rely on /proc to gather system-type 
information. Some of the utilities that use /proc entries include 
iostat, sar, lsdev, lsusb, lspci, vmstat, and mpstat. This chapter 
covers each of these utilities.</p>

<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">What Is /proc?</h3>
<p class="docText">The /proc file system is a
 reflection of the system in memory. It can be used as a hierarchal view
 of the system. The goal of the /proc file system is to provide an easy 
view of the kernel resources and components. You also can use /proc to 
view information about the processes that are currently running on the 
system. A second goal of /proc is to present information about the 
system in a readable way instead of getting this type of information 
through API system calls.</p>
<p class="docText">There is a close relationship between /proc and <span class="docEmphStrong">sysctl</span> functions. In general, all <span class="docEmphStrong">sysctl</span>
 functions are also represented under /proc/sys/ as a proc file system 
entry. The /proc file system entries are not stored on a nonvolatile 
medium such as a file system; the entries are generated on-the-fly. In 
other words, every time the read method for the associated file is 
invoked, the entries are provided. This results in much freedom in how 
output is represented to the user. The /proc file system is a file 
system in the sense that it provides an interface to the user that 
resembles the normal file system interface of any other file system, 
allowing access via <span class="docEmphStrong">open</span>, <span class="docEmphStrong">read</span>, <span class="docEmphStrong">write</span>, and <span class="docEmphStrong">close</span>.</p>
<p class="docText">/proc has two basic 
interface types: binary and character-based. Most interfaces are 
text-mode. In cases where binary interfaces are used, usually both types
 are implemented at the same time. For user-space applications, it is 
generally simpler to
 interface with the binary version rather than with text mode, since in 
the latter case parsing (or at least scanning fixed-format input lines) 
would be required. On the other hand, binary interfaces are not 
well-suited for direct interpretation by humans.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
