<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Task States</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Task States</h3>
<p class="docText">Six task states are defined
 in the file named sched.h, which is located in the 
/usr/src/linux-2.6.x/include/linux/sched.h subdirectory in the kernel 
source tree:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphStrong">TASK_RUNNING</span> means that the task is in the run queue (either executing on the CPU or waiting to be executed).</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphStrong">TASK_INTERRUPTIBLE</span>
 means that the task is waiting for a signal or resource (sleeping). The
 process is suspended (sleeps) until some condition becomes true.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphStrong">TASK_UNINTERRUPTIBLE</span>
 means that the task is waiting for a resource (sleeping). It is in the 
same “wait queue” as the preceding state, except that delivering a 
signal to the sleeping process leaves its state unchanged. This process 
state is seldom used. However, it is valuable under certain specific 
conditions in which a process must wait until a given event occurs 
without being interrupted.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphStrong">TASK_STOPPED</span> means that the task is being debugged.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphStrong">TASK_ZOMBIE</span> means that the task child is without a parent. Process execution is terminated, but the parent process has not yet issued a <span class="docEmphStrong">wait()</span>.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphStrong">TASK_DEAD</span> means that the task is in the process of dying.</p></li></ul>
</div>
</body>
</html>
