<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Error Logging Subsystem for Event Logging</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Error Logging Subsystem for Event Logging</h3>
<p class="docText">Telco and 
high-availability (HA) environments are two types of solutions that 
require a robust event delivery subsystem. The POSIX 1003.25 standard 
contains a specification for an event logging facility that meets these 
requirements.</p>
<p class="docText">The Event Logger uses the 
POSIX standard APIs to register clients for events, receive log events 
from applications and the kernel, and deliver event notifications to 
clients that registered for them. Events are stored in a persistent log 
that can be viewed and managed. The event logging framework provides 
APIs and utilities for displaying, registering for and taking actions 
when events are received, and managing events in the log.</p>
<p class="docText">The error logging 
facility components are part of the evlog package. Both the syslogd and 
evlog packages can be installed on a single system. Major components of 
error logging are discussed in the following sections.</p>
<p class="docText">The evlogd daemon 
starts during system initialization and monitors the special file 
/dev/error for new entries sent by the kernel or an application. The 
label of each new entry is checked against the contents of the Error 
Record Template Repository. When
 a match is found, additional information about the system environment 
is added before the entry is added to the error log. Error entries are 
stored in two files; the default files are /var/evlog/eventlog and 
/var/evlog/privatelog.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E5WBG">Event Logging Interfaces</h4>
<p class="docText">Event logging has two
 primary interfaces: the provider interface and the consumer interface. 
Log management is the secondary interface for event logging.</p>
<p class="docText">The provider 
interface is how software reports events. Commands executed from the 
command line and scripts are common providers. Each event needs a base 
set of information that must be provided to make the event and its data 
useful for analysis and acceptable for storage in the log.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ELXBG">Benefits of Event-Type Logging</h4>
<p class="docText">The event logging system 
collects common information, such as a time stamp for the event, and 
adds it to the supplied provider data to create a log entry. The event 
logging system also has these additional features:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">It can take <span class="docEmphStrong">printk()</span> and <span class="docEmphStrong">syslog()</span> messages and create POSIX-compliant event record log entries.</p></li><li><p class="docList">It
 can use specified thresholds to suppress logging of duplicate events 
being logged in rapid succession to minimize system performance 
degradation and reduce logging space.</p></li><li><p class="docList">It can use specified criteria to screen events that are recorded to the log.</p></li><li><p class="docList">It can use specified criteria to filter events that are read from the log.</p></li><li><p class="docList">It can notify registered consumers when events match consumer criteria.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The event buffer size can be configured.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The following are true of the consumer interface:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Configurable event data can be retrieved from the log.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Configurable event records are displayed either in a standard format or in a customized format specified by the consumer.</p></li><li><p class="docList">You can register to be notified when events written to the log match consumer-specified criteria.</p></li></ul></li></ul>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EPZBG">Log Management</h4>
<p class="docText">Log management has methods for the following:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">Automatic removal of events from the log that are no longer needed, truncating the log, and reclaiming the space</p></li><li><p class="docList">Event log size management</p></li></ul>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EC6BG">Different Types of Event Log Records</h4>
<p class="docText">One of the new types of 
event log records that is available from event logging is to include 
binary data. This snippet of code allows binary data to be captured from
 the kernel:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>evl_writek( facility, event_type, severity,
   "ushort", 0x1212,        /* type = unsigned short, value = 0x1212 */
   "3*uchar", 5, 20, 80,    /* 3 unsigned chars */
   "int[]", 20, int_array,   /* array of 20 integers */
   "string", "Binary example",
   "endofdata");</pre></div><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EU6BG">Managing the Event Log</h4>
<p class="docText">The evlogmgr can be run as
 a cron job. A cron job is a program that lets Linux users execute 
commands or scripts (groups of commands) automatically at a specified 
time and date. It is normally used for sys admin commands. During event 
logging installation, the file evlogmgr is placed in the /etc/cron.d 
directory. This file contains the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre># Everyday at 2:00 AM remove recds older than 30 days
0 2 * * * root /sbin/evlogmgr -c 'age &gt; "30d"'

# Everyday at 1:00 AM remove recds w/ sev=DEBUG
0 1 * * * root /sbin/evlogmgr -c "severity=DEBUG"</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This code schedules the <span class="docEmphStrong">evlogmgr</span> command to perform the described actions. This is the default. See the evlogmgr man page for details on changing this feature.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ENAAI">Event Logging Utilities</h4>
<p class="docText">The evlsend utility logs a POSIX-type event that contains an event type, severity, and the text of the event message.</p>
<p class="docText">The evlview utility lets you view events in real time or from a log file.</p>
<p class="docText">The evlnotify utility registers a command when a specified query match occurs on events.</p>
<p class="docText">The evlquery file is not a 
command. It provides query and filter expression rules for the evlview, 
evlconfig, evlnotify, and evlogmgr commands.</p>
<p class="docText">The evlfacility 
utility lists the contents of the event logging facility registry, 
replaces the entire facility registry, adds facilities (with options) to
 the facility registry, deletes facilities, and modifies an existing 
facility.</p>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphStrong">evlconfig</span> command lets you change the default settings for event logging.</p>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphStrong">evlogmgr</span>
 command performs log management on the event log, on the private log, 
or, optionally, on a specified log file. It can also specify which 
events are to be deleted. The space freed by deleted events is reused 
for undeleted events (a process called compaction) and the log file is 
truncated, thus reducing its overall size.</p>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphStrong">evlgentmpls</span> command generates formatting templates for event logging calls.</p>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphStrong">evltc</span>
 command reads the formatting template specification(s) in the source 
file and creates a binary template file for each specification.</p>
<p class="docText">Each of these event 
logging utilities has a man page with more complete descriptions and 
examples of how to set up different options for the utilities.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ECGAI">Remote Logging</h4>
<p class="docText">This section describes the main components of remote event forwarding and logging.</p>
<p class="docText">The Event 
Consolidation Host collects events logged by multiple hosts in the 
network. It accepts events transmitted via UDP or TCP, but it logs 
events from a particular host only if its hostname is stored in the 
/etc/evlog.d/evlhosts file.</p>
<p class="docText">Forwarding Plug-ins 
can register with the evlogd daemon to read events from the evlogd event
 stream and provide alternative methods of processing and logging 
events.</p>
<p class="docText">Two plug-ins are available for forwarding events:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphStrong">udp_rmtlog_be</span>, which transmits using UDP</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphStrong">tcp_rmtlog_be</span>, which transmits using TCP</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">User Datagram Protocol 
(UDP) is a communications protocol that offers a limited amount of 
service when messages are exchanged between computers in a network that 
uses Internet Protocol. UDP is an alternative to Transmission Control 
Protocol (TCP). Like TCP, UDP uses Internet Protocol to transmit a data 
unit from one computer to another. Unlike TCP, however, UDP does not 
divide a message into packets and reassemble it at the other end. 
Specifically, UDP doesn’t sequence the packets that the data arrives in.
 This means that the application program that uses UDP must be able to 
make sure that the entire message has arrived and is in the right order.
 Network applications that want to save processing time because they 
have very small data units to exchange (and therefore very little 
message reassembling to do) may prefer UDP to TCP.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
