<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Setting up the Event Consolidator</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Setting up the Event Consolidator</h3>
<p class="docText">The evlogrmtd daemon 
is installed when the main event logging software is installed in user 
space. evlogrmtd starts during bootup, opens the /etc/evlog.d/evlhosts 
file, and, if hosts are listed, attempts to resolve each of the 
hostnames to an IP address.</p>
<p class="docText">Follow these steps to configure evlogrmtd:</p>

<table border="0" class="docText"><tbody><tr><td valign="top" width="25"><div class="docText"><b>1. </b></div></td><td><div class="docText">Edit
 /etc/evlog.d/evlhosts to add an entry for each host that evlogrmtd is 
to accept events from. Each entry must specify the hostname—either the 
simple name or the fully qualified domain name—and a unique identifier 
for each host.<br/><br/>
					The following are all valid entries:<br/><br/>
<p></p><table cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0" frame="void" rules="none"><colgroup align="left" span="2"><col width="100"></col><col width="150"></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top"><span class="docEmphStrong">Identifier</span></th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top"><span class="docEmphStrong">Hostname</span></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">1</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">mylinuxbox</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">10.128</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">mylinuxbox2</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
					The identifier is always specified first, followed by one or more spaces, followed by the hostname.<br/><br/>
</div></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="25"><div class="docText"><b>2. </b></div></td><td><div class="docText">Edit /etc/evlog.d/evlogrmtd.conf, which contains the following:<br/><br/>
<div class="docText"><pre>Password=password
TCPPort=12000
UDPPort=34000</pre></div><br/>
					Password is used only by TCP clients to authenticate remote hosts 
when attempting to connect. If all remote hosts are using UDP, Password 
is ignored.<br/><br/>
					TCPPort must match the TCP port used by remote hosts to send events to the event consolidator.<br/><br/>
					UDPPort must match the UDP port used by remote hosts to send events to the event consolidator.<br/><br/>
</div></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="25"><div class="docText"><b>3. </b></div></td><td><div class="docText">Restart the evlogrmtd daemon:<br/><br/>
<div class="docText"><pre>/etc/init.d/evlogrmt restart</pre></div><br/>
</div></td></tr></tbody></table>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ES2BG">Forwarding Syslog Messages to the Event Log</h4>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphStrong">slog_fwd</span>
 command can be used to forward Syslog messages to the event log. This 
is a good way to try out event log and to start changing any scripts 
that are being used to parse Syslog messages to parse event log 
messages.</p>
<p class="docText">The following command can be issued to forward Syslog messages to the new event log:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong"># /sbin/slog_fwd</span></pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This forwards 
Syslog messages immediately and after every subsequent reboot. To 
disable Syslog forwarding, issue the following command:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong"># /sbin/slog_fwd -r</span></pre></div><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EX3BG">evlog Packages</h4>
<p class="docText">The evlog package provides
 a set of tools to implement enterprise-level event logging, as defined 
by POSIX draft standard 1003.25. The evlog-devel package contains the 
header files and libraries to write applications for the evlog event 
logging system.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
