<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Data Acquisition</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Data Acquisition</h3>
<p class="docText">Before data collection is started for the 2.6.x level of the kernel, the relayfs file system must be mounted.</p>
<p class="docText">A mount point must be used to mount the relayfs. The following example uses /mnt/relay as the mount point:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong"># mount -t relayfs nodev /mnt/relay</span></pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Collection of trace data 
starts and is transferred to user space when the tracer functionality in
 the kernel is started and the trace daemon connects to it through the 
device files or relayfs file system.</p>
<p class="docText">Several helper scripts call the trace daemon to start and stop tracing directly:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphStrong">trace</span>
<span class="docEmphasis">seconds filename:</span> The trace daemon is activated for <span class="docEmphasis">seconds</span>. The trace results are saved in two files. <span class="docEmphasis">filename</span>.trace stores the trace data, and <span class="docEmphasis">file name</span>.proc stores the /proc information at the start of the trace run. Both files are used to view the trace.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphStrong">tracecore</span>
<span class="docEmphasis">seconds filename:</span> The trace daemon is activated for <span class="docEmphasis">seconds</span>. The trace results are saved in the same two files as with <span class="docEmphStrong">trace</span>, but only a core subset of events is saved.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphStrong">tracecpuid</span>
<span class="docEmphasis">seconds filename:</span> The trace daemon is activated for <span class="docEmphasis">seconds</span>. The trace results are saved in the same two files as with <span class="docEmphStrong">trace</span>, but CPU identification is also included with each trace entry.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphStrong">traceu</span>
<span class="docEmphasis">filename:</span> The trace daemon is activated until it is killed. The trace results are saved in the same two files as with <span class="docEmphStrong">trace</span>.</p></li></ul>
</div>
</body>
</html>
