<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Ways to Analyze Tracing Processes</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Ways to Analyze Tracing Processes</h3>
<p class="docText">Most of the time tracing 
needs to be done on a certain process to determine why that process 
isn’t performing as expected. The LTT provides the framework for 
tracing, but there isn’t a built-in way to start a trace when a process 
is created and to end the trace when the process exits.</p>
<p class="docText">Several methods exist to accomplish this task:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">For a 
one-time manual tracing, you can start and stop the tracing from a 
separate shell. Tracing is started, and then the process is started. 
Upon process exits, the trace daemon is killed. This method isn’t easily
 automated.</p></li><li><p class="docList">You can use a timed trace by using one of the helper scripts or by invoking the trace daemon with the <span class="docEmphStrong">-t</span> option. This approach usually captures more tracing data and lets you automate tracing collection.</p></li><li><p class="docList">You can start the trace daemon and then start the process of interest. Use the <span class="docEmphStrong">pgrep</span> command or an equivalent to indicate that the process of interest has finished, and then kill the trace daemon.</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">A number of options control 
data acquisition, so it is worth viewing the man page for the trace 
daemon. One option that can limit the events being traced is having the 
trace daemon collect events by PID or group PID.</p>
<p class="docText">Table 9.1 lists the common kernel trace points that LTT can capture.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
