<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 10. oprofile: a Profiler Supported by the Kernel</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h2 class="docChapterTitle" id="title-ID0EZEAI">Chapter 10. oprofile: a Profiler Supported by the Kernel</h2>
<p class="docText">In this chapter</p>
<p></p><table cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0" frame="void" rules="none"><colgroup align="left" span="3"><col width="10"></col><col width="300"></col><col width="200"></col></colgroup><thead></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">▪</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Instrumentation</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">page 262</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">▪</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Sampling</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">page 263</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">▪</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">oprofile: a System-Wide Profiler</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">page 263</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">▪</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Utilities for oprofile</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">page 267</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">▪</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">General Profile Steps</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">page 268</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">▪</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Examining a Single Executable’s Profile</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">page 272</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">▪</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Report Examples</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">page 276</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">▪</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Saving Profiling Data</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">page 277</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">▪</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Hardware Counters</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">page 277</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">▪</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">The Prospect Profiler</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">page 287</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">▪</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Summary</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">page 288</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">▪</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Web Resources for Profiling</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">page 289</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">This
 chapter covers profilers—software development tools designed to help 
analyze the performance of applications and the kernel. They can be used
 to identify sections of code that aren’t performing as expected. They 
provide measurements of how long a routine takes to execute, how often 
it is called, where it is called from, and how much time it takes. 
Profiling is also covered in Chapter 1,
 “Profiling”; one profiler discussed in that chapter is called gprof. 
Another topic covered in this chapter is ways to minimize cache misses. 
Cache misses can be a cause of applications not performing as expected.</p>
<p class="docText">There are different 
ways to measure an application’s performance while it runs. Depending on
 the method used, profiler results vary; this can affect your ability to
 optimize performance. Profiling methods can be divided into two 
categories: instrumentation and sampling. Let’s take a look at each.</p>

<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Instrumentation</h3>
<p class="docText">Instrumentation profilers 
insert special code at the beginning and end of each routine to record 
when the routine starts and when it exits. With this information, the 
profiler can measure the time taken by the routine on each call. This 
type of profiler may also record which other routines are called from a 
routine. It can then display the time for the entire routine and also 
break it down into time spent locally and time spent on each call to 
another routine. gprof is an instrumentation profiler.</p>
<p class="docText">One possible drawback of 
instrumentation profiling is that, when a routine has a small number of 
code lines, another effect of instrumentation becomes important. Modern 
processors are quite dependent on order of execution for branch 
predictions and other CPU optimizations. Inevitably, inserting a timing 
operation at the start and end of a very small routine disturbs how it 
would execute in the CPU, absent the timing calls. If a small routine 
that is called thousands of times is hit by, say, a cache miss, an 
instrumentation profiler does not yield an accurate time comparison 
between this routine and larger routines. If this is ignored, a great 
deal of effort may be spent optimizing routines that are really not 
bottlenecks.</p>
<p class="docText">For a recap of instrumentation profilers, see Chapter 1, which covers gprof.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
