<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Sampling</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Sampling</h3>
<p class="docText">To
 help address the limitations of instrumentation profilers, sampling 
profilers let applications run without any runtime modifications. 
Nothing is inserted, and all profiling work is done outside the 
application’s process.</p>
<p class="docText">The operating system 
interrupts the CPU at regular intervals (time slices) to execute process
 switches. At that point, a sampling profiler records the currently 
executed instruction for the application it is profiling. This is as 
short an operation as can possibly be implemented: the contents of one 
CPU register are copied to memory. Using debug information linked to the
 application’s executable, the profiler later correlates the recorded 
execution points with the routine and source code line they belong to. 
What the profiling finally yields is the frequency at which a given 
routine or source line was executing at a given period in the 
application’s run, or over the entire run.</p>
<p class="docText">A sampling profiler is 
the perfect tool to isolate small, often-called routines that cause 
bottlenecks in program execution. The downside is that its evaluations 
of time spent are approximations. It is not impossible that a very fast 
routine should regularly execute at the sampling interrupts. To make 
sure that a given routine really is slow, you should run the application
 through the sampling profiler more than once. This chapter covers a 
sampling kernel profiler called oprofile.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
