<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Utilities for oprofile</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Utilities for oprofile</h3>
<p class="docText">Five utilities help 
with oprofile, as described in the following list. The first and second 
are used to start and stop oprofile collection of data. The last three 
can be used to view oprofile data:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">opcontrol starts and stops the oprofile daemon and provides setup parameters.</p><p class="docList">One useful parameter for opcontrol is <span class="docEmphStrong">—save=filename</span>, which is used to start with a clean slate. Another parameter is <span class="docEmphStrong">—dump</span>, which ensures that all the current profiling is flushed to the sample files before profiling data is analyzed.</p><p class="docList">See the opcontrol man page for more complete descriptions and examples of how to set up different options.</p></li><li><p class="docList">oprof_start is a GUI program that is used to configure and control oprofile.</p></li><li><p class="docList">opreport gives image- and symbol-based profile summaries for the whole system or a subset of binary images.</p><p class="docList">See the opreport man page for more complete descriptions and examples of how to set up different options.</p></li><li><p class="docList">opannotate outputs annotated source and/or assembly from profile data of an oprofile session.</p><p class="docList">See the opannotate man page for more complete descriptions and examples of how to set up different options.</p></li><li><p class="docList">opgprof can produce a gprof-format profile for a single binary.</p><p class="docList">See the opgprof man page for more complete descriptions and examples of how to set up different options.</p></li></ul>
</div>
</body>
</html>
