<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Summary</h3>
<p class="docText">Before you dive into specific optimization techniques, here are some basic heuristics to remember about optimizing code:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">Don’t optimize for 
optimization’s sake; do so only after a demonstration that the 
optimization is necessary. Verify the need for optimization with proven 
timing techniques or a reliable execution profiler that identifies 
specific performance issues.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Optimizations
 should be applied carefully; otherwise, bugs can be introduced. 
Remember that slow, robust code is better than faster, unstable code.</p></li><li><p class="docList">After
 performing an optimization, profile again to prove that it has had the 
desired effect. This is especially necessary when implementing 
optimizations in a system of software in which various integrated 
components have or share optimizations.</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">Design problems typically
 spring up because developers need to produce speedy code. Moreover, in 
their haste, they can neglect solid design principles for perceived (and
 unrealized) performance improvements. This might result in faster code,
 but it also produces inefficient code and designs that lack robustness 
and extensibility. The bigger issue is this: applications designed in 
this manner require that developers predict potential performance 
problems without the benefit of the working code that produces 
measurable execution paths.</p>
<p class="docText">A good rule for producing fast
 code is to optimize only what is being executed. Time spent optimizing 
code that does not have a substantial impact on performance is wasted. 
Typically, 80 to 90 percent of an application’s execution time is spent 
executing only 20 to 30 percent of its code. The 20 to 30 percent of 
your code that needs improvement is best found by using performance 
profilers.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
