<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>GDB Thread Analysis</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">GDB Thread Analysis</h3>
<p class="docText">In Linux, a single program 
may have more than one thread of execution. The precise semantics of 
threads differ from one operating system to another, but in general the 
threads of a single program are akin to multiple processes—except that 
they share one address space (that is, they can all examine and modify 
the same variables). On the other hand, each thread has its own 
registers and execution stack, and perhaps private memory.</p>
<p class="docText">GDB provides these facilities for debugging multithread programs. Some of the thread-related commands are as follows:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphStrong">info threads</span> displays all existing threads.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphStrong">thread</span>
<span class="docEmphasis">thread #</span> switches to another thread.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphStrong">thread apply</span> [<span class="docEmphasis">thread #</span>] [<span class="docEmphStrong">all</span>] <span class="docEmphasis">args</span> applies a command to a list of threads.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Thread-specific breakpoints</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">Let’s look at gdb’s 
capability to switch between threads and view where each thread is on 
the system. You’ll see how to view a thread. The first gdb command you 
use is <span class="docEmphStrong">info threads</span>. This command displays all the threads on the system. Suppose you’re looking for one JFS thread, and from <span class="docEmphStrong">thread info</span> the thread number turns out to be 18. To view thread 18, first you use the gdb command <span class="docEmphStrong">thread 18</span>, and then you use the <span class="docEmphStrong">where</span> command to get a back trace for this thread. The exact gdb commands are as follows:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphStrong">info threads</span> displays the program’s threads.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphStrong">thread 18</span> switches to that thread.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphStrong">where</span> displays a back trace for thread 18.</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">Checking where each 
thread is can be an effective way to determine which thread (or threads)
 are causing the system to hang. One thing to look for is when one 
thread is holding a semaphore and the other thread is waiting on that 
semaphore. Another area of interest is when one thread has a lock that 
the other thread is waiting for.</p>
<p></p><div class="box">
<h2 class="docSidebarTitle">Using UML for Development and Testing</h2>
<p class="docText">I used UML to develop 
and test one of file systems available for Linux—Journaled File System 
(JFS). UML provided a source-level debugging environment using gdb, and 
using UML helped reduce the amount of time it took to port this file 
system to Linux. During the development of JFS, I was traveling a 
significant amount of time, presenting JFS at conferences. Usually the 
conferences were three days long plus two days of travel time, so 
without UML I could have lost a week of development time. With UML I 
could develop and test file system code on my laptop computer and not 
worry about having a bad change in the file system, which could have 
caused the system to stop booting. I’ve actually written and tested code
 using UML in an airplane while the person next to me was watching a 
movie on his notebook computer—two very different uses of a notebook 
computer.</p>
<p class="docText">Most
 developers have a development system and one or more test machines. 
UML’s major advantage is that it eliminates the need for a separate test
 machine. Also, UML can boot faster than a physical machine. An average 
UML environment can boot and display the login prompt in less than 20 
seconds!</p>
<p class="docText">Another file system where
 UML was used successfully for development and testing is the Lustre 
File System. The Lustre File System team uses UML to develop and test 
this cluster file system. Lustre File System is a next-generation 
cluster file system whose goal is to serve clusters with tens of 
thousands of nodes, that have petabytes of storage, that move hundreds 
of GBps, and that provide a state-of-the-art security and management 
infrastructure. This type of kernel development is a good fit for 
debugging in the UML environment because very few supercomputers are 
available to the Lustre team; using a virtual machine helps create a 
similar environment. The Lustre team has created a very good how-to 
guide for debugging with UML. It is available at https://wiki.clusterfs.com/lustre/LustreUML.</p>
</div><p></p><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
