<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>UML Utilities</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">UML Utilities</h3>
<p class="docText">Five UML utilities facilitate networking (among other things) between the UML virtual system and the host Linux system:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphStrong">uml_mconsole</span>
 is the UML management console. It’s a low-level interface to the 
kernel, somewhat like the SysRq interface to the kernel. The mconsole 
interface provides the following functions:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Displays the kernel version.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Adds and removes devices.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Halts or reboots the machine.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Sends SysRq commands.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Pauses and resumes the UML.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Creates online backups without shutting down the UML.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Receives notifications of events of interest from within UML.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Monitors the UML’s internal state.</p></li></ul></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphStrong">uml_moo</span> merges a copy-on-write (COW) file with its backing file.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphStrong">uml_mkcow</span> creates a new COW file.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphStrong">uml_net</span>
 sets up the various transports and provides a UML instance with network
 access to the host, other machines on the local net, and the rest of 
the network.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphStrong">uml_switch</span> is the switch daemon, which provides a mechanism for creating a totally virtual network.</p></li></ul>
</div>
</body>
</html>
