<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>General Steps for Using Probes</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">General Steps for Using Probes</h3>
<p class="docText">The general steps for using dynamic probes are as follows:</p>

<table border="0" class="docText"><tbody><tr><td valign="top" width="25"><div class="docText"><b>1. </b></div></td><td><div class="docText">Narrow
 down the problem such that the source code that needs to be debugged 
has been identified. The source code could be an executable program, a 
shared library, or kernel code.<br/><br/>
</div></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="25"><div class="docText"><b>2. </b></div></td><td><div class="docText">Identify the probe locations. Listing 12.1 shows a probe location in the kernel for the <span class="docEmphStrong">sys_open</span> routine. For a complete explanation of where probe locations can occur, see the man page for dprobes.lang.<br/><br/>
</div></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="25"><div class="docText"><b>3. </b></div></td><td><div class="docText">Specify
 the actions to be taken when a given probe is fired. This is the probe 
handler part of each probe. All the probes that need to work on a given 
module must be specified in a probe program file. The format of the 
probe program file and all the instructions available for a probe 
handler are detailed in the dprobes.lang(8) man page.<br/><br/>
</div></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="25"><div class="docText"><b>4. </b></div></td><td><div class="docText">Run
 the program to be debugged or wait for the probed code locations to be 
activated. When the probes are activated, the probe handlers run and 
logs are collected, as per the instructions in the probe handlers.<br/><br/>
</div></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="25"><div class="docText"><b>5. </b></div></td><td><div class="docText">Examine the log and repeat the steps as needed.<br/><br/>
</div></td></tr></tbody></table>
<p class="docText">Now let’s place a probe in the <span class="docEmphStrong">sys_open</span>
 kernel routine located in the /usr/src/linux/fs/open.c file. A typical 
probe needs a probe handler, and in this example it is called <span class="docEmphStrong">probe_handler_open</span>. The <span class="docEmphStrong">addr</span> field is set to the kernel <span class="docEmphStrong">sys_open</span> routine, which allows the probe mechanism in the kernel to insert the Kprobe for the <span class="docEmphStrong">sys_open</span> routine. After the Kprobe structure is set up, the Kprobe must be registered. The registration is done using the <span class="docEmphStrong">register_kprobe</span> call.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E3DBI">Listing 12.1. High-Level Usage for Adding a Kprobe</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>static int probe_handler_open(struct kprobe *p, struct pt_regs
*regs)
{
       ... do the probe commands ...
}
struct kprobe kp = {
       .addr = sys_open,
       .pre_handler = probe_handler_open
};
register_kprobe(&amp;kp);</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
