<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Netdump: The Network Crash Dump Facility from Both the Client and Server</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Netdump: The Network Crash Dump Facility from Both the Client and Server</h3>
<p class="docText">In
 Red Hat Linux Advanced Server 2.1 and above, Red Hat, Inc. provided its
 first crash dump facility. Unlike traditional crash dump facilities, 
this facility dumps memory images to a centralized server via the 
network. Two tasks are involved in using netdump: setting up the netdump
 server, and allowing the clients to send dumps to the server.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EA5BI">Server</h4>
<p class="docText">One requirement of the 
server is that there be sufficient free disk space to store each dump. 
The crash dump images and files are written to the /var/crash directory.</p>
<p class="docText">The netdump-server package
 needs to be installed on the server. There is a way to limit the number
 of concurrent dump operations that are permitted to be sent to the 
server. For example, if you want to set the limit to 10, set <span class="docEmphStrong">max_concurrent_dumps=10</span>
 in the /etc/netdump.conf file. A README file that comes with the 
netdump-server package explains that a password needs the client to 
authenticate itself with the server.</p>
<p class="docText">The netdump server is enabled using the following command:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong"># chkconfig netdump-server on</span></pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This causes it to be started automatically on subsequent boots. The service can also be started by using the following command:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong"># netdump-server start</span></pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The netdump server is now ready to receive network crash dump images.</p>
<p class="docText">A set of scripts runs when 
system events occur. They go in /var/crash/scripts, and sample scripts 
are in the directory /usr/share/doc/netdump-server*/ example_ scripts/. 
The man page for netdump-server explains the uses of these scripts. One 
key feature is that reports of system crashes can notify a system 
administrator.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EL6BI">Client</h4>
<p class="docText">The client must have a 
network device that supports netdump. Some of the supported drivers are 
3c59x, eepro100, e100, tlan, and tulip.</p>
<p class="docText">The netdump package needs to be installed on the client. Edit the file /etc/sysconfig/netdump and add a line like <span class="docEmphStrong">NETDUMPADDR=</span><span class="docEmphasis">x.x.x.x</span>, where <span class="docEmphasis">x.x.x.x</span> specifies the address of the netdump server.</p>
<p class="docText">The netdump client and 
server must authenticate themselves with the server. One way to do this 
is to have the netdump init script send a dynamic random key to the 
server. To do that, the netdump service can propagate and be prepared to
 give the netdump user’s password on the netdump server. This needs to 
be done only once when the client is set up. This sets up the netdump 
server to allow connections to provide the dynamic random key to the 
server each time the module is loaded on the client.</p>
<p class="docText">Enable the netdump client to start with the following command:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong"># chkconfig netdump on</span></pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This causes it to be started automatically on subsequent boots. The service can be started by using the following command:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong"># netdump start</span></pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Once a netdump is created on the server, the crash utility can be used to view that dump.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
