<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>diskdump: a Crash Dump Facility</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">diskdump: a Crash Dump Facility</h3>
<p class="docText">In Red Hat Linux Enterprise Server 3 Update 3 and above, Red Hat, Inc. provided diskdump as another crash dump facility.</p>
<p class="docText">diskdump lets you create a 
kernel dump on a single system without sending the dump to a server like
 netdump does. Diskdump creates files identical in format to the netdump
 core files and can be analyzed with the same tools. Like netdump, 
diskdump requires device driver support. The SCSI disk series 
controllers (aic7xxx/aic79xx) are supported. For additional support 
device drivers, see the README file in the /usr/share/doc/diskdump-* 
directory.</p>
<p class="docText">A diskdump is created in a
 two-stage process and works similarly to UNIX-style traditional disk 
dumps. The first step is when the kernel crash happens. The 
system-related information and the current memory are stored to a 
reserved partition on a supported disk.</p>
<p class="docText">On the next reboot, when
 the system restarts, the diskdump init scripts create a dump file from 
the saved information on the reserved partition. This file is stored in 
the /var/crash/ directory.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E14BI">General Steps to Configure diskdump</h4>
<p class="docText">Here are the general steps to configure diskdump:</p>

<table border="0" class="docText"><tbody><tr><td valign="top" width="25"><div class="docText"><b>1. </b></div></td><td><div class="docText">Load the diskdump module.<br/><br/>
</div></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="25"><div class="docText"><b>2. </b></div></td><td><div class="docText">The diskdump reserved partition can be specified in /etc/sysconfig/diskdump. The <span class="docEmphStrong">DEVICE</span> option specifies which partition the dump will be placed on. The following example uses /dev/sdb1: DEVICE=/dev/sdb1<br/><br/>
</div></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="25"><div class="docText"><b>3. </b></div></td><td><div class="docText">Initialize the partition for use:<br/><br/>
<div class="docText"><pre># <span class="docEmphStrong">service diskdump initialformat</span></pre></div><br/>
<div class="docNote"><p class="docNoteTitle">Warning</p>
<p class="docText">Any data on this partition will be lost.</p>
</div>
</div></td></tr><tr><td valign="top" width="25"><div class="docText"><b>4. </b></div></td><td><div class="docText">Add the service to run on startup, and then start the service:<br/><br/>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong"># chkconfig diskdump o</span>
								<span class="docEmphStrong"># service diskdump start</span></pre></div><br/>
</div></td></tr></tbody></table>
<p class="docText">The diskdump service is now configured. At the next system crash, the dump will be saved to the reserved partition.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
