<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 1. A Sneak Preview</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 1. A Sneak Preview"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="a_sneak_preview"></a>Chapter 1. A Sneak Preview</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="“Programming Python: The Short Story”"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="quotation_mark_programming_python_colon"></a>“Programming Python: The Short Story”</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p style="display: block;">If you are like most people, when you pick up a book as large as
        this one, you’d like to know a little about what you’re going to be
        learning before you roll up your sleeves. That’s what this chapter is
        for—it provides a demonstration of some of the kinds of things you can
        do with Python, before getting into the details. You won’t learn the
        full story here, and if you’re looking for complete explanations of
        the tools and techniques applied in this chapter, you’ll have to read
        on to later parts of the book. The point here is just to whet your
        appetite, review a few Python basics, and preview some of the topics
        to come.</p>
<p>To do this, I’ll pick a fairly simple application
        task—constructing a database of <span>records—</span>and migrate it through multiple
        steps: interactive coding, command-line tools, console interfaces,
        GUIs, and simple web-based interfaces. Along the way, we’ll also peek
        at concepts such as data representation, object persistence, and
        <span>object</span>-<span>oriented</span> programming (OOP); explore some
        alternatives that we’ll revisit later in the book; and review some
        core Python ideas that you should be aware of before reading this
        book. Ultimately, we’ll wind up with a database of Python class
        instances, which can be browsed and changed from a variety of
        interfaces.</p>
<p>I’ll cover additional topics in this book, of course, but the
        techniques you will see here are representative of some of the domains
        we’ll explore later. And again, if you don’t completely understand the
        programs in this chapter, don’t worry because you <span>shouldn’t—</span>not yet anyway. This is just a
        Python demo. We’ll fill in the rest of the details soon enough. For
        now, let’s start off with a bit of fun.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note"><h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p>Readers of the Fourth Edition of <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Learning
          Python</em></span> might recognize some aspects of the
          running example used in this chapter—the characters here are similar
          in spirit to those in the OOP tutorial chapter in that book, and the
          later class-based examples here are essentially a variation on a
          theme. Despite some redundancy, I’m revisiting the example here for
          three reasons: it serves its purpose as a review of language
          fundamentals; some readers of this book haven’t read
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Learning Python</em></span>; and the example receives
          expanded treatment here, with the addition of GUI and Web
          interfaces. That is, this chapter picks up where <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Learning
          Python</em></span> left off, pushing this core language example into
          the realm of realistic applications—which, in a nutshell, reflects
          the purpose of this book.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
