<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Step 1: Representing Records</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Step 1: Representing Records"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="step_1_colon_representing_records"></a>Step 1: Representing Records</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>If we’re going to <a id="pro1.3"></a>store records in a database, the first step is probably
        deciding what those records will look like. There are a variety of
        ways to represent information about people in the Python language.
        Built-in object types such as lists and dictionaries are often
        sufficient, especially if we don’t initially care about processing the
        data we store.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Using Lists"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="using_lists"></a>Using Lists</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Lists, for example, <a id="rec1.3.1"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e1013"></a>can collect attributes about people in a positionally
          ordered way. Start up your Python interactive interpreter and type
          the following two statements:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e1019"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bob = ['Bob Smith', 42, 30000, 'software']</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sue = ['Sue Jones', 45, 40000, 'hardware']</code></strong></pre>
<p>We’ve just made two records, albeit simple ones, to represent
          two people, Bob and Sue (my apologies if you really are Bob or Sue,
          generically or otherwise<sup>[2]</sup>). Each record is a list of four properties: name, age,
          pay, and job fields. To access these fields, we simply index by
          position; the result is in parentheses here because it is a tuple of
          two results:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e1033"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bob[0], sue[2]</code></strong>             # fetch name, pay
('Bob Smith', 40000)</pre>
<p>Processing records is easy with this representation; we just
          use <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e1040"></a>list operations. For example, we can extract a last
          name by splitting the name field on blanks and grabbing the last
          part, and we can give someone a raise by changing their list
          in-place:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e1046"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bob[0].split()[-1]</code></strong>         # what's bob's last name?
'Smith'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sue[2] *= 1.25</code></strong>             # give sue a 25% raise
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sue</code></strong>
['Sue Jones', 45, 50000.0, 'hardware']</pre>
<p>The last-name expression here proceeds from left to right: we
          fetch Bob’s name, split it into a list of substrings around spaces,
          and index his last name (run it one step at a time to see
          how).</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Start-up pointers"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="start-up_pointers"></a>Start-up pointers</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Since this is <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e1064"></a>the first code in this book, here are some quick
            pragmatic pointers for reference:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>This code may be typed in the IDLE GUI; after typing
                <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong> at a shell
                prompt (or the full directory path to it if it’s not on your
                system path); and so on.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">&gt;&gt;&gt;</code>
                characters are Python’s prompt (not code you type
                yourself).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The informational lines that Python prints when this
                prompt starts up are usually omitted in this book to save
                space.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>I’m running all of this book’s code under Python 3.1;
                results in any 3.X release should be similar (barring
                unforeseeable Python changes, of course).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Apart from some system and C integration code, most of
                this book’s examples are run under Windows 7, though thanks to
                Python portability, it generally doesn’t matter unless stated
                otherwise.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>If you’ve never run Python code this way before, see an
            introductory resource such as O’Reilly’s <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Learning
            Python</em></span> for help with getting started. I’ll also
            have a few words to say about running code saved in script files
            later in this chapter.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="A database list"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="a_database_list"></a>A database list</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Of course, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e1103"></a>what we’ve really coded so far is just two
            variables, not a database; to collect Bob and Sue into a unit, we
            might simply stuff them into another list:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e1109"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>people = [bob, sue]</code></strong>                        # reference in list of lists
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for person in people:</code></strong>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(person)</code></strong>

['Bob Smith', 42, 30000, 'software']
['Sue Jones', 45, 50000.0, 'hardware']</pre>
<p>Now the people list represents our database. We can fetch
            specific records by their relative positions and process them one
            at a time, in loops:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e1122"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>people[1][0]</code></strong>
'Sue Jones'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for person in people:</code></strong>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(person[0].split()[-1])</code></strong>           # print last names
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>person[2] *= 1.20</code></strong>                      # give each a 20% raise

Smith
Jones

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for person in people: print(person[2])</code></strong>     # check new pay

36000.0
60000.0</pre>
<p>Now that we have a list, we can also collect values from
            records using some of Python’s more powerful iteration tools, such
            as list comprehensions, maps, and generator <span>expressions</span>:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e1144"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pays = [person[2] for person in people]</code></strong>    # collect all pay
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pays</code></strong>
[36000.0, 60000.0]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pays = map((lambda x: x[2]), people)</code></strong>       # ditto (map is a generator in 3.X)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(pays)</code></strong>
[36000.0, 60000.0]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sum(person[2] for person in people)</code></strong>       # generator expression, sum built-in
96000.0</pre>
<p>To add a record to the database, the usual list operations,
            such as<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e1163"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e1168"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e1171"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e1176"></a> <code class="epub__literal">append</code> and
            <code class="epub__literal">extend</code>, will suffice:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e1186"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>people.append(['Tom', 50, 0, None])</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>len(people)</code></strong>
3
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>people[-1][0]</code></strong>
'Tom'</pre>
<p>Lists work for our people database, and they might be
            sufficient for some programs, but they suffer from a few major
            flaws. For one thing, Bob and Sue, at this point, are just
            fleeting objects in memory that will disappear once we exit
            Python. For another, every time we want to extract a last name or
            give a raise, we’ll have to repeat the kinds of code we just
            typed; that could become a problem if we ever change the way those
            operations work—we may have to update many places in our code.
            We’ll address these issues in a few moments.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Field labels"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="field_labels"></a>Field labels</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Perhaps more <a id="lists1.3.1.3"></a><a id="field1.3.1.3"></a>fundamentally, accessing fields by position in a
            list requires us to memorize what each position means: if you see
            a bit of code indexing a record on magic position 2, how can you
            tell it is extracting a pay? In terms of understanding the code,
            it might be better to associate a field name with a field
            value.</p>
<p>We might try to associate names with relative positions by
            using the Python<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e1216"></a> <code class="epub__literal">range</code> built-in
            function, which generates successive integers when used in
            iteration contexts (such as the sequence assignment used initially
            here):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e1223"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>NAME, AGE, PAY = range(3)</code></strong>                # 0, 1, and 2
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bob = ['Bob Smith', 42, 10000]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bob[NAME]</code></strong>
'Bob Smith'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>PAY, bob[PAY]</code></strong>
(2, 10000)</pre>
<p>This addresses readability: the three uppercase variables
            essentially become field names. This makes our code dependent on
            the field position assignments, though—we have to remember to
            update the range assignments whenever we change record structure.
            Because they are not directly associated, the names and records
            may become out of sync over time and require a maintenance
            step.</p>
<p>Moreover, because the field names are independent variables,
            there is no direct mapping from a record list back to its field’s
            names. A raw record list, for instance, provides no way to label
            its values with field names in a formatted display. In the
            preceding record, without additional code, there is no path from
            value 42 to label AGE: <code class="epub__literal">bob.index(42)</code> gives 1, the value of AGE,
            but not the name AGE itself.</p>
<p>We might also try this by using lists of tuples, where the
            tuples record both a field name and a value; better yet, a list of
            lists would allow for updates (tuples are immutable). Here’s what
            that idea translates to, with slightly simpler records:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e1246"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bob = [['name', 'Bob Smith'], ['age', 42], ['pay', 10000]]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sue = [['name', 'Sue Jones'], ['age', 45], ['pay', 20000]]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>people = [bob, sue]</code></strong></pre>
<p>This really doesn’t fix the problem, though, because we
            still have to index by position in order to fetch fields:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e1258"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for person in people:</code></strong>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(person[0][1], person[2][1])</code></strong>     # name, pay

Bob Smith 10000
Sue Jones 20000

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[person[0][1] for person in people]</code></strong>       # collect names
['Bob Smith', 'Sue Jones']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for person in people:</code></strong>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(person[0][1].split()[-1])</code></strong>       # get last names
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>person[2][1] *= 1.10</code></strong>                  # give a 10% raise

Smith
Jones
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for person in people: print(person[2])</code></strong>

['pay', 11000.0]
['pay', 22000.0]</pre>
<p>All we’ve really done here is add an extra level of
            positional indexing. To do better, we might inspect field names in
            loops to find the one we want (the loop uses tuple assignment here
            to unpack the name/value pairs):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e1287"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for person in people:</code></strong>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for (name, value) in person:</code></strong>
            <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if name == 'name': print(value)</code></strong>   # find a specific field

Bob Smith
Sue Jones</pre>
<p>Better yet, we can code a fetcher function to do the job for
            us:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e1300"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def field(record, label):</code></strong>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for (fname, fvalue) in record:</code></strong>
            <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if fname == label:</code></strong>                # find any field by name
                <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return fvalue</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>field(bob, 'name')</code></strong>
'Bob Smith'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>field(sue, 'pay')</code></strong>
22000.0

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for rec in people:</code></strong>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(field(rec, 'age'))</code></strong>              # print all ages

42
45</pre>
<p>If we proceed down this path, we’ll eventually wind up with
            a set of record interface functions that generically map field
            names to field data. If you’ve done any Python coding in the past,
            though, you probably already know that there is an easier way to
            code this sort of association, and you can probably guess where
            we’re headed in the next <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e1329"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e1331"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e1333"></a>section.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Using Dictionaries"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="using_dictionaries"></a>Using Dictionaries</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The list-based <a id="rec1.3.2"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e1346"></a>record representations in the prior section work,
          though not without some cost in terms of performance required to
          search for field names (assuming you need to care about milliseconds
          and such). But if you already know some Python, you also know that
          there are more efficient and convenient ways to associate property
          names and values. The built-in dictionary object is a
          natural:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e1352"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bob = {'name': 'Bob Smith', 'age': 42, 'pay': 30000, 'job': 'dev'}</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sue = {'name': 'Sue Jones', 'age': 45, 'pay': 40000, 'job': 'hdw'}</code></strong></pre>
<p>Now, Bob and Sue are objects that map field names to values
          automatically, and they make our code more understandable and
          meaningful. We don’t have to remember what a numeric offset means,
          and we let Python search for the value associated with a field’s
          name with its efficient dictionary indexing:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e1361"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bob['name'], sue['pay']</code></strong>            # not bob[0], sue[2]
('Bob Smith', 40000)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bob['name'].split()[-1]</code></strong>
'Smith'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sue['pay'] *= 1.10</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sue['pay']</code></strong>
44000.0</pre>
<p>Because fields are accessed mnemonically now, they are more
          meaningful to those who read your code (including you).</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Other ways to make dictionaries"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="other_ways_to_make_dictionaries"></a>Other ways to make dictionaries</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Dictionaries <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e1382"></a>turn out to be so useful in Python programming that
            there are even more convenient ways to code them than the
            traditional literal syntax shown earlier—e.g., with keyword
            arguments and the type constructor, as long as the keys are all
            strings:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e1388"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bob = dict(name='Bob Smith', age=42, pay=30000, job='dev')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sue = dict(name='Sue Jones', age=45, pay=40000, job='hdw')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bob</code></strong>
{'pay': 30000, 'job': 'dev', 'age': 42, 'name': 'Bob Smith'}
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sue</code></strong>
{'pay': 40000, 'job': 'hdw', 'age': 45, 'name': 'Sue Jones'}</pre>
<p>by filling out a dictionary one field at a time (recall that
            dictionary keys are pseudo-randomly ordered):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e1404"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sue = {}</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sue['name'] = 'Sue Jones'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sue['age']  = 45</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sue['pay']  = 40000</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sue['job']  = 'hdw'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sue</code></strong>
{'job': 'hdw', 'pay': 40000, 'age': 45, 'name': 'Sue Jones'}</pre>
<p>and by zipping together name/value lists:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e1428"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>names  = ['name', 'age', 'pay', 'job']</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>values = ['Sue Jones', 45, 40000, 'hdw']</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(zip(names, values))</code></strong>
[('name', 'Sue Jones'), ('age', 45), ('pay', 40000), ('job', 'hdw')]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sue = dict(zip(names, values))</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sue</code></strong>
{'job': 'hdw', 'pay': 40000, 'age': 45, 'name': 'Sue Jones'}</pre>
<p>We can even make dictionaries from a sequence of key values
            and an optional starting value for all the keys (handy to
            initialize an empty dictionary):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e1447"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>fields = ('name', 'age', 'job', 'pay')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>record = dict.fromkeys(fields, '?')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>record</code></strong>
{'job': '?', 'pay': '?', 'age': '?', 'name': '?'}</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Lists of dictionaries"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="lists_of_dictionaries"></a>Lists of dictionaries</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Regardless of <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e1463"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e1468"></a>how we code them, we still need to collect our
            dictionary-based records into a database; a list does the trick
            again, as long as we don’t require access by key at the top
            level:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e1474"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bob</code></strong>
{'pay': 30000, 'job': 'dev', 'age': 42, 'name': 'Bob Smith'}
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sue</code></strong>
{'job': 'hdw', 'pay': 40000, 'age': 45, 'name': 'Sue Jones'}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>people = [bob, sue]</code></strong>                                   # reference in a list
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for person in people:</code></strong>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(person['name'], person['pay'], sep=', ')</code></strong>    # all name, pay

Bob Smith, 30000
Sue Jones, 40000

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for person in people:</code></strong>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if person['name'] == 'Sue Jones':</code></strong>                 # fetch sue's pay
            <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(person['pay'])</code></strong>

40000</pre>
<p>Iteration tools work just as well here, but we use keys
            rather than obscure positions (in database terms, the list
            comprehension and map in the following code project the database
            on the “name” field column):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e1503"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>names = [person['name'] for person in people]</code></strong>         # collect names
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>names</code></strong>
['Bob Smith', 'Sue Jones']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(map((lambda x: x['name']), people))</code></strong>              # ditto, generate
['Bob Smith', 'Sue Jones']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sum(person['pay'] for person in people)</code></strong>               # sum all pay
70000</pre>
<p>Interestingly, tools such as list comprehensions and
            on-demand generator expressions can even approach the utility of
            SQL queries here, albeit operating on in-memory <span>objects</span>:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e1522"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[rec['name'] for rec in people if rec['age'] &gt;= 45]</code></strong>   # SQL-ish query
['Sue Jones']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[(rec['age'] ** 2 if rec['age'] &gt;= 45 else rec['age']) for rec in people]</code></strong>
[42, 2025]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>G = (rec['name'] for rec in people if rec['age'] &gt;= 45)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(G)</code></strong>
'Sue Jones'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>G = ((rec['age'] ** 2 if rec['age'] &gt;= 45 else rec['age']) for rec in people)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>G.__next__()</code></strong>
42</pre>
<p>And because dictionaries are normal Python objects, these
            records can also be accessed and updated with normal Python
            syntax:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e1545"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for person in people:</code></strong>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(person['name'].split()[-1])</code></strong>                 # last name
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>person['pay'] *= 1.10</code></strong>                             # a 10% raise

Smith
Jones

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for person in people: print(person['pay'])</code></strong>

33000.0
44000.0</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Nested structures"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="nested_structures"></a>Nested structures</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Incidentally, we <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e1564"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e1569"></a>could avoid the last-name extraction code in the
            prior examples by further structuring our records. Because all of
            Python’s compound datatypes can be nested inside each other and as
            deeply as we like, we can build up fairly complex information
            structures easily—simply type the object’s syntax, and Python does
            all the work of building the components, linking memory
            structures, and later reclaiming their space. This is one of the
            great advantages of a scripting language such as Python.</p>
<p>The following, for instance, represents a more structured
            record by nesting a dictionary, list, and tuple inside another
            dictionary:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e1577"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <span class="epub__strong"><strong><strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bob2 = {'name': {'first': 'Bob', 'last': 'Smith'},</code></strong></strong></span>
            <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'age':  42,</code></strong>
            <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'job':  ['software', 'writing'],</code></strong>
            <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'pay':  (40000, 50000)}</code></strong></pre>
<p>Because this record contains
            nested structures, we simply index twice to go two levels
            deep:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e1594"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bob2['name']</code></strong>                            # bob's full name
{'last': 'Smith', 'first': 'Bob'}
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bob2['name']['last']</code></strong>                    # bob's last name
'Smith'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bob2['pay'][1]</code></strong>                          # bob's upper pay
50000</pre>
<p>The name field is another dictionary here, so instead of
            splitting up a string, we simply index to fetch the last name.
            Moreover, people can have many jobs, as well as minimum and
            maximum pay limits. In fact, Python becomes a sort of query
            language in such cases—we can fetch or change nested data with the
            usual object operations:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e1607"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for job in bob2['job']: print(job)</code></strong>      # all of bob's jobs
software
writing

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bob2['job'][-1]</code></strong>                          # bob's last job
'writing'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bob2['job'].append('janitor')</code></strong>           # bob gets a new job
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bob2</code></strong>
{'job': ['software', 'writing', 'janitor'], 'pay': (40000, 50000), 'age': 42, 'name':
{'last': 'Smith', 'first': 'Bob'}}</pre>
<p>It’s OK to grow the nested list with<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e1623"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e1626"></a> <code class="epub__literal">append</code>, because
            it is really an independent object. Such nesting can come in handy
            for more sophisticated applications; to keep ours simple, we’ll
            stick to the original flat record structure.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Dictionaries of dictionaries"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="dictionaries_of_dictionaries"></a>Dictionaries of dictionaries</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>One last twist on <a id="dict1.3.2.4"></a>our people database: we can get a little more
            mileage out of dictionaries here by using one to represent the
            database itself. That is, we can use a dictionary of
            dictionaries—the outer dictionary is the database, and the nested
            dictionaries are the records within it. Rather than a simple list
            of records, a dictionary-based database allows us to store and
            retrieve records by symbolic key:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e1646"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bob = dict(name='Bob Smith', age=42, pay=30000, job='dev')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sue = dict(name='Sue Jones', age=45, pay=40000, job='hdw')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bob</code></strong>
{'pay': 30000, 'job': 'dev', 'age': 42, 'name': 'Bob Smith'}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>db = {}</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>db['bob'] = bob</code></strong>                      # reference in a dict of dicts
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>db['sue'] = sue</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>db['bob']['name']</code></strong>                    # fetch bob's name
'Bob Smith'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>db['sue']['pay'] = 50000</code></strong>             # change sue's pay
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>db['sue']['pay']</code></strong>                     # fetch sue's pay
50000</pre>
<p>Notice how this structure allows us to access a record
            directly instead of searching for it in a loop—we get to Bob’s
            name immediately by indexing on key <code class="epub__literal">bob</code>. This really is a dictionary of
            dictionaries, though you won’t see all the gory details unless you
            display the database all at once (the Python<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e1681"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e1686"></a> <code class="epub__literal">pprint</code>
            pretty-printer module can help with legibility here):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e1695"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>db</code></strong>
{'bob': {'pay': 30000, 'job': 'dev', 'age': 42, 'name': 'Bob Smith'}, 'sue':
{'pay': 50000, 'job': 'hdw', 'age': 45, 'name': 'Sue Jones'}}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import pprint</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pprint.pprint(db)</code></strong>
{'bob': {'age': 42, 'job': 'dev', 'name': 'Bob Smith', 'pay': 30000},
 'sue': {'age': 45, 'job': 'hdw', 'name': 'Sue Jones', 'pay': 50000}}</pre>
<p>If we still need to step through the database one record at
            a time, we can now rely on dictionary iterators.<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e1708"></a> In recent Python releases, a dictionary iterator
            produces one key in a <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop
            each time through (for compatibility with earlier releases, we can
            also call the<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e1715"></a> <code class="epub__literal">db.keys</code> method
            explicitly in the <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop
            rather than saying just <code class="epub__literal">db</code>, but
            since <span>Python 3’s</span> <code class="epub__literal">keys</code> result is a generator, the effect
            is roughly the same):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e1735"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for key in db:</code></strong>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(key, '=&gt;', db[key]['name'])</code></strong>

bob =&gt; Bob Smith
sue =&gt; Sue Jones

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for key in db:</code></strong>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(key, '=&gt;', db[key]['pay'])</code></strong>

bob =&gt; 30000
sue =&gt; 50000</pre>
<p>To visit all records, either index by key as you go:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e1751"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for key in db:</code></strong>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(db[key]['name'].split()[-1])</code></strong>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>db[key]['pay'] *= 1.10</code></strong>

Smith
Jones</pre>
<p>or step through the dictionary’s values to access records
            directly:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e1764"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for record in db.values(): print(record['pay'])</code></strong>

33000.0
55000.0

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = [db[key]['name'] for key in db]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x</code></strong>
['Bob Smith', 'Sue Jones']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = [rec['name'] for rec in db.values()]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x</code></strong>
['Bob Smith', 'Sue Jones']</pre>
<p>And to add a new record, simply assign it to a new key; this
            is just a dictionary, after all:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e1784"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>db['tom'] = dict(name='Tom', age=50, job=None, pay=0)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>db['tom']</code></strong>
{'pay': 0, 'job': None, 'age': 50, 'name': 'Tom'}
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>db['tom']['name']</code></strong>
'Tom'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(db.keys())</code></strong>
['bob', 'sue', 'tom']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>len(db)</code></strong>
3
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[rec['age'] for rec in db.values()]</code></strong>
[42, 45, 50]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[rec['name'] for rec in db.values() if rec['age'] &gt;= 45]</code></strong>     # SQL-ish query
['Sue Jones', 'Tom']</pre>
<p>Although our database is still a transient object in memory,
            it turns out that this <span>dictionary</span>-of-<span>dictionaries</span> format corresponds
            exactly to a system that saves objects permanently—the <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e1816"></a>shelve (yes, this should probably be
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>shelf</em></span>, grammatically speaking, but the Python
            module name and term is <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>shelve</em></span>). To learn
            how, let’s move on to <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e1829"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e1831"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e1833"></a>the next section.</p>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[2] </sup>No, I’m serious. In the Python classes I teach, I had for
              many years regularly used the name “Bob Smith,” age 40.5, and
              jobs “developer” and “manager” as a supposedly fictitious
              database record—until a class in Chicago, where I met a student
              named Bob Smith, who was 40.5 and was a developer and manager.
              The world is stranger than it seems.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
