<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Step 2: Storing Records Persistently</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Step 2: Storing Records Persistently"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="step_2_colon_storing_records_persistentl"></a>Step 2: Storing Records Persistently</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>So far, we’ve <a id="pro1.4"></a>settled on a dictionary-based representation for our
        database of records, and we’ve reviewed some Python data structure
        concepts along the way. As mentioned, though, the objects we’ve seen
        so far are temporary—they live in memory and they go away as soon as
        we exit Python or the Python program that created them. To make our
        people persistent, they need to be stored in a file of some
        sort.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Using Formatted Files"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="using_formatted_files"></a>Using Formatted Files</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>One way to <a id="rec1.4.1"></a>keep our data around between program runs is to write
          all the data out to a simple text file, in a formatted way. Provided
          the saving and loading tools agree on the format selected, we’re
          free to use any custom scheme we like.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Test data script"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="test_data_script"></a>Test data script</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>So that we <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e1863"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e1868"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e1873"></a>don’t have to keep working interactively, let’s
            first write a script that initializes the data we are going to
            store (if you’ve done any Python work in the past, you know that
            the interactive prompt tends to become tedious once you leave the
            realm of simple one-liners). Example 1-1 creates the sort of
            records and database dictionary we’ve been working with so far,
            but because it is a module, we can import it repeatedly without
            having to retype the code each time. In a sense, this module is a
            database itself, but its program code format doesn’t support
            automatic or end-user updates as is.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_preview"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 1-1. PP4E\Preview\initdata.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting"># initialize data to be stored in files, pickles, shelves

# records
bob = {'name': 'Bob Smith', 'age': 42, 'pay': 30000, 'job': 'dev'}
sue = {'name': 'Sue Jones', 'age': 45, 'pay': 40000, 'job': 'hdw'}
tom = {'name': 'Tom',       'age': 50, 'pay': 0,     'job': None}

# database
db = {}
db['bob'] = bob
db['sue'] = sue
db['tom'] = tom

if __name__ == '__main__':       # when run as a script
    for key in db:
        print(key, '=&gt;\n  ', db[key])</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>As usual, the <code class="epub__literal">__name__</code>
            test at the bottom of Example 1-1 is true only when this
            file is run, not when it is imported. When run as a top-level
            script (e.g., from a command line, via an icon click, or within
            the IDLE GUI), the file’s self-test code under this test dumps the
            database’s contents to the standard output stream (remember,
            that’s what <code class="epub__literal">print</code> function-call
            statements do by default).</p>
<p>Here is the script in action being run from a system command
            line on Windows. Type the following command in a Command Prompt
            window after a <code class="epub__literal">cd</code> to the
            directory where the file is stored, and use a similar console
            window on other types of computers:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e1901"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">...\PP4E\Preview&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python initdata.py</code></strong>
bob =&gt;
   {'job': 'dev', 'pay': 30000, 'age': 42, 'name': 'Bob Smith'}
sue =&gt;
   {'job': 'hdw', 'pay': 40000, 'age': 45, 'name': 'Sue Jones'}
tom =&gt;
   {'job': None, 'pay': 0, 'age': 50, 'name': 'Tom'}</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="File name conventions"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="file_name_conventions"></a>File name conventions</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Since this is our <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e1911"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e1916"></a>first source file (a.k.a. “script”), here are three
            usage notes for this book’s examples:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The text <code class="epub__literal">...\PP4E\Preview&gt;</code> in the first
                line of the preceding example listing stands for your
                operating system’s prompt, which can vary per platform; you
                type just the text that follows this prompt (<code class="epub__literal">python initdata.py</code>).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Like all examples in this book, the system prompt also
                gives the directory in the downloadable book examples package
                where this command should be run. When running this script
                using a command-line in a system shell, make sure the shell’s
                current working directory is <em class="epub__filename">PP4E\Preview</em>. This can matter for
                examples that use files in the working directory.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Similarly, the label that precedes every example file’s
                code listing tells you where the source file resides in the
                examples package. Per the Example 1-1 listing label shown
                earlier, this script’s full filename is <em class="epub__filename">PP4E\Preview\initdata.py</em> in the
                <span>examples</span> tree.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>We’ll use these conventions throughout the book; see the
            Preface for more on getting the examples if you wish to work
            along. I occasionally give more of the directory path in system
            prompts when it’s useful to provide the extra execution context,
            especially in the system part of the book (e.g., a “C:\” prefix
            from Windows or more directory names).</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Script start-up pointers"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="script_start-up_pointers"></a>Script start-up pointers</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>I gave <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e1956"></a>pointers for using the interactive prompt earlier.
            Now that we’ve started running script files, here are also a few
            quick startup pointers for using Python scripts in general:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>On some platforms, you may need to type the full
                directory path to the Python program on your machine; if
                Python isn’t on your system path setting on Windows, for
                example, replace <code class="epub__literal">python</code> in
                the command with <code class="epub__literal">C:\Python31\python</code> (this assumes
                you’re using Python 3.1).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>On most Windows systems you also don’t need to type
                <code class="epub__literal">python</code> on the command line
                at all; just type the file’s name to run it, since Python is
                registered to open “.py” script files.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>You can also run this file inside Python’s standard IDLE
                GUI (open the file and use the Run menu in the text edit
                window), and in similar ways from any of the available
                third-party Python IDEs (e.g., Komodo, Eclipse, NetBeans, and
                the Wing IDE).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>If you click the program’s file icon to launch it on
                Windows, be sure to add an <code class="epub__literal">input()</code> call to the bottom of the
                script to keep the output window up. On other systems, icon
                clicks may require a <code class="epub__literal">#!</code>
                line at the top and executable permission via a<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e1990"></a> <code class="epub__literal">chmod</code>
                command.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>I’ll assume here that you’re able to run Python code one way
            or another. Again, if you’re stuck, see other books such as
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Learning
            Python</em></span> for the full story on launching Python
            programs.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Data format script"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="data_format_script"></a>Data format script</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Now, all we <a id="for1.4.1.4"></a><a id="scr1.4.1.4"></a>have to do is store all of this in-memory data in a
            file. There are a variety of ways to accomplish this; one of the
            most basic is to write one piece of data at a time, with
            separators between each that we can use when reloading to break
            the data apart. Example 1-2 shows one way to
            code this idea.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_preview-id1"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 1-2. PP4E\Preview\make_db_file.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
Save in-memory database object to a file with custom formatting;
assume 'endrec.', 'enddb.', and '=&gt;' are not used in the data;
assume db is dict of dict;  warning: eval can be dangerous - it
runs strings as code;  could also eval() record dict all at once;
could also dbfile.write(key + '\n') vs print(key, file=dbfile);
"""

dbfilename = 'people-file'
ENDDB  = 'enddb.'
ENDREC = 'endrec.'
RECSEP = '=&gt;'

def storeDbase(db, dbfilename=dbfilename):
    "formatted dump of database to flat file"
    dbfile = open(dbfilename, 'w')
    for key in db:
        print(key, file=dbfile)
        for (name, value) in db[key].items():
            print(name + RECSEP + repr(value), file=dbfile)
        print(ENDREC, file=dbfile)
    print(ENDDB, file=dbfile)
    dbfile.close()

def loadDbase(dbfilename=dbfilename):
    "parse data to reconstruct database"
    dbfile = open(dbfilename)
    import sys
    sys.stdin = dbfile
    db = {}
    key = input()
    while key != ENDDB:
        rec = {}
        field = input()
        while field != ENDREC:
            name, value = field.split(RECSEP)
            rec[name] = eval(value)
            field = input()
        db[key] = rec
        key = input()
    return db

if __name__ == '__main__':
    from initdata import db
    storeDbase(db)</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>This is a somewhat complex program, partly because it has
            both saving and loading logic and partly because it does its job
            the hard way; as we’ll see in a moment, there are better ways to
            get objects into files than by manually formatting and parsing
            them. For simple tasks, though, this does work; running Example 1-2 as a script writes
            the database out to a flat file. It has no printed output, but we
            can inspect the database file interactively after this script is
            run, either within IDLE or from a console window where you’re
            running these examples (as is, the database file shows up in the
            current working directory):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e2031"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">...\PP4E\Preview&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python make_db_file.py</code></strong>
...\PP4E\Preview&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for line in open('people-file'):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(line, end='')</code></strong>
...
bob
job=&gt;'dev'
pay=&gt;30000
age=&gt;42
name=&gt;'Bob Smith'
endrec.
sue
job=&gt;'hdw'
pay=&gt;40000
age=&gt;45
name=&gt;'Sue Jones'
endrec.
tom
job=&gt;None
pay=&gt;0
age=&gt;50
name=&gt;'Tom'
endrec.
enddb.</pre>
<p>This file is simply our database’s content with added
            formatting. Its data originates from the test data initialization
            module we wrote in Example 1-1
            because that is the module from which Example 1-2’s self-test code
            imports its data. In practice, Example 1-2 itself could be
            imported and used to store a variety of databases and
            files.</p>
<p>Notice how data to be written is formatted with the as-code
            <code class="epub__literal">repr</code> call and is re-created
            with the <code class="epub__literal">eval</code> call, which
            treats strings as Python code. That allows us to store and
            re-create things like the <code class="epub__literal">None</code>
            object, but it is potentially unsafe; you shouldn’t use <code class="epub__literal">eval</code> if you can’t be sure that the
            database won’t contain malicious code. For our purposes, however,
            there’s probably no cause for <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2067"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2069"></a>alarm.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Utility scripts"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="utility_scripts"></a>Utility scripts</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To test <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2077"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2082"></a>further, Example 1-3 reloads the database
            from a file each time it is run.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_preview-id2"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 1-3. PP4E\Preview\dump_db_file.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from make_db_file import loadDbase
db = loadDbase()
for key in db:
    print(key, '=&gt;\n  ', db[key])
print(db['sue']['name'])</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>And Example 1-4
            makes changes by loading, updating, and storing again.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_preview-id3"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 1-4. PP4E\Preview\update_db_file.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from make_db_file import loadDbase, storeDbase
db = loadDbase()
db['sue']['pay'] *= 1.10
db['tom']['name'] = 'Tom Tom'
storeDbase(db)</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Here are the dump script and the update script in action at
            a system command line; both Sue’s pay and Tom’s name change
            between script runs. The main point to notice is that the data
            stays around after each script exits—our objects have become
            persistent simply because they are mapped to and from text
            files:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e2106"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">...\PP4E\Preview&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python dump_db_file.py</code></strong>
bob =&gt;
   {'pay': 30000, 'job': 'dev', 'age': 42, 'name': 'Bob Smith'}
sue =&gt;
   {'pay': 40000, 'job': 'hdw', 'age': 45, 'name': 'Sue Jones'}
tom =&gt;
   {'pay': 0, 'job': None, 'age': 50, 'name': 'Tom'}
Sue Jones

...\PP4E\Preview&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python update_db_file.py</code></strong>
...\PP4E\Preview&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python dump_db_file.py</code></strong>
bob =&gt;
   {'pay': 30000, 'job': 'dev', 'age': 42, 'name': 'Bob Smith'}
sue =&gt;
   {'pay': <span class="epub__strong"><strong>44000.0</strong></span>, 'job': 'hdw', 'age': 45, 'name': 'Sue Jones'}
tom =&gt;
   {'pay': 0, 'job': None, 'age': 50, 'name': <span class="epub__strong"><strong>'Tom Tom'</strong></span>}
Sue Jones</pre>
<p>As is, we’ll have to write Python code in scripts or at the
            interactive command line for each specific database update we need
            to perform (later in this chapter, we’ll do better by providing
            generalized console, GUI, and web-based interfaces instead). But
            at a basic level, our text file is a database of records. As we’ll
            learn in the next section, though, it turns out that we’ve just
            done a lot of pointless <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2125"></a>work.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Using Pickle Files"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="using_pickle_files"></a>Using Pickle Files</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The formatted text <a id="rec1.4.2"></a><a id="pic1.4.2"></a>file scheme of the prior section works, but it has
          some major limitations. For one thing, it has to read the entire
          database from the file just to fetch one record, and it must write
          the entire database back to the file after each set of updates.
          Although storing one record’s text per file would work around this
          limitation, it would also complicate the program further.</p>
<p>For another thing, the text file approach assumes that the
          data separators it writes out to the file will not appear in the
          data to be stored: if the characters <code class="epub__literal">=&gt;</code> happen to appear in the data, for
          example, the scheme will fail. We might work around this by
          generating XML text to represent records in the text file, using
          Python’s XML parsing tools, which we’ll meet later in this text, to
          reload; XML tags would avoid collisions with actual data’s text, but
          creating and parsing XML would complicate the program substantially
          too.</p>
<p>Perhaps worst of all, the formatted text file scheme is
          already complex without being general: it is tied to the
          dictionary-of-dictionaries structure, and it can’t handle anything
          else without being greatly expanded. It would be nice if a general
          tool existed that could translate any sort of Python data to a
          format that could be saved in a file in a single step.</p>
<p>That is exactly what the Python <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> module is designed to do. The
          <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> module translates an
          in-memory Python object into a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>serialized</em></span> byte
          stream—a string of bytes that can be written to any file-like
          object. The <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> module also
          knows how to reconstruct the original object in memory, given the
          serialized byte stream: we get back the exact same object. In a
          sense, the <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> module replaces
          proprietary data formats—its serialized format is general and
          efficient enough for any program. With <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code>, there is no need to manually
          translate objects to data when storing them persistently, and no
          need to manually parse a complex format to get them back. Pickling
          is similar in spirit to XML representations, but it’s both more
          Python-specific, and much simpler to code.</p>
<p>The net effect is that pickling allows us to store and fetch
          native Python objects as they are and in a single step—we use normal
          Python syntax to process pickled records. Despite what it does, the
          <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> module is remarkably easy
          to use. Example 1-5 shows
          how to store our records in a flat file, using <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code>.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_preview-id4"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 1-5. PP4E\Preview\make_db_pickle.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from initdata import db
import pickle
dbfile = open('people-pickle', 'wb')               # use binary mode files in 3.X
pickle.dump(db, dbfile)                            # data is bytes, not str
dbfile.close()</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>When run, this script stores the entire database (the
          dictionary of dictionaries defined in Example 1-1) to a flat file named
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>people-pickle</em></span> in the current working directory.
          The <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> module handles the
          work of converting the object to a string. Example 1-6 shows how to access
          the pickled database after it has been created; we simply open the
          file and pass its content back to <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> to remake the object from its
          serialized string.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_preview-id5"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 1-6. PP4E\Preview\dump_db_pickle.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import pickle
dbfile = open('people-pickle', 'rb')               # use binary mode files in 3.X
db = pickle.load(dbfile)
for key in db:
    print(key, '=&gt;\n  ', db[key])
print(db['sue']['name'])</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Here are these two scripts at work, at the system command line
          again; naturally, they can also be run in IDLE, and you can open and
          inspect the pickle file by running the same sort of code
          interactively as well:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e2209"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">...\PP4E\Preview&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python make_db_pickle.py</code></strong>
...\PP4E\Preview&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python dump_db_pickle.py</code></strong>
bob =&gt;
   {'pay': 30000, 'job': 'dev', 'age': 42, 'name': 'Bob Smith'}
sue =&gt;
   {'pay': 40000, 'job': 'hdw', 'age': 45, 'name': 'Sue Jones'}
tom =&gt;
   {'pay': 0, 'job': None, 'age': 50, 'name': 'Tom'}
Sue Jones</pre>
<p>Updating with a pickle file is similar to a manually formatted
          file, except that Python is doing all of the formatting work for us.
          Example 1-7 shows
          how.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_preview-id6"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 1-7. PP4E\Preview\update_db_pickle.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import pickle
dbfile = open('people-pickle', 'rb')
db = pickle.load(dbfile)
dbfile.close()

db['sue']['pay'] *= 1.10
db['tom']['name'] = 'Tom Tom'

dbfile = open('people-pickle', 'wb')
pickle.dump(db, dbfile)
dbfile.close()</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Notice how the entire database is written back to the file
          after the records are changed in memory, just as for the manually
          formatted approach; this might become slow for very large databases,
          but we’ll ignore this for the moment. Here are our update and dump
          scripts in action—as in the prior section, Sue’s pay and Tom’s name
          change between scripts because they are written back to a file (this
          time, a pickle file):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e2229"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">...\PP4E\Preview&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python update_db_pickle.py</code></strong>
...\PP4E\Preview&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python dump_db_pickle.py</code></strong>
bob =&gt;
   {'pay': 30000, 'job': 'dev', 'age': 42, 'name': 'Bob Smith'}
sue =&gt;
   {'pay': <span class="epub__strong"><strong>44000.0</strong></span>, 'job': 'hdw', 'age': 45, 'name': 'Sue Jones'}
tom =&gt;
   {'pay': 0, 'job': None, 'age': 50, 'name': <span class="epub__strong"><strong>'Tom Tom'</strong></span>}
Sue Jones</pre>
<p>As we’ll learn in Chapter 17, the Python pickling system
          supports nearly arbitrary object types—lists, dictionaries, class
          instances, nested structures, and more. There, we’ll also learn
          about the pickler’s text and binary storage protocols; as of Python
          3, all protocols use <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>
          objects to represent pickled data, which in turn requires pickle
          files to be opened in binary mode for all protocols. As we’ll see
          later in this chapter, the pickler and its data format also underlie
          shelves and ZODB databases, and pickled class instances provide both
          data and behavior for objects stored.</p>
<p>In fact, pickling is more general than these examples may
          imply. Because they accept any object that provides an interface
          compatible with files, pickling and unpickling may be used to
          transfer native Python objects to a variety of media. Using a
          network socket, for instance, allows us to ship pickled Python
          objects across a network and provides an alternative to larger
          protocols such as SOAP and <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2252"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2254"></a>XML-RPC.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Using Per-Record Pickle Files"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="using_per-record_pickle_files"></a>Using Per-Record Pickle Files</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As mentioned <a id="rec1.4.3"></a><a id="pic1.4.3"></a>earlier, one potential disadvantage of this section’s
          examples so far is that they may become slow for very large
          databases: because the entire database must be loaded and rewritten
          to update a single record, this approach can waste time. We could
          improve on this by storing each record in the database in a separate
          flat file. The next three examples show one way to do so; Example 1-8 stores each record in
          its own flat file, using each record’s original key as its filename
          with a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>.pkl</em></span> appended (it creates the files
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>bob.pkl, sue.pkl</em></span>, and
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>tom.pkl</em></span> in the current working
          directory).</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_preview-id7"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 1-8. PP4E\Preview\make_db_pickle_recs.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from initdata import bob, sue, tom
import pickle
for (key, record) in [('bob', bob), ('tom', tom), ('sue', sue)]:
    recfile = open(key + '.pkl', 'wb')
    pickle.dump(record, recfile)
    recfile.close()</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Next, Example 1-9
          dumps the entire database by using the standard library’s <code class="epub__literal">glob</code> <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2296"></a>module to do filename expansion and thus collect all
          the files in this directory with a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>.pkl</em></span>
          extension. To load a single record, we open its file and deserialize
          with <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code>; we must load only
          one record file, though, not the entire database, to fetch one
          record.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_preview-id8"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 1-9. PP4E\Preview\dump_db_pickle_recs.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import pickle, glob
for filename in glob.glob('*.pkl'):         # for 'bob','sue','tom'
    recfile = open(filename, 'rb')
    record  = pickle.load(recfile)
    print(filename, '=&gt;\n  ', record)

suefile = open('sue.pkl', 'rb')
print(pickle.load(suefile)['name'])         # fetch sue's name</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Finally, Example 1-10
          updates the database by fetching a record from its file, changing it
          in memory, and then writing it back to its pickle file. This time,
          we have to fetch and rewrite only a single record file, not the full
          database, to update.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_preview-id9"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 1-10. PP4E\Preview\update_db_pickle_recs.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import pickle
suefile = open('sue.pkl', 'rb')
sue = pickle.load(suefile)
suefile.close()

sue['pay'] *= 1.10
suefile = open('sue.pkl', 'wb')
pickle.dump(sue, suefile)
suefile.close()</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Here are our file-per-record scripts in action; the results
          are about the same as in the prior section, but database keys become
          real filenames now. In a sense, the filesystem becomes our top-level
          dictionary—filenames provide direct access to each <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2326"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2328"></a>record.</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e2331"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">...\PP4E\Preview&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python make_db_pickle_recs.py</code></strong>
...\PP4E\Preview&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python dump_db_pickle_recs.py</code></strong>
bob.pkl =&gt;
   {'pay': 30000, 'job': 'dev', 'age': 42, 'name': 'Bob Smith'}
sue.pkl =&gt;
   {'pay': 40000, 'job': 'hdw', 'age': 45, 'name': 'Sue Jones'}
tom.pkl =&gt;
   {'pay': 0, 'job': None, 'age': 50, 'name': 'Tom'}
Sue Jones

...\PP4E\Preview&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python update_db_pickle_recs.py</code></strong>
...\PP4E\Preview&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python dump_db_pickle_recs.py</code></strong>
bob.pkl =&gt;
   {'pay': 30000, 'job': 'dev', 'age': 42, 'name': 'Bob Smith'}
sue.pkl =&gt;
   {'pay': <span class="epub__strong"><strong>44000.0</strong></span>, 'job': 'hdw', 'age': 45, 'name': 'Sue Jones'}
tom.pkl =&gt;
   {'pay': 0, 'job': None, 'age': 50, 'name': 'Tom'}
Sue Jones</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Using Shelves"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="using_shelves"></a>Using Shelves</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Pickling <a id="rec1.4.4"></a><a id="sh1.4.4"></a>objects to files, as shown in the preceding section,
          is an optimal scheme in many applications. In fact, some
          applications use pickling of Python objects across network sockets
          as a simpler alternative to network protocols such as the SOAP and
          XML-RPC web services architectures (also supported by Python, but
          much heavier than <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code>).</p>
<p>Moreover, assuming your filesystem can handle as many files as
          you’ll need, pickling one record per file also obviates the need to
          load and store the entire database for each update. If we really
          want keyed access to records, though, the Python standard library
          offers an even higher-level tool: shelves.</p>
<p>Shelves automatically pickle objects to and from a
          keyed-access filesystem. They behave much like dictionaries that
          must be opened, and they persist after each program exits. Because
          they give us key-based access to stored records, there is no need to
          manually manage one flat file per record—the shelve system
          automatically splits up stored records and fetches and updates only
          those records that are accessed and changed. In this way, shelves
          provide utility similar to per-record pickle files, but they are
          usually easier to code.</p>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">shelve</code> interface is
          just as simple as <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code>: it is
          identical to dictionaries, with extra open and close calls. In fact,
          to your code, a shelve really does appear to be a persistent
          dictionary of persistent objects; Python does all the work of
          mapping its content to and from a file. For instance, Example 1-11 shows how to store
          our in-memory dictionary objects in a shelve for permanent
          keeping.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_preview-id10"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 1-11. PP4E\Preview\make_db_shelve.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from initdata import bob, sue
import shelve
db = shelve.open('people-shelve')
db['bob'] = bob
db['sue'] = sue
db.close()</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>This script creates one or more files in the current directory
          with the name <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>people-shelve</em></span> as a prefix (in
          Python 3.1 on Windows, <em class="epub__filename">people-shelve.bak</em>, <em class="epub__filename">people-shelve.dat</em>, and <em class="epub__filename">people-shelve.dir</em>). You shouldn’t delete
          these files (they are your database!), and you should be sure to use
          the same base name in other scripts that access the shelve. <span>Example 1-12</span>, for
          instance, reopens the shelve and indexes it by key to fetch its
          stored records.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_preview-id11"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 1-12. PP4E\Preview\dump_db_shelve.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import shelve
db = shelve.open('people-shelve')
for key in db:
    print(key, '=&gt;\n  ', db[key])
print(db['sue']['name'])
db.close()</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>We still have a dictionary of dictionaries here, but the
          top-level dictionary is really a shelve mapped onto a file. Much
          happens when you access a shelve’s keys—it uses <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> internally to serialize and
          deserialize objects stored, and it interfaces with a keyed-access
          filesystem. From your perspective, though, it’s just a persistent
          dictionary. Example 1-13
          shows how to code shelve updates.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_preview-id12"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 1-13. PP4E\Preview\update_db_shelve.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from initdata import tom
import shelve
db = shelve.open('people-shelve')
sue = db['sue']                       # fetch sue
sue['pay'] *= 1.50
db['sue'] = sue                       # update sue
db['tom'] = tom                       # add a new record
db.close()</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Notice how this code fetches <code class="epub__literal">sue</code> by key, updates in memory, and then
          reassigns to the key to update the shelve; this is a requirement of
          shelves by default, but not always of more advanced shelve-like
          systems such as ZODB, covered in Chapter 17. As we’ll see later<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2427"></a>, <code class="epub__literal">shelve.open</code> also
          has a newer <code class="epub__literal">writeback</code> keyword
          argument, which, if passed <code class="epub__literal">True</code>,
          causes all records loaded from the shelve to be cached in memory,
          and automatically written back to the shelve when it is closed; this
          avoids manual write backs on changes, but can consume memory and
          make closing slow.</p>
<p>Also note how shelve files are explicitly closed. Although we
          don’t need to pass mode flags to <code class="epub__literal">shelve.open</code> (by default it creates the
          shelve if needed, and opens it for reads and writes otherwise), some
          underlying keyed-access filesystems may require a <code class="epub__literal">close</code> call in order to flush output
          buffers after changes.</p>
<p>Finally, here are the shelve-based scripts on the job,
          creating, changing, and fetching records. The records are still
          dictionaries, but the database is now a dictionary-like shelve which
          automatically retains its state in a file between program
          runs:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e2454"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">...\PP4E\Preview&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python make_db_shelve.py</code></strong>
...\PP4E\Preview&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python dump_db_shelve.py</code></strong>
bob =&gt;
   {'pay': 30000, 'job': 'dev', 'age': 42, 'name': 'Bob Smith'}
sue =&gt;
   {'pay': 40000, 'job': 'hdw', 'age': 45, 'name': 'Sue Jones'}
Sue Jones

...\PP4E\Preview&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python update_db_shelve.py</code></strong>
...\PP4E\Preview&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python dump_db_shelve.py</code></strong>
bob =&gt;
   {'pay': 30000, 'job': 'dev', 'age': 42, 'name': 'Bob Smith'}
sue =&gt;
   {'pay': <span class="epub__strong"><strong>60000.0</strong></span>, 'job': 'hdw', 'age': 45, 'name': 'Sue Jones'}
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>tom =&gt;</strong></span>
   <span class="epub__strong"><strong>{'pay': 0, 'job': None, 'age': 50, 'name': 'Tom'}</strong></span>
Sue Jones</pre>
<p>When we ran the update and dump scripts here, we added a new
          record for key <code class="epub__literal">tom</code> and increased
          Sue’s pay field by 50 percent. These changes are permanent because
          the record dictionaries are mapped to an external file by shelve.
          (In fact, this is a particularly good script for Sue—something she
          might consider scheduling to run often, using a cron job on Unix, or
          a Startup folder or msconfig entry on <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2483"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2485"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2487"></a>Windows…)</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="what_apostrophy_s_in_a_name_question"></a>
<p class="epub__title">What’s in a Name?</p>
<p>Though it’s a surprisingly well-kept secret, Python
            <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2495"></a>gets its name from the 1970s British TV comedy
            series <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Monty Python’s Flying Circus</em></span>.
            According to Python folklore, Guido <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2504"></a>van Rossum, Python’s creator, was watching reruns of
            the show at about the same time he needed a name for a new
            language he was developing. And as they say in show business, “the
            rest is history.”</p>
<p>Because of this heritage, references to the comedy group’s
            work often show up in examples and discussion. For instance, the
            name <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Brian</em></span> appears often in scripts; the
            words <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>spam, lumberjack</em></span>, and
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>shrubbery</em></span> have a special connotation to
            Python users; and presentations are sometimes referred to as
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>The Spanish Inquisition</em></span>. As a rule, if a
            Python user starts using phrases that have no relation to reality,
            they’re probably borrowed from the Monty Python series or movies.
            Some of these phrases might even pop up in this book. You don’t
            have to run out and rent <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>The Meaning of Life</em></span>
            or <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>The Holy Grail</em></span> to do useful work in
            Python, of course, but it can’t hurt.</p>
<p>While “Python” turned out to be a distinctive name, it has
            also had some interesting side effects. For instance, when the
            Python newsgroup, comp.lang.python, came online in 1994, its first
            few weeks of activity were almost entirely taken up by people
            wanting to discuss topics from the TV show. More recently, a
            special Python supplement in the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Linux
            Journal</em></span> magazine featured photos of Guido garbed in an
            obligatory “nice red uniform.”</p>
<p>Python’s news list still receives an occasional post from
            fans of the show. For instance, one early poster innocently
            offered to swap Monty Python scripts with other fans. Had he known
            the nature of the forum, he might have at least mentioned whether
            they were portable or not.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
