<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Step 3: Stepping Up to OOP</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Step 3: Stepping Up to OOP"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="step_3_colon_stepping_up_to_oop"></a>Step 3: Stepping Up to OOP</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Let’s step back <a id="pro1.5"></a><a id="oop1.5"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2551"></a>for a moment and consider how far we’ve come. At this
        point, we’ve created a database of records: the shelve, as well as
        per-record pickle file approaches of the prior section suffice for
        basic data storage tasks. As is, our records are represented as simple
        dictionaries, which provide easier-to-understand access to fields than
        do lists (by key, rather than by position). Dictionaries, however,
        still have some limitations that may become more critical as our
        program grows over time.</p>
<p>For one thing, there is no central place for us to collect
        record processing logic. Extracting last names and giving raises, for
        instance, can be accomplished with code like the following:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e2559"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import shelve</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>db = shelve.open('people-shelve')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bob = db['bob']</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bob['name'].split()[-1]</code></strong>             # get bob's last name
'Smith'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sue = db['sue']</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sue['pay'] *= 1.25</code></strong>                  # give sue a raise
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sue['pay']</code></strong>
75000.0
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>db['sue'] = sue</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>db.close()</code></strong></pre>
<p>This works, and it might suffice for some short programs. But if
        we ever need to change the way last names and raises are implemented,
        we might have to update this kind of code in many places in our
        program. In fact, even finding all such magical code snippets could be
        a challenge; hardcoding or cutting and pasting bits of logic
        redundantly like this in more than one place will almost always come
        back to haunt you eventually.</p>
<p>It would be better to somehow hide—that is,
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>encapsulate</em></span>—such bits of code. Functions in a
        module would allow us to implement such operations in a single place
        and thus avoid code redundancy, but still wouldn’t naturally associate
        them with the records themselves. What we’d like is a way to bind
        processing logic with the data stored in the database in order to make
        it easier to understand, debug, and reuse.</p>
<p>Another downside to using dictionaries for records is that they
        are difficult to expand over time. For example, suppose that the set
        of data fields or the procedure for giving raises is different for
        different kinds of people (perhaps some people get a bonus each year
        and some do not). If we ever need to extend our program, there is no
        natural way to customize simple dictionaries. For future growth, we’d
        also like our software to support extension and customization in a
        natural way.</p>
<p>If you’ve already studied Python in any sort of depth, you
        probably already know that this is where its OOP support begins to
        become attractive:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Structure</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>With OOP, we can naturally associate processing logic with
              record data—classes provide both a program unit that combines
              logic and data in a single package and a hierarchy that allows
              code to be easily factored to avoid redundancy.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Encapsulation</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>With OOP, we can also wrap up details such as name
              processing and pay increases behind method functions—i.e., we
              are free to change method implementations without breaking their
              users.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Customization</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>And with OOP, we have a natural growth path. Classes can
              be extended and customized by coding new subclasses, without
              changing or breaking already working code.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>That is, under OOP, we program by customizing and reusing, not
        by rewriting. OOP is an option in Python and, frankly, is sometimes
        better suited for strategic than for tactical tasks. It tends to work
        best when you have time for upfront planning—something that might be a
        luxury if your users have already begun storming the gates.</p>
<p>But especially for larger systems that change over time, its
        code reuse and structuring advantages far outweigh its learning curve,
        and it can substantially cut development time. Even in our simple
        case, the customizability and reduced redundancy we gain from classes
        can be a decided <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2625"></a>advantage.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Using Classes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="using_classes"></a>Using Classes</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>OOP is easy to <a id="oop1.5.1"></a><a id="cl1.5.1"></a><a id="pro1.5.1"></a>use in Python, thanks largely to Python’s dynamic
          typing model. In fact, it’s so easy that we’ll jump right into an
          example: Example 1-14
          implements our database records as class instances rather than as
          dictionaries.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_preview-id13"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 1-14. PP4E\Preview\person_start.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Person:
    def __init__(self, name, age, pay=0, job=None):
        self.name = name
        self.age  = age
        self.pay  = pay
        self.job  = job

if __name__ == '__main__':
    bob = Person('Bob Smith', 42, 30000, 'software')
    sue = Person('Sue Jones', 45, 40000, 'hardware')
    print(bob.name, sue.pay)

    print(bob.name.split()[-1])
    sue.pay *= 1.10
    print(sue.pay)</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>There is not much to this class—just a constructor method that
          fills out the instance with data passed in as arguments to the class
          name. It’s sufficient to represent a database record, though, and it
          can already provide tools such as defaults for pay and job fields
          that dictionaries cannot. The self-test code at the bottom of this
          file creates two instances (records) and accesses their attributes
          (fields); here is this file’s output when run under IDLE (a system
          command-line works just as well):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e2659"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">Bob Smith 40000
Smith
44000.0</pre>
<p>This isn’t a database yet, but we could stuff these objects
          into a list or dictionary as before in order to collect them as a
          unit:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e2663"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from person_start import Person</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bob = Person('Bob Smith', 42)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sue = Person('Sue Jones', 45, 40000)</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>people = [bob, sue]</code></strong>                          # a "database" list
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for person in people:</code></strong>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(person.name, person.pay)</code></strong>

Bob Smith 0
Sue Jones 40000

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = [(person.name, person.pay) for person in people]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x</code></strong>
[('Bob Smith', 0), ('Sue Jones', 40000)]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[rec.name for rec in people if rec.age &gt;= 45]</code></strong>     # SQL-ish query
['Sue Jones']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[(rec.age ** 2 if rec.age &gt;= 45 else rec.age) for rec in people]</code></strong>
[42, 2025]</pre>
<p>Notice that Bob’s pay defaulted to zero this time because we
          didn’t pass in a value for that argument (maybe Sue is supporting
          him now?). We might also implement a class that represents the
          database, perhaps as a subclass of the built-in list or dictionary
          types, with insert and delete methods that encapsulate the way the
          database is implemented. We’ll abandon this path for now, though,
          because it will be more useful to store these records persistently
          in a shelve, which already encapsulates stores and fetches behind an
          interface for us. Before we do, though, let’s add some <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2698"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2700"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2702"></a>logic.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Adding Behavior"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="adding_behavior"></a>Adding Behavior</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>So far, our <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2710"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2715"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2720"></a>class is just data: it replaces dictionary keys with
          object attributes, but it doesn’t add much to what we had before. To
          really leverage the power of classes, we need to add some behavior.
          By wrapping up bits of behavior in class method functions, we can
          insulate clients from changes. And by packaging methods in classes
          along with data, we provide a natural place for readers to look for
          code. In a sense, classes combine records and the programs that
          process those records; methods provide logic that interprets and
          updates the data (we say they are
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>object-oriented</em></span>, because they always process an
          object’s data).</p>
<p>For instance, Example 1-15 adds the last-name
          and raise logic as class methods; methods use the <code class="epub__literal">self</code> argument to access or update the
          instance (record) being processed.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_preview-id14"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 1-15. PP4E\Preview\person.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Person:
    def __init__(self, name, age, pay=0, job=None):
        self.name = name
        self.age  = age
        self.pay  = pay
        self.job  = job
    def lastName(self):
        return self.name.split()[-1]
    def giveRaise(self, percent):
        self.pay *= (1.0 + percent)

if __name__ == '__main__':
    bob = Person('Bob Smith', 42, 30000, 'software')
    sue = Person('Sue Jones', 45, 40000, 'hardware')
    print(bob.name, sue.pay)

    print(bob.lastName())
    sue.giveRaise(.10)
    print(sue.pay)</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>The output of this script is the same as the last, but the
          results are being computed by methods now, not by hardcoded logic
          that appears redundantly wherever it is required:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e2743"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">Bob Smith 40000
Smith
44000.0</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Adding Inheritance"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="adding_inheritance"></a>Adding Inheritance</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>One last <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2750"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2755"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2760"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2765"></a>enhancement to our records before they become
          permanent: because they are implemented as classes now, they
          naturally support customization through the inheritance search
          mechanism in Python. Example 1-16, for instance,
          customizes the last section’s <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> class in order to give a 10 percent
          bonus by default to managers whenever they receive a raise (any
          relation to practice in the real world is purely
          coincidental).</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_preview-id15"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 1-16. PP4E\Preview\manager.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from person import Person

class Manager(Person):
    def giveRaise(self, percent, bonus=0.1):
        self.pay *= (1.0 + percent + bonus)

if __name__ == '__main__':
    tom = Manager(name='Tom Doe', age=50, pay=50000)
    print(tom.lastName())
    tom.giveRaise(.20)
    print(tom.pay)</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>When run, this script’s self-test prints the following:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e2783"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">Doe
65000.0</pre>
<p>Here, the <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> class
          appears in a module of its own, but it could have been added to the
          <code class="epub__literal">person</code> module instead (Python
          doesn’t require just one class per file). It inherits the
          constructor and last-name methods from its superclass, but it
          customizes just the <code class="epub__literal">giveRaise</code>
          method (there are a variety of ways to code this extension, as we’ll
          see later). Because this change is being added as a new subclass,
          the original <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> class, and
          any objects generated from it, will continue working unchanged. Bob
          and Sue, for example, inherit the original raise logic, but Tom gets
          the custom version because of the class from which he is created. In
          OOP, we program by <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>customizing</em></span>, not by
          changing.</p>
<p>In fact, code that uses our objects doesn’t need to be at all
          aware of what the raise method does—it’s up to the object to do the
          right thing based on the class from which it is created. As long as
          the object supports the expected interface (here, a method called
          <code class="epub__literal">giveRaise</code>), it will be compatible
          with the calling code, regardless of its specific type, and even if
          its method works differently than others.</p>
<p>If you’ve already studied Python, you may know this behavior
          as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>polymorphism</em></span>; it’s a core property of the
          language, and it accounts for much of your code’s flexibility. When
          the following code calls the <code class="epub__literal">giveRaise</code> method, for example, what
          happens depends on the <code class="epub__literal">obj</code> object
          being processed; Tom gets a 20 percent raise instead of 10 percent
          because of the <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> class’s
          customization:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e2821"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from person import Person</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from manager import Manager</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bob = Person(name='Bob Smith', age=42, pay=10000)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sue = Person(name='Sue Jones', age=45, pay=20000)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>tom = Manager(name='Tom Doe',  age=55, pay=30000)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>db = [bob, sue, tom]</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for obj in db:</code></strong>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>obj.giveRaise(.10)</code></strong>         # default or custom

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for obj in db:</code></strong>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(obj.lastName(), '=&gt;', obj.pay)</code></strong>

Smith =&gt; 11000.0
Jones =&gt; 22000.0
Doe =&gt; 36000.0</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Refactoring Code"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="refactoring_code"></a>Refactoring Code</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Before we <a id="oop1.5.4"></a>move on, there are a few coding alternatives worth
          noting here. Most of these underscore the Python OOP model, and they
          serve as a quick review.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Augmenting methods"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="augmenting_methods"></a>Augmenting methods</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As a first <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2872"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2877"></a><a id="pro1.5.4"></a>alternative, notice that we have introduced some
            redundancy in Example 1-16: the raise
            calculation is now repeated in two places (in the two classes). We
            could also have implemented the customized <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> class by
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>augmenting</em></span> the inherited raise method instead
            of replacing it completely:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e2894"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Manager(Person):
    def giveRaise(self, percent, bonus=0.1):
        Person.giveRaise(self, percent + bonus)</pre>
<p>The trick here is to call back the superclass’s version of
            the method directly, passing in the <code class="epub__literal">self</code> argument explicitly. We still
            redefine the method, but we simply run the general version after
            adding 10 percent (by default) to the passed-in percentage. This
            coding pattern can help reduce code redundancy (the original raise
            method’s logic appears in only one place and so is easier to
            change) and is especially handy for kicking off superclass
            constructor methods in practice.</p>
<p>If you’ve already studied Python OOP, you know that this
            coding scheme works because we can always call methods through
            either an instance or the class name. In general, the following
            are equivalent, and both forms may be used explicitly:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e2903"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">instance.method(arg1, arg2)
class.method(instance, arg1, arg2)</pre>
<p>In fact, the first form is mapped to the second—when calling
            through the instance, Python determines the class by searching the
            inheritance tree for the method name and passes in the instance
            automatically. Either way, within <code class="epub__literal">giveRaise</code>, <code class="epub__literal">self</code> refers to the instance that is the
            subject of the call.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Display format"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="display_format"></a>Display format</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>For more <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2918"></a>object-oriented fun, we could also add a few
            operator overloading methods to our people classes. For example, a
            <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> method, shown here,
            could return a string to give the display format for our objects
            when they are printed as a whole—much better than the default
            display we get for an instance:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e2927"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Person:
    def __str__(self):
        return '&lt;%s =&gt; %s&gt;' % (self.__class__.__name__, self.name)

tom = Manager('Tom Jones', 50)
print(tom)                               # prints: &lt;Manager =&gt; Tom Jones&gt;</pre>
<p>Here <code class="epub__literal">__class__</code> gives the
            lowest class from which <code class="epub__literal">self</code>
            was made, even though <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code>
            may be inherited. The net effect is that <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> allows us to print instances
            directly instead of having to print specific attributes. We could
            extend this <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> to loop
            through the instance’s <code class="epub__literal">__dict__</code>
            attribute dictionary to display all attributes generically; for
            this preview we’ll leave this as a suggested exercise.</p>
<p>We might even code an <code class="epub__literal">__add__</code> method to make <code class="epub__literal">+</code> expressions automatically call the
            <code class="epub__literal">giveRaise</code> method. Whether we
            should is another question; the fact that a <code class="epub__literal">+</code> expression gives a person a raise
            might seem more magical to the next person reading our code than
            it should.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Constructor customization"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="constructor_customization"></a>Constructor customization</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Finally, notice <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2969"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2974"></a>that we didn’t pass the <code class="epub__literal">job</code> argument when making a manager in
            Example 1-16; if we had,
            it would look like this with keyword arguments:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e2983"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">tom = Manager(name='Tom Doe', age=50, pay=50000, job='manager')</pre>
<p>The reason we didn’t include a job in the example is that
            it’s redundant with the class of the object: if someone is a
            manager, their class should imply their job title. Instead of
            leaving this field blank, though, it may make more sense to
            provide an explicit constructor for managers, which fills in this
            field automatically:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e2987"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Manager(Person):
    def __init__(self, name, age, pay):
        Person.__init__(self, name, age, pay, 'manager')</pre>
<p>Now when a manager is created, its job is filled in
            automatically. The trick here is to call to the superclass’s
            version of the method explicitly, just as we did for the <code class="epub__literal">give</code><code class="epub__literal">Raise</code> method
            earlier in this section; the only difference here is the unusual
            name for the constructor method.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Alternative classes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="alternative_classes"></a>Alternative classes</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>We won’t <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e3001"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e3006"></a>use any of this section’s three extensions in later
            examples, but to demonstrate how they work, Example 1-17 collects these
            ideas in an alternative implementation of our <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> classes.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_preview-id16"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 1-17. PP4E\Preview\person_alternative.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
Alternative implementation of person classes, with data, behavior,
and operator overloading (not used for objects stored persistently)
"""

class Person:
    """
    a general person: data+logic
    """
    def __init__(self, name, age, pay=0, job=None):
        self.name = name
        self.age  = age
        self.pay  = pay
        self.job  = job
    def lastName(self):
        return self.name.split()[-1]
    def giveRaise(self, percent):
        self.pay *= (1.0 + percent)
    def __str__(self):
        return ('&lt;%s =&gt; %s: %s, %s&gt;' %
               (self.__class__.__name__, self.name, self.job, self.pay))

class Manager(Person):
    """
    a person with custom raise
    inherits general lastname, str
    """
    def __init__(self, name, age, pay):
        Person.__init__(self, name, age, pay, 'manager')
    def giveRaise(self, percent, bonus=0.1):
        Person.giveRaise(self, percent + bonus)

if __name__ == '__main__':
    bob = Person('Bob Smith', 44)
    sue = Person('Sue Jones', 47, 40000, 'hardware')
    tom = Manager(name='Tom Doe', age=50, pay=50000)
    print(sue, sue.pay, sue.lastName())
    for obj in (bob, sue, tom):
        obj.giveRaise(.10)                 # run this obj's giveRaise
        print(obj)                         # run common __str__ method</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Notice the polymorphism in this module’s self-test loop: all
            three objects share the constructor, last-name, and printing
            methods, but the raise method called is dependent upon the class
            from which an instance is created. When run, Example 1-17 prints the
            following to standard output—the manager’s job is filled in at
            construction, we get the new custom display format for our
            objects, and the new version of the manager’s raise method works
            as before:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e3027"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&lt;Person =&gt; Sue Jones: hardware, 40000&gt; 40000 Jones
&lt;Person =&gt; Bob Smith: None, 0.0&gt;
&lt;Person =&gt; Sue Jones: hardware, 44000.0&gt;
&lt;Manager =&gt; Tom Doe: manager, 60000.0&gt;</pre>
<p>Such <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>refactoring</em></span> (restructuring) of
            code is common as class hierarchies grow and evolve. In fact, as
            is, we still can’t give someone a raise if his pay is zero (Bob is
            out of luck); we probably need a way to set pay, too, but we’ll
            leave such extensions for the next release. The good news is that
            Python’s flexibility and readability make refactoring <span>easy—</span>it’s simple and quick to
            restructure your code. If you haven’t used the language yet,
            you’ll find that Python development is largely an exercise in
            rapid, incremental, and interactive programming, which is well
            suited to the shifting needs of real-world <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e3037"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e3039"></a>projects.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Adding Persistence"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="adding_persistence"></a>Adding Persistence</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>It’s time for a <a id="oop1.5.5"></a><a id="pro1.5.5"></a><a id="per1.5.5"></a><a id="cl1.5.5"></a>status update. We now have encapsulated in the form of
          classes customizable implementations of our records and their
          processing logic. Making our class-based records persistent is a
          minor last step. We could store them in per-record pickle files
          again; a shelve-based storage medium will do just as well for our
          goals and is often easier to code. Example 1-18 shows how.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_preview-id17"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 1-18. PP4E\Preview\make_db_classes.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import shelve
from person import Person
from manager import Manager

bob = Person('Bob Smith', 42, 30000, 'software')
sue = Person('Sue Jones', 45, 40000, 'hardware')
tom = Manager('Tom Doe',  50, 50000)

db = shelve.open('class-shelve')
db['bob'] = bob
db['sue'] = sue
db['tom'] = tom
db.close()</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>This file creates three class instances (two from the original
          class and one from its customization) and assigns them to keys in a
          newly created shelve file to store them permanently. In other words,
          it creates a shelve of class instances; to our code, the database
          looks just like a dictionary of class instances, but the top-level
          dictionary is mapped to a shelve file again. To check our work,
          Example 1-19 reads the
          shelve and prints fields of its records.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_preview-id18"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 1-19. PP4E\Preview\dump_db_classes.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import shelve
db = shelve.open('class-shelve')
for key in db:
    print(key, '=&gt;\n  ', db[key].name, db[key].pay)

bob = db['bob']
print(bob.lastName())
print(db['tom'].lastName())</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Note that we don’t need to reimport the <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> class here in order to fetch its
          instances from the shelve or run their methods. When instances are
          shelved or pickled, the underlying pickling system records both
          instance attributes and enough information to locate their classes
          automatically when they are later fetched (the class’s module simply
          has to be on the module search path when an instance is loaded).
          This is on purpose; because the class and its instances in the
          shelve are stored separately, you can change the class to modify the
          way stored instances are interpreted when loaded (more on this later
          in the book). Here is the shelve dump script’s output just after
          creating the shelve with the maker script:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e3089"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">bob =&gt;
   Bob Smith 30000
sue =&gt;
   Sue Jones 40000
tom =&gt;
   Tom Doe 50000
Smith
Doe</pre>
<p>As shown in Example 1-20, database updates are
          as simple as before (compare this to Example 1-13), but dictionary keys
          become attributes of instance objects, and updates are implemented
          by class method calls instead of hardcoded logic. Notice how we
          still fetch, update, and reassign to keys to update the
          shelve.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_preview-id19"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 1-20. PP4E\Preview\update_db_classes.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import shelve
db = shelve.open('class-shelve')

sue = db['sue']
sue.giveRaise(.25)
db['sue'] = sue

tom = db['tom']
tom.giveRaise(.20)
db['tom'] = tom
db.close()</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>And last but not least, here is the dump script again after
          running the update script; Tom and Sue have new pay values, because
          these objects are now persistent in the shelve. We could also open
          and inspect the shelve by typing code at Python’s interactive
          command line; despite its longevity, the shelve is just a Python
          object containing Python objects.</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e3104"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">bob =&gt;
   Bob Smith 30000
sue =&gt;
   Sue Jones <span class="epub__strong"><strong>50000.0</strong></span>
tom =&gt;
   Tom Doe <span class="epub__strong"><strong>65000.0</strong></span>
Smith
Doe</pre>
<p>Tom and Sue both get a raise this time around, because they
          are persistent objects in the shelve database. Although shelves can
          also store simpler object types such as lists and dictionaries,
          class instances allow us to combine both data and behavior for our
          stored items. In a sense, instance attributes and class methods take
          the place of records and processing programs in more traditional
          <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e3115"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e3117"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e3119"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e3121"></a>schemes.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Other Database Options"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="other_database_options"></a>Other Database Options</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>At this point, we <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e3129"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e3134"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e3139"></a>have a full-fledged database system: our classes
          simultaneously implement record data and record processing, and they
          encapsulate the implementation of the behavior. And the Python
          <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> and <code class="epub__literal">shelve</code> modules provide simple ways to
          store our database persistently between program executions. This is
          not a relational database (we store objects, not tables, and queries
          take the form of Python object processing code), but it is
          sufficient for many kinds of programs.</p>
<p>If we need more functionality, we could migrate this
          application to even more powerful tools. For example, should we ever
          need full-blown SQL query support, there are interfaces that allow
          Python scripts to communicate with relational databases such as
          MySQL, PostgreSQL, and Oracle in portable ways.</p>
<p>ORMs (object relational mappers)<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e3155"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e3160"></a> such as <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e3166"></a>SQLObject and SqlAlchemy<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e3170"></a> offer another approach which retains the Python class
          view, but translates it to and from relational database tables—in a
          sense providing the best of both worlds, with Python class syntax on
          top, and enterprise-level databases underneath.</p>
<p>Moreover, the open source ZODB system<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e3176"></a> provides a more comprehensive object database for
          Python, with support for features missing in shelves, including
          concurrent updates, transaction commits and rollbacks, automatic
          updates on in-memory component changes, and more. We’ll explore
          these more advanced third-party tools in Chapter 17. For now, let’s move on to
          putting a good face on our <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e3184"></a>system.</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="quotation_mark_buses_considered_harmful"></a>
<p class="epub__title">“Buses Considered Harmful”</p>
<p>Over the years, Python has been remarkably well supported by
            the volunteer efforts of both countless individuals and formal
            organizations. Today, the nonprofit Python Software Foundation
            (PSF)<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e3192"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e3195"></a> oversees Python conferences and other noncommercial
            activities. The PSF was preceded by the PSA, a group that was
            originally formed in response to an early thread on the Python
            newsgroup that posed the semiserious question: “What would happen
            if Guido was hit by a bus?”</p>
<p>These days, Python creator Guido <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e3201"></a>van Rossum is still the ultimate arbiter of proposed
            Python changes. He was officially anointed the BDFL<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e3205"></a>—Benevolent Dictator for Life—of Python at the first
            Python conference and still makes final yes and no decisions on
            language changes (and apart from 3.0’s deliberate
            incompatibilities, has usually said no: a good thing in the
            programming languages domain, because Python tends to change
            slowly and in backward-compatible ways).</p>
<p>But Python’s user base helps support the language, work on
            extensions, fix bugs, and so on. It is a true community project.
            In fact, Python development is now a completely open
            process—anyone can inspect the latest source code files or submit
            patches by visiting a website (see http://www.python.org for details).</p>
<p>As an open source package, Python development is really in
            the hands of a very large cast of developers working in concert
            around the world—so much so that if the BDFL ever does pass the
            torch, Python will almost certainly continue to enjoy the kind of
            support its users have come to expect. Though not without pitfalls
            of their own, open source projects by nature tend to reflect the
            needs of their user communities more than either individuals or
            shareholders.</p>
<p>Given Python’s popularity, bus attacks seem less threatening
            now than they once did. Of course, I can’t speak for Guido.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
