<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Step 4: Adding Console Interaction</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Step 4: Adding Console Interaction"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="step_4_colon_adding_console_interaction"></a>Step 4: Adding Console Interaction</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>So far, our database <a id="pro1.6"></a>program consists of class instances stored in a shelve
        file, as coded in the preceding section. It’s sufficient as a storage
        medium, but it requires us to run scripts from the command line or
        type code interactively in order to view or process its content.
        Improving on this is straightforward: simply code more general
        programs that interact with users, either from a console window or
        from a full-blown graphical <span>interface</span>.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="A Console Shelve Interface"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="a_console_shelve_interface"></a>A Console Shelve Interface</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Let’s start <a id="con1.6.1"></a><a id="sh1.6.1"></a>with something simple. The most basic kind of
          interface we can code would allow users to type keys and values in a
          console window in order to process the database (instead of writing
          Python program code). Example 1-21, for instance,
          implements a simple interactive loop that allows a user to query
          multiple record objects in the shelve by key.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_preview-id20"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 1-21. PP4E\Preview\peopleinteract_query.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting"># interactive queries
import shelve
fieldnames = ('name', 'age', 'job', 'pay')
maxfield   = max(len(f) for f in fieldnames)
db = shelve.open('class-shelve')

while True:
    key = input('\nKey? =&gt; ')           # key or empty line, exc at eof
    if not key: break
    try:
        record = db[key]                # fetch by key, show in console
    except:
        print('No such key "%s"!' % key)
    else:
        for field in fieldnames:
            print(field.ljust(maxfield), '=&gt;', getattr(record, field))</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>This script uses the <code class="epub__literal">getattr</code> built-in function to fetch an
          object’s attribute when given its name string, and the <code class="epub__literal">ljust</code> left-justify method of strings to
          align outputs (<code class="epub__literal">maxfield</code>, derived
          from a generator expression, is the length of the longest field
          name). When run, this script goes into a loop, inputting keys from
          the interactive user (technically, from the standard input stream,
          which is usually a console window) and displaying the fetched
          records field by field. An empty line ends the session. If our
          shelve of class instances is still in the state we left it near the
          end of the last section:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e3267"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">...\PP4E\Preview&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dump_db_classes.py</code></strong>
bob =&gt;
   Bob Smith 30000
sue =&gt;
   Sue Jones 50000.0
tom =&gt;
   Tom Doe 65000.0
Smith
Doe</pre>
<p>We can then use our new script to query the object database
          interactively, by key:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e3274"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">...\PP4E\Preview&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>peopleinteract_query.py</code></strong>

Key? =&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sue</code></strong>
name =&gt; Sue Jones
age  =&gt; 45
job  =&gt; hardware
pay  =&gt; 50000.0

Key? =&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>nobody</code></strong>
No such key "nobody"!

Key? =&gt;</pre>
<p>Example 1-22 goes
          further and allows interactive updates. For an input key, it inputs
          values for each field and either updates an existing record or
          creates a new object and stores it under the key.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_preview-id21"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 1-22. PP4E\Preview\peopleinteract_update.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting"># interactive updates
import shelve
from person import Person
fieldnames = ('name', 'age', 'job', 'pay')

db = shelve.open('class-shelve')
while True:
    key = input('\nKey? =&gt; ')
    if not key: break
    if key in db:
        record = db[key]                      # update existing record
    else:                                     # or make/store new rec
        record = Person(name='?', age='?')    # eval: quote strings
    for field in fieldnames:
        currval = getattr(record, field)
        newtext = input('\t[%s]=%s\n\t\tnew?=&gt;' % (field, currval))
        if newtext:
            setattr(record, field, eval(newtext))
    db[key] = record
db.close()</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Notice the use of <code class="epub__literal">eval</code> in
          this script to convert inputs (as usual, that allows any Python
          object type, but it means you must quote string inputs explicitly)
          and the use of <code class="epub__literal">setattr</code> call to
          assign an attribute given its name string. When run, this script
          allows any number of records to be added and changed; to keep the
          current value of a record’s field, press the Enter key when prompted
          for a new value:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e3301"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">Key? =&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>tom</code></strong>
        [name]=Tom Doe
                new?=&gt;
        [age]=50
                new?=&gt;<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>56</code></strong>
        [job]=None
                new?=&gt;<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'mgr'</code></strong>
        [pay]=65000.0
                new?=&gt;<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>90000</code></strong>

Key? =&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>nobody</code></strong>
        [name]=?
                new?=&gt;<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'John Doh'</code></strong>
        [age]=?
                new?=&gt;<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>55</code></strong>
        [job]=None
                new?=&gt;
        [pay]=0
                new?=&gt;<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>None</code></strong>

Key? =&gt;</pre>
<p>This script is still fairly simplistic (e.g., errors aren’t
          handled), but using it is much easier than manually opening and
          modifying the shelve at the Python interactive prompt, especially
          for nonprogrammers. Run the query script to check your work after an
          update (we could combine query and update into a single script if
          this becomes too cumbersome, albeit at some cost in code and
          user-experience <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e3331"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e3333"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e3335"></a>complexity):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e3338"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">Key? =&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>tom</code></strong>
name =&gt; Tom Doe
age  =&gt; 56
job  =&gt; mgr
pay  =&gt; 90000

Key? =&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>nobody</code></strong>
name =&gt; John Doh
age  =&gt; 55
job  =&gt; None
pay  =&gt; None

Key? =&gt;</pre>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
