<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>The End of the Demo</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="The End of the Demo"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="the_end_of_the_demo"></a>The End of the Demo</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>And that concludes our sneak preview demo of Python in action.
        We’ve explored data representation, OOP, object persistence, GUIs, and
        website basics. We haven’t studied any of these topics in any great
        depth. Hopefully, though, this chapter has piqued your curiosity about
        Python applications programming.</p>
<p>In the rest of this book, we’ll delve into these and other
        application programming tools and topics, in order to help you put
        Python to work in your own programs. In the next chapter, we begin our
        tour with the systems programming and administration tools available
        to Python programmers.</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="the_python_quotation_mark_secret_handsha"></a>
<p class="epub__title">The Python “Secret Handshake”</p>
<p>I’ve been involved with Python for some 18 years now as of
          this writing in 2010, and I have seen it grow from an obscure
          language into one that is used in some fashion in almost every
          development organization and a solid member of the top four or five
          most widely-used programming languages in the world. It has been a
          fun ride.</p>
<p>But looking back over the years, it seems to me that if Python
          truly has a single legacy, it is simply that Python has made quality
          a more central focus in the development world. It was almost
          inevitable. A language that requires its users to line up code for
          readability can’t help but make people raise questions about good
          software practice in general.</p>
<p>Probably nothing summarizes this aspect of Python life better
          than the standard library<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e4860"></a> <code class="epub__literal">this</code> module—a sort
          of Easter egg in Python written by Python core developer <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e4867"></a>Tim Peters, which captures much of the design
          philosophy behind the language. To see <code class="epub__literal">this</code> for yourself, go to any Python
          interactive prompt and import the module (<span>naturally</span>, it’s available on all
          platforms):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e4877"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">    &gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import this</code></strong>
    The Zen of Python, by Tim Peters

    Beautiful is better than ugly.
    Explicit is better than implicit.
    Simple is better than complex.
    Complex is better than complicated.
    Flat is better than nested.
    Sparse is better than dense.
    Readability counts.
    Special cases aren't special enough to break the rules.
    Although practicality beats purity.
    Errors should never pass silently.
    Unless explicitly silenced.
    In the face of ambiguity, refuse the temptation to guess.
    There should be one-- and preferably only one --obvious way to do it.
    Although that way may not be obvious at first unless you're Dutch.
    Now is better than never.
    Although never is often better than *right* now.
    If the implementation is hard to explain, it's a bad idea.
    If the implementation is easy to explain, it may be a good idea.
    Namespaces are one honking great idea -- let's do more of those!
    &gt;&gt;&gt;</pre>
<p>Worth special mention, the “Explicit is better than implicit”
          rule has become known as “EIBTI<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e4884"></a>” in the Python world—one of Python’s defining ideas,
          and one of its sharpest contrasts with other languages. As anyone
          who has worked in this field for more than a few years can attest,
          magic and engineering do not mix. Python has not always followed all
          of these guidelines, of course, but it comes very close. And if
          Python’s main contribution to the software world is getting people
          to think about such things, it seems like a win. Besides, it looked
          great on the T-shirt.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
