<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Part II. System Programming</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__part" title="Part II. System Programming"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="system_programming"></a>Part II. System Programming</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__partintro" id="id3358538" title="System Programming"><div>
</div>
<p>This first in-depth part of the book presents Python’s system
      programming tools—interfaces to services in the underlying operating
      system as well as the context of an executing program. It consists of
      the following chapters:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Chapter 2</span></dt><dd>
<p>This chapter provides a comprehensive first look at commonly
            used system interface tools. It starts slowly and is meant in part
            as a reference for tools and techniques we’ll be using later in
            the book.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Chapter 3</span></dt><dd>
<p>This chapter continues the tour begun in Chapter 2, by showing how Python’s system
            interfaces are applied to process standard streams, command-line
            arguments, shell variables, and more.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Chapter 4</span></dt><dd>
<p>This chapter continues our survey of system interfaces by
            focusing on tools and techniques used to process files and
            directories in Python. We’ll learn about binary files, tree
            walkers, and so on.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Chapter 5</span></dt><dd>
<p>This chapter is an introduction to Python’s library support
            for running programs in parallel. Here, you’ll find coverage of
            threads, process forks, pipes, sockets, signals, queues, and the
            like.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Chapter 6</span></dt><dd>
<p>This last chapter is a collection of typical system
            programming examples that draw upon the material of the prior four
            chapters. Python scripts here perform real tasks; among other
            things, they split and join files, compare and copy directory
            trees, test other programs, and search and launch files.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Although this part of the book emphasizes systems programming
      tasks, the tools <span>introduced</span> are
      general-purpose and are used often in later chapters.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
