<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 2. System Tools</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 2. System Tools"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="system_tools"></a>Chapter 2. System Tools</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="“The os.path to Knowledge”"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="quotation_mark_the_os.path_to_knowledge"></a>“The os.path to Knowledge”</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>This chapter begins our in-depth look at ways to apply Python to
        real programming tasks. In this and the following chapters, you’ll see
        how to use Python to write system tools, GUIs, database applications,
        Internet scripts, websites, and more. Along the way, we’ll also study
        larger Python programming concepts in action: code reuse,
        maintainability, object-oriented programming (OOP), and so on.</p>
<p>In this first part of the book, we begin our Python programming
        tour by exploring the<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e4942"></a> <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>systems application domain</em></span>—scripts
        that deal with files, programs, and the general environment
        surrounding a program. Although the examples in this domain focus on
        particular kinds of tasks, the techniques they employ will prove to be
        useful in later parts of the book as well. In other words, you should
        begin your journey here, unless you are already a Python systems
        programming wizard.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Why Python Here?"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="why_python_here_question"></a>Why Python Here?</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Python’s system interfaces span application domains, but for
          the next five chapters, most of our examples fall into the category
          of<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e4954"></a> <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>system tools</em></span>—programs sometimes
          called command-line utilities, shell scripts, system administration,
          systems programming, and other permutations of such words.
          Regardless of their title, you are probably already familiar with
          this sort of script; these scripts accomplish such tasks as
          processing files in a directory, launching test programs, and so on.
          Such programs historically have been written in nonportable and
          syntactically obscure shell languages such as DOS batch files, csh,
          and awk.</p>
<p>Even in this relatively simple domain, though, some of
          Python’s better attributes shine brightly. For instance, Python’s
          ease of use and extensive built-in library make it simple (and even
          fun) to use advanced system tools such as threads, signals, forks,
          sockets, and their kin; such tools are much less accessible under
          the obscure syntax of shell languages and the slow development
          cycles of compiled languages. Python’s support for concepts like
          code clarity and OOP also help us write shell tools that can be
          read, maintained, and reused. When using Python, there is no need to
          start every new script from scratch.</p>
<p>Moreover, we’ll find that Python not only includes all the
          interfaces we need in order to write system tools, but it also
          fosters script <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>portability</em></span>. By employing
          Python’s standard library, most system scripts written in Python are
          automatically portable to all major platforms. For instance, you can
          usually run in Linux a Python directory-processing script written in
          Windows without changing its source code at all—simply copy over the
          source code. Though writing scripts that achieve such portability
          utopia requires some extra effort and practice, if used well, Python
          could be the only system scripting tool you need to use.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The Next Five Chapters"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_next_five_chapters"></a>The Next Five Chapters</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To make this part of the book easier to study, I have broken
          it down into five chapters:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In this chapter, I’ll introduce the main system-related
              modules in overview fashion. We’ll meet some of the most
              commonly used system tools here for the first time.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In Chapter 3, we
              continue exploring the basic system interfaces by studying their
              role in core system programming concepts: streams, command-line
              arguments, environment variables, and so on.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Chapter 4 focuses on the
              tools Python provides for processing files, directories, and
              directory trees.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In Chapter 5, we’ll move on
              to cover Python’s standard tools for parallel <span>processing—</span>processes, threads,
              queues, pipes, signals, and more.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Chapter 6 wraps up by
              presenting a collection of complete system-oriented programs.
              The examples here are larger and more realistic, and they use
              the tools introduced in the prior four chapters to perform real,
              practical tasks. This collection includes both general system
              scripts, as well as scripts for processing directories of
              files.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Especially in the examples chapter at the end of this part, we
          will be concerned as much with system interfaces as with general
          Python development concepts. We’ll see non-object-oriented and
          object-oriented versions of some examples along the way, for
          instance, to help illustrate the benefits of thinking in more
          strategic ways.</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="quotation_mark_batteries_included_quotat"></a>
<p class="epub__title">“Batteries Included”</p>
<p>This chapter, and those that follow, deal with both the
            Python language and its <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>standard library</em></span>—a
            collection of precoded modules written in Python and C that are
            automatically installed with the Python interpreter. Although
            Python itself provides an easy-to-use scripting language, much of
            the real action in Python development involves this vast library
            of programming tools (a few hundred modules at last count) that
            ship with the Python package.</p>
<p>In fact, the standard library is so powerful that it is not
            uncommon to hear Python described as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>batteries
            included</em></span>—a phrase generally credited to Frank
            Stajano<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5015"></a> meaning that most of what you need for real
            day-to-day work is already there for importing. Python’s standard
            library, while not part of the core language per se, is a standard
            part of the Python system and you can expect it to be available
            wherever your scripts run. Indeed, this is a noteworthy difference
            between Python and some other scripting languages—because Python
            comes with so many library tools “out of the box,” supplemental
            sites like Perl’s CPAN are not as important.</p>
<p>As we’ll see, the standard library forms much of the
            challenge in Python programming. Once you’ve mastered the core
            language, you’ll find that you’ll spend most of your time applying
            the built-in functions and modules that come with the system. On
            the other hand, libraries are where most of the fun happens. In
            practice, programs become most interesting when they start using
            services external to the language interpreter: networks, files,
            GUIs, XML, databases, and so on. All of these are supported in the
            Python <span>standard</span>
            library.</p>
<p>Beyond the standard library, there is an additional
            collection<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5026"></a> of <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>third-party packages</em></span> for
            Python that must be fetched and installed separately. As of this
            writing, you can find most of these third-party extensions via
            general web searches, and using the links at http://www.python.org and at the PyPI website
            (accessible from http://www.python.org).
            Some third-party extensions are large systems in their own right;
            NumPy, Django, and VPython, for instance, add vector processing,
            website construction, and visualization, respectively.</p>
<p>If you have to do something special with Python, chances are
            good that either its support is part of the standard Python
            install package or you can find a free and open source module that
            will help. Most of the tools we’ll employ in this text are a
            standard part of Python, but I’ll be careful to point out things
            that must be installed separately. Of course, Python’s extreme
            code reuse idiom also makes your programs dependent on the code
            you reuse; in practice, though, and as we’ll see repeatedly in
            this book, powerful libraries coupled with open source access
            speed development without locking you into an existing set of
            features or limitations.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
