<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>System Scripting Overview</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="System Scripting Overview"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="system_scripting_overview"></a>System Scripting Overview</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To begin our <a id="syst2.2"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5051"></a>exploration of the systems domain, we will take a quick
        tour through the standard <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5057"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5062"></a>library <code class="epub__literal">sys</code> and
        <code class="epub__literal">os</code> modules in this chapter, before
        moving on to larger system programming concepts. As you can tell from
        the length of their attribute lists, both of these are large
        modules—the following reflects Python 3.1 running on Windows 7 outside
        IDLE:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e5074"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
Python 3.1.1 (r311:74483, Aug 17 2009, 17:02:12) [MSC v.1500 32 bit (...)] on win32
Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import sys, os</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>len(dir(sys))</code></strong>          # 65 attributes
65
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>len(dir(os))</code></strong>           # 122 on Windows, more on Unix
122
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>len(dir(os.path))</code></strong>      # a nested module within os
52</pre>
<p>The content of these two modules may vary per Python version and
        platform. For example, <code class="epub__literal">os</code> is much
        larger under Cygwin after building Python 3.1 from its source code
        there (Cygwin is a system that provides Unix-like functionality on
        Windows; it is discussed further in More on Cygwin Python for Windows):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e5098"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>./python.exe</code></strong>
Python 3.1.1 (r311:74480, Feb 20 2010, 10:16:52)
[GCC 3.4.4 (cygming special, gdc 0.12, using dmd 0.125)] on cygwin
Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import sys, os</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>len(dir(sys))</code></strong>
64
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>len(dir(os))</code></strong>
217
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>len(dir(os.path))</code></strong>
51</pre>
<p>As I’m not going to demonstrate every item in every built-in
        module, the first thing I want to do is show you how to get more
        details on your own. Officially, this task also serves as an excuse
        for introducing a few core system scripting concepts; along the way,
        we’ll code a first script to format documentation.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Python System Modules"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="python_system_modules"></a>Python System Modules</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Most system-level <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5122"></a>interfaces in Python are shipped in just two modules:
          <code class="epub__literal">sys</code> and <code class="epub__literal">os</code>. That’s somewhat oversimplified; other
          standard modules belong to this domain too. Among them are the
          following:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">glob</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>For <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5142"></a>filename expansion</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">socket</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>For network <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5155"></a>connections and <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5161"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5166"></a>Inter-Process Communication (IPC)</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">threading</code>, <code class="epub__literal">_thread</code>, <code class="epub__literal">queue</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>For running <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5185"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5190"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5195"></a>and synchronizing concurrent threads</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">time</code>, <code class="epub__literal">timeit</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>For <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5211"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5216"></a>accessing system time details</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">subprocess</code>, <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>For launching <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5230"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5235"></a>and controlling parallel processes</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">signal</code>, <code class="epub__literal">select</code>, <code class="epub__literal">shutil</code>, <code class="epub__literal">tempfile</code>, and others</span></dt><dd>
<p>For <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5258"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5263"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5268"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5273"></a>various other system-related tasks</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Third-party extensions such as<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5279"></a> pySerial (a serial port interface),<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5283"></a> Pexpect (an Expect work-alike for controlling
          cross-program dialogs), and even<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5289"></a> Twisted (a networking framework) can be arguably
          lumped into the systems domain as well. In addition, some built-in
          functions are actually system interfaces as well—the <code class="epub__literal">open</code> function, for example, interfaces
          with the file system. But by and large, <code class="epub__literal">sys</code> and <code class="epub__literal">os</code> together form the core of Python’s
          built-in system tools arsenal.</p>
<p>In principle at least, <code class="epub__literal">sys</code>
<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5310"></a>exports components related to the Python
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>interpreter</em></span> itself (e.g., the module search
          path), and <code class="epub__literal">os</code> <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5322"></a>contains variables and functions that map to the
          operating system on which Python is run. In practice, this
          distinction may not always seem clear-cut (e.g., the standard input
          and output streams show up in <code class="epub__literal">sys</code>, but they are arguably tied to
          operating system paradigms). The good news is that you’ll soon use
          the tools in these modules so often that their locations will be
          permanently stamped on your memory.<sup>[3]</sup></p>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">os</code> module also attempts
          to provide a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>portable</em></span> programming interface to
          the underlying operating system; its functions may be implemented
          differently on different platforms, but to Python scripts, they look
          the same everywhere. And if that’s still not enough, the <code class="epub__literal">os</code> module also exports a nested
          submodule<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5346"></a>, <code class="epub__literal">os.path</code>, which
          provides a portable interface to file and directory processing
          tools.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Module Documentation Sources"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="module_documentation_sources"></a>Module Documentation Sources</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As you can <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5360"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5365"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5370"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5373"></a>probably deduce from the preceding paragraphs,
          learning to write system scripts in Python is mostly a matter of
          learning about Python’s system modules. Luckily, there are a variety
          of information sources to make this task easier—from module
          attributes to published references and books.</p>
<p>For instance, if you want to know everything that a built-in
          module exports, you can read its library manual entry; study its
          source code (Python is open source software, after all); or fetch
          its attribute list and documentation string interactively. Let’s
          import <code class="epub__literal">sys</code> in Python 3.1 and see
          what it has to offer:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e5384"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import sys</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dir(sys)</code></strong>
['__displayhook__', '__doc__', '__excepthook__', '__name__', '__package__',
'__stderr__', '__stdin__', '__stdout__', '_clear_type_cache', '_current_frames',
'_getframe', 'api_version', 'argv', 'builtin_module_names', 'byteorder',
'call_tracing', 'callstats', 'copyright', 'displayhook', 'dllhandle',
'dont_write_bytecode', 'exc_info', 'excepthook', 'exec_prefix', 'executable',
'exit', 'flags', 'float_info', 'float_repr_style', 'getcheckinterval',
'getdefaultencoding', 'getfilesystemencoding', 'getprofile', 'getrecursionlimit',
'getrefcount', 'getsizeof', 'gettrace', 'getwindowsversion', 'hexversion',
'int_info', 'intern', 'maxsize', 'maxunicode', 'meta_path', 'modules', 'path',
'path_hooks', 'path_importer_cache', 'platform', 'prefix', 'ps1', 'ps2',
'setcheckinterval', 'setfilesystemencoding', 'setprofile', 'setrecursionlimit',
'settrace', 'stderr', 'stdin', 'stdout', 'subversion', 'version', 'version_info',
'warnoptions', 'winver']</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">dir</code> function <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5400"></a>simply returns a list containing the string names of
          all the attributes in any object with attributes; it’s a handy
          memory jogger for modules at the interactive prompt. For example, we
          know there is something called <code class="epub__literal">sys.version</code>, because the name <code class="epub__literal">version</code> came back in the <code class="epub__literal">dir</code> result. If that’s not enough, we can
          always consult the <code class="epub__literal">__doc__</code> string
          <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5419"></a>of built-in modules:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e5425"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sys.__doc__</code></strong>
"This module provides access to some objects used or maintained by the\ninterpre
ter and to functions that interact strongly with the interpreter.\n\nDynamic obj
ects:\n\nargv -- command line arguments; argv[0] is the script pathname if known
\npath -- module search path; path[0] is the script directory, else ''\nmodules
-- dictionary of loaded modules\n\ndisplayhook -- called to show results in an i
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...lots of text deleted here...</span></em>"</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Paging Documentation Strings"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="paging_documentation_strings"></a>Paging Documentation Strings</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">__doc__</code> built-in
          <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5441"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5446"></a>attribute just shown usually contains a string of
          documentation, but it may look a bit weird when displayed this
          way—it’s one long string with embedded end-line characters that
          print as <code class="epub__literal">\n</code>, not as a nice list
          of lines. To format these strings for a more humane display, you can
          simply use a <code class="epub__literal">print</code> function-call
          statement:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e5458"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(sys.__doc__)</code></strong>
This module provides access to some objects used or maintained by the
interpreter and to functions that interact strongly with the interpreter.

Dynamic objects:

argv -- command line arguments; argv[0] is the script pathname if known
path -- module search path; path[0] is the script directory, else ''
modules -- dictionary of loaded modules

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...lots of lines deleted here...</span></em></pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">print</code> built-in
          function, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5470"></a>unlike interactive displays, interprets end-line
          characters correctly. Unfortunately, <code class="epub__literal">print</code> doesn’t, by itself, do anything
          about scrolling or paging and so can still be unwieldy on some
          platforms. Tools such as the built-in <code class="epub__literal">help</code> function<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5482"></a> can do better:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e5486"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>help(sys)</code></strong>
Help on built-in module sys:

NAME
    sys

FILE
    (built-in)

MODULE DOCS
    http://docs.python.org/library/sys

DESCRIPTION
    This module provides access to some objects used or maintained by the
    interpreter and to functions that interact strongly with the interpreter.

    Dynamic objects:

    argv -- command line arguments; argv[0] is the script pathname if known
    path -- module search path; path[0] is the script directory, else ''
    modules -- dictionary of loaded modules

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...lots of lines deleted here...</span></em></pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">help</code> function is one
          interface provided by the<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5498"></a> PyDoc system—standard library code that ships with
          Python and renders documentation (documentation strings, as well as
          structural details) related to an object in a formatted way. The
          format is either like a Unix manpage, which we get for <code class="epub__literal">help</code>, or an HTML page, which is more
          grandiose. It’s a handy way to get basic information when working
          interactively, and it’s a last resort before falling back on manuals
          and books.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="A Custom Paging Script"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="a_custom_paging_script"></a>A Custom Paging Script</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">help</code> function we just
          met is also <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5513"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5518"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5521"></a>fairly fixed in the way it displays information;
          although it attempts to page the display in some contexts, its page
          size isn’t quite right on some of the machines I use. Moreover, it
          doesn’t page at all in the IDLE GUI, instead relying on manual use
          if the scrollbar—potentially painful for large displays. When I want
          more control over the way help text is printed, I usually use a
          utility script of my own, like the one in Example 2-1.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 2-1. PP4E\System\more.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
split and interactively page a string or file of text
"""

def more(text, numlines=15):
    lines = text.splitlines()                # like split('\n') but no '' at end
    while lines:
        chunk = lines[:numlines]
        lines = lines[numlines:]
        for line in chunk: print(line)
        if lines and input('More?') not in ['y', 'Y']: break

if __name__ == '__main__':
    import sys                               # when run, not imported
    more(open(sys.argv[1]).read(), 10)       # page contents of file on cmdline</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>The meat of this file is its<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5536"></a> <code class="epub__literal">more</code> function, and
          if you know enough Python to be qualified to read this book, it
          should be fairly straightforward. It simply splits up a string
          around end-line characters, and then slices off and displays a few
          lines at a time (15 by default) to avoid scrolling off the screen. A
          slice expression, <code class="epub__literal">lines[:15]</code>,
          gets the first 15 items in a list, and <code class="epub__literal">lines[15:]</code> gets the rest; to show a
          different number of lines each time, pass a number to the <code class="epub__literal">numlines</code> argument (e.g., the last line in
          Example 2-1 passes 10 to the
          <code class="epub__literal">numlines</code> argument of the <code class="epub__literal">more</code> function).</p>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">splitlines</code> string
          object method call that this script employs returns a list of
          substrings split at line ends (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">["line", "line",...]</code>). An alternative
          <code class="epub__literal">splitlines</code> method does similar
          work, but retains an empty line at the end of the result if the last
          line is <code class="epub__literal">\n</code> terminated:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e5577"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>line = 'aaa\nbbb\nccc\n'</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>line.split('\n')</code></strong>
['aaa', 'bbb', 'ccc', '']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>line.splitlines()</code></strong>
['aaa', 'bbb', 'ccc']</pre>
<p>As we’ll see more formally in Chapter 4, the end-of-line
          character<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5592"></a> is normally always <code class="epub__literal">\n</code> (which stands for a byte usually having
          a binary value of 10) within a Python script, no matter what
          platform it is run upon. (If you don’t already know why this
          matters, DOS <code class="epub__literal">\r</code> characters in
          text are dropped by default when read.)</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="String Method Basics"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="string_method_basics"></a>String Method Basics</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Now, Example 2-1 is a
          simple Python program, <a id="sys2.2.5"></a><a id="string2.2.5"></a>but it already brings up three important topics that
          merit quick detours here: it uses string methods, reads from a file,
          and is set up to be run or imported. Python string methods are not a
          system-related tool per se, but they see action in most Python
          programs. In fact, they are going to show up throughout this chapter
          as well as those that follow, so here is a quick review of some of
          the more useful tools in this set. String methods include calls for
          searching and replacing:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e5622"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mystr = 'xxxSPAMxxx'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mystr.find('SPAM')</code></strong>                           # return first offset
3
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mystr = 'xxaaxxaa'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mystr.replace('aa', 'SPAM')</code></strong>                  # global replacement
'xxSPAMxxSPAM'</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">find</code> call returns the
          offset of the first occurrence of a substring, and <code class="epub__literal">replace</code> does global search and
          replacement. Like all string operations, <code class="epub__literal">replace</code> returns a new string instead of
          changing its subject in-place (recall that strings are immutable).
          With these methods, substrings are just strings; in Chapter 19, we’ll also meet a module called
          <code class="epub__literal">re</code> that allows regular expression
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>patterns</em></span> to show up in searches and
          replacements.</p>
<p>In more recent Pythons, the <code class="epub__literal">in</code> membership operator can often be used
          as an alternative to <code class="epub__literal">find</code> if all
          we need is a yes/no answer (it tests for a substring’s presence).
          There are also a handful of methods for removing whitespace on the
          ends of strings—especially useful for lines of text read from a
          file:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e5664"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mystr = 'xxxSPAMxxx'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'SPAM' in mystr</code></strong>                              # substring search/test
True
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'Ni' in mystr</code></strong>                                # when not found
False
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mystr.find('Ni')</code></strong>
-1

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mystr = '\t  Ni\n'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mystr.strip()</code></strong>                                # remove whitespace
'Ni'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mystr.rstrip()</code></strong>                               # same, but just on right side
'\t  Ni'</pre>
<p>String methods also provide functions that are useful for
          things such as case conversions, and a standard library module named
          <code class="epub__literal">string</code> defines <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5693"></a>some useful preset variables, among other
          things:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e5699"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mystr = 'SHRUBBERY'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mystr.lower()</code></strong>                           # case converters
'shrubbery'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mystr.isalpha()</code></strong>                         # content tests
True
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mystr.isdigit()</code></strong>
False

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import string</code></strong>                           # case presets: for 'in', etc.
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>string.ascii_lowercase</code></strong>
'abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>string.whitespace</code></strong>                       # whitespace characters
' \t\n\r\x0b\x0c'</pre>
<p>There are also methods for splitting up strings around a
          substring delimiter and putting them back together with a substring
          in between. We’ll explore these tools later in this book, but as an
          introduction, here they are at work:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e5725"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mystr = 'aaa,bbb,ccc'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mystr.split(',')</code></strong>                        # split into substrings list
['aaa', 'bbb', 'ccc']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mystr = 'a  b\nc\nd'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mystr.split()</code></strong>                           # default delimiter: whitespace
['a', 'b', 'c', 'd']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>delim = 'NI'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>delim.join(['aaa', 'bbb', 'ccc'])</code></strong>       # join substrings list
'aaaNIbbbNIccc'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>' '.join(['A', 'dead', 'parrot'])</code></strong>       # add a space between
'A dead parrot'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>chars = list('Lorreta')</code></strong>                 # convert to characters list
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>chars</code></strong>
['L', 'o', 'r', 'r', 'e', 't', 'a']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>chars.append('!')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>''.join(chars)</code></strong>                          # to string: empty delimiter
'Lorreta!'</pre>
<p>These calls turn out to be surprisingly powerful. For example,
          a line of data columns separated by tabs can be parsed into its
          columns with a single <code class="epub__literal">split</code> call;
          the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>more.py</em></span> script uses the <code class="epub__literal">splitlines</code> variant shown earlier to split
          a string into a list of line strings. In fact, we can emulate the
          <code class="epub__literal">replace</code> call we saw earlier in
          this section with a split/join combination:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e5779"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mystr = 'xxaaxxaa'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'SPAM'.join(mystr.split('aa'))</code></strong>          # str.replace, the hard way!
'xxSPAMxxSPAM'</pre>
<p>For future reference, also keep in mind that Python doesn’t
          automatically <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5789"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5794"></a>convert strings to numbers, or vice versa; if you want
          to use one as you would use the other, you must say so with manual
          conversions:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e5798"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>int("42"), eval("42")</code></strong>                   # string to int conversions
(42, 42)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>str(42), repr(42)</code></strong>                       # int to string conversions
('42', '42')

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>("%d" % 42), '{:d}'.format(42)</code></strong>          # via formatting expression, method
('42', '42')

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>"42" + str(1), int("42") + 1</code></strong>            # concatenation, addition
('421', 43)</pre>
<p>In the last command here, the first expression triggers string
          concatenation (since both sides are strings), and the second invokes
          integer addition (because both objects are numbers). Python doesn’t
          assume you meant one or the other and convert automatically; as a
          rule of thumb, Python tries to avoid magic—and the temptation to
          guess—whenever possible. String tools will be covered in more detail
          later in this book (in fact, they get a full chapter in Part V), but be sure to also see the
          library manual for additional string method <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5816"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5818"></a>tools.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Other String Concepts in Python 3.X: Unicode and bytes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="other_string_concepts_in_python_3.x_colo"></a>Other String Concepts in Python 3.X: Unicode and
          bytes</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Technically <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5827"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5832"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5837"></a>speaking, the Python 3.X string story is a bit richer
          than I’ve implied here. What I’ve shown so far is the<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5843"></a> <code class="epub__literal">str</code> object type—a
          sequence of characters (technically, Unicode “code points”
          represented as Unicode “code units”) which represents both ASCII and
          wider Unicode text, and handles encoding and decoding both manually
          on request and automatically on file transfers. Strings are coded in
          quotes (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">'abc'</code>), along with
          various syntax for coding non-ASCII text (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">'\xc4\xe8'</code>, <code class="epub__literal">'\u00c4\u00e8'</code>).</p>
<p>Really, though, 3.X has two additional string types that
          support most <code class="epub__literal">str</code> string
          operations:<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5867"></a> <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>—a sequence
          of short integers for representing 8-bit binary data, and<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5874"></a> <code class="epub__literal">bytearray</code>—a
          mutable variant of bytes. You generally know you are dealing with
          <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> if strings display or are
          coded with a leading “b” character before the opening quote (e.g.,
          <code class="epub__literal">b'abc'</code>, <code class="epub__literal">b'\xc4\xe8'</code>). As we’ll see in Chapter 4, files in 3.X follow a similar
          dichotomy, using <code class="epub__literal">str</code> in text mode
          (which also handles Unicode encodings and line-end conversions) and
          <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> in binary mode (which
          transfers bytes to and from files unchanged). And in Chapter 5, we’ll see the same distinction
          for tools like sockets, which deal in byte strings today.</p>
<p>Unicode text is used in Internationalized applications, and
          many of Python’s binary-oriented tools deal in byte strings today.
          This includes some file tools we’ll meet along the way, such as the
          <code class="epub__literal">open</code> call, and the <code class="epub__literal">os.listdir</code> and <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code> tools we’ll study in upcoming
          chapters. As we’ll see, even simple directory tools sometimes have
          to be aware of Unicode in file content and names. Moreover, tools
          such as object pickling and binary data parsing are byte-oriented
          today.</p>
<p>Later in the book, we’ll also find that Unicode also pops up
          today in the text displayed in GUIs; the bytes shipped other
          networks; Internet standard such as email; and even some persistence
          topics such as DBM files and shelves. Any interface that deals in
          text necessarily deals in Unicode today, because <code class="epub__literal">str</code> <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>is</em></span> Unicode,
          whether ASCII or wider. Once we reach the realm of the applications
          programming presented in this book, Unicode is no longer an optional
          topic for most Python 3.X programmers.</p>
<p>In this book, we’ll defer further coverage of Unicode until we
          can see it in the context of application topics and practical
          programs. For more fundamental details on how 3.X’s Unicode text and
          binary data support impact both string and file usage in some roles,
          please see <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Learning
          Python, </em></span>Fourth Edition; since this is officially
          a core language topic, it enjoys in-depth coverage and a full
          45-page dedicated chapter in that book.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="File Operation Basics"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="file_operation_basics"></a>File Operation Basics</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Besides processing <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5933"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5938"></a>strings, the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>more.py</em></span> script also
          uses files—it opens the external file whose name is listed on the
          command line using the built-in <code class="epub__literal">open</code> function, and it reads that file’s
          text into memory all at once with the file object <code class="epub__literal">read</code> method. Since file objects returned
          by <code class="epub__literal">open</code> are part of the core
          Python language itself, I assume that you have at least a passing
          familiarity with them at this point in the text. But just in case
          you’ve flipped to this chapter early on in your Pythonhood, the
          following calls load a file’s contents into a string, load a
          fixed-size set of bytes into a string, load a file’s contents into a
          list of line strings, and load the next line in the file into a
          string, respectively:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e5956"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">open('file').read()            # read entire file into string
open('file').read(N)           # read next N bytes into string
open('file').readlines()       # read entire file into line strings list
open('file').readline()        # read next line, through '\n'</pre>
<p>As we’ll see in a moment, these calls can also be applied to
          shell commands in Python to read their output. File objects also
          have <code class="epub__literal">write</code> methods for sending
          strings to the associated file. File-related topics are covered in
          depth in Chapter 4, but making an
          output file and reading it back is easy in Python:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e5965"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file = open('spam.txt', 'w')</code></strong>        # create file spam.txt
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.write(('spam' * 5) + '\n')</code></strong>     # write text: returns #characters written
21
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.close()</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file = open('spam.txt')</code></strong>             # or open('spam.txt').read()
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>text = file.read()</code></strong>                  # read into a string
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>text</code></strong>
'spamspamspamspamspam\n'</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Using Programs in Two Ways"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="using_programs_in_two_ways"></a>Using Programs in Two Ways</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Also by way of <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e5991"></a>review, the last few lines in the
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>more.py</em></span> file in Example 2-1 introduce one of the first
          big concepts in shell tool programming. They instrument the file to
          be used in either of two ways—as a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>script</em></span> or as
          a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>library</em></span>.</p>
<p>Recall that every Python module has a built-in<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e6010"></a> <code class="epub__literal">__name__</code> variable
          that Python sets to the <code class="epub__literal">__main__</code>
          string only when the file is run as a program, not when it’s
          imported as a library. Because of that, the <code class="epub__literal">more</code> function in this file is executed
          automatically by the last line in the file when this script is run
          as a top-level program, but not when it is imported elsewhere. This
          simple trick turns out to be one key to writing reusable script
          code: by coding program logic as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>functions</em></span>
          rather than as top-level code, you can also import and reuse it in
          other scripts.</p>
<p>The upshot is that we can run <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>more.py</em></span> by
          itself or import and call its <code class="epub__literal">more</code> function elsewhere. When running the
          file as a top-level program, we list on the command line the name of
          a file to be read and paged: as I’ll describe in more depth in the
          next chapter, words typed in the command that is used to start a
          program show up in the built-in <code class="epub__literal">sys.argv</code> list in Python. For example, here
          is the script file in action, paging itself (be sure to type this
          command line in your <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>PP4E\System</em></span> directory, or
          it won’t find the input file; more on command lines later):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e6040"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python more.py more.py</code></strong>
"""
split and interactively page a string or file of text
"""

def more(text, numlines=15):
    lines = text.splitlines()                # like split('\n') but no '' at end
    while lines:
        chunk = lines[:numlines]
        lines = lines[numlines:]
        for line in chunk: print(line)
More?<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y</code></strong>
        if lines and input('More?') not in ['y', 'Y']: break

if __name__ == '__main__':
    import sys                               # when run, not imported
    more(open(sys.argv[1]).read(), 10)       # page contents of file on cmdline</pre>
<p>When the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>more.py</em></span> file is imported, we
          pass an explicit string to its <code class="epub__literal">more</code> function, and this is exactly the
          sort of utility we need for documentation text. Running this utility
          on the <code class="epub__literal">sys</code> module’s documentation
          string gives us a bit more information in human-readable form about
          what’s available to scripts:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e6059"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from more import more</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import sys</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>more(sys.__doc__)</code></strong>
This module provides access to some objects used or maintained by the
interpreter and to functions that interact strongly with the interpreter.

Dynamic objects:

argv -- command line arguments; argv[0] is the script pathname if known
path -- module search path; path[0] is the script directory, else ''
modules -- dictionary of loaded modules

displayhook -- called to show results in an interactive session
excepthook -- called to handle any uncaught exception other than SystemExit
  To customize printing in an interactive session or to install a custom
  top-level exception handler, assign other functions to replace these.

stdin -- standard input file object; used by input()
More?</pre>
<p>Pressing “y” or “Y” here makes the function display the next
          few lines of documentation, and then prompt again, unless you’ve run
          past the end of the lines list. Try this on your own machine to see
          what the rest of the module’s documentation string looks like. Also
          try experimenting by passing a different window size in the second
          <span>argument—</span><code class="epub__literal">more(sys.__doc__, 5)</code> shows just 5 lines at
          a time.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Python Library Manuals"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="python_library_manuals"></a>Python Library Manuals</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>If that still isn’t enough <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e6085"></a>detail, your next step is to read the Python library
          manual’s entry for <code class="epub__literal">sys</code> to get the
          full story. All of Python’s standard manuals are available online,
          and they often install alongside Python itself. On Windows, the
          standard manuals are installed automatically, but here are a few
          simple pointers:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>On Windows, click the Start button, pick All Programs,
              select the Python entry there, and then choose the Python
              Manuals item. The manuals should magically appear on your
              display; as of Python 2.4, the manuals are provided as a Windows
              help file and so support searching and navigation.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>On Linux or Mac OS X, you may be able to click on the
              manuals’ entries in a file explorer or start your browser from a
              shell command line and navigate to the library manual’s HTML
              files on your machine.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>If you can’t find the manuals on your computer, you can
              always read them online. Go to Python’s website at http://www.python.org and follow the
              documentation links there. This website also has a simple
              searching utility for the manuals.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>However you get started, be sure to pick the Library manual
          for things such as <code class="epub__literal">sys</code>; this
          manual documents all of the standard library, built-in types and
          functions, and more. Python’s standard manual set also includes a
          short tutorial, a language reference, extending references, and
          more.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Commercially Published References"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="commercially_published_references"></a>Commercially Published References</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>At the risk of <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e6116"></a>sounding like a marketing droid, I should mention that
          you can also purchase the Python manual set, printed and bound; see
          the book information page at http://www.python.org for details and links.
          Commercially published Python reference books are also available
          today, including <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Python Essential Reference</em></span>,
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Python in a
          Nutshell</em></span>, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Python Standard
          Library</em></span>, and <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Python
          Pocket Reference</em></span>. Some of these books are more
          complete and come with examples, but the last one serves as a
          convenient memory jogger once you’ve taken a library <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e6140"></a>tour or two.<sup>[4]</sup></p>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[3] </sup>They may also work their way into your subconscious.
              Python newcomers sometimes describe a phenomenon in which they
              “dream in Python” (insert overly simplistic Freudian analysis
              here…).</p>
</div><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[4] </sup>Full disclosure: I also wrote the last of the books listed
              as a replacement for the reference appendix that appeared in the
              first edition of this book; it’s meant to be a supplement to the
              text you’re reading, and its latest edition also serves as a
              translation resource for Python 2.X readers. As explained in the
              Preface, the book you’re holding is meant as tutorial, not
              reference, so you’ll probably want to find some sort of
              reference resource eventually (though I’m nearly narcissistic
              enough to require that it be mine).</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
