<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Introducing the sys Module</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Introducing the sys Module"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="introducing_the_sys_module"></a>Introducing the sys Module</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>But enough <a id="syst2.3"></a>about documentation sources (and scripting basics)—let’s
        move on to system module details. As mentioned earlier, the <code class="epub__literal">sys</code> and <code class="epub__literal">os</code> modules form the core of much of Python’s
        system-related tool set. To see how, we’ll turn to a quick,
        interactive tour through some of the tools in these two modules before
        applying them in bigger examples. We’ll start with <code class="epub__literal">sys</code>, the smaller of the two; remember that
        to see a full list of all the attributes in <code class="epub__literal">sys</code>, you need to pass it to the <code class="epub__literal">dir</code> function (or see where we did so earlier
        in this chapter).</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Platforms and Versions"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="platforms_and_versions"></a>Platforms and Versions</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Like most <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e6178"></a>modules, <code class="epub__literal">sys</code>
          includes both informational names and functions that take action.
          For instance, its attributes give us the name of the underlying
          operating system on which the platform code is running, the largest
          possible “natively sized” integer on this machine (though integers
          can be arbitrarily long in Python 3.X), and the version number of
          the Python interpreter running our code:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e6187"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import sys</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sys.platform, sys.maxsize, sys.version</code></strong>
('win32', 2147483647, '3.1.1 (r311:74483, Aug 17 2009, 17:02:12) <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...more deleted...</span></em>')

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if sys.platform[:3] == 'win': print('hello windows')</code></strong>
...
hello windows</pre>
<p>If you have code that must act differently on different
          machines, simply test the<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e6209"></a> <code class="epub__literal">sys.platform</code>
          string as done here; although most of Python is cross-platform,
          nonportable tools are usually wrapped in <code class="epub__literal">if</code> tests like the one here. For instance,
          we’ll see later that some program launch and low-level console
          interaction tools may vary per platform—simply test <code class="epub__literal">sys.platform</code> to pick the right tool for
          the machine on which your script is running.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The Module Search Path"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_module_search_path"></a>The Module Search Path</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">sys</code> module also
          <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e6232"></a>lets us inspect the module search path both
          interactively and within a Python program. <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code> is a list of directory name
          strings representing the true search path in a running Python
          interpreter. When a module is imported, Python scans this list from
          left to right, searching for the module’s file on each directory
          named in the list. Because of that, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e6241"></a>this is the place to look to verify that your search
          path is really set as intended.<sup>[5]</sup></p>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code> list is simply
          initialized from your <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code>
          setting—the content of any <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>.pth</em></span> path files
          located in Python’s directories on your machine plus system <span>defaults—</span>when the interpreter is first
          started up. In fact, if you inspect <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code> interactively, you’ll notice
          quite a few directories that are not on your <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code>: <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code> also includes an indicator for
          the script’s home directory (an empty string—something I’ll explain
          in more detail after we meet <code class="epub__literal">os.getcwd</code>) and a set of standard library
          directories that may vary per installation:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e6299"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sys.path</code></strong>
['', 'C:\\PP4thEd\\Examples', <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...plus standard library paths deleted...</span></em> ]</pre>
<p>Surprisingly, <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code> can
          actually be <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>changed</em></span> by a program, too. A script
          can use list operations such as <code class="epub__literal">append</code>, <code class="epub__literal">extend</code>, <code class="epub__literal">insert</code>, <code class="epub__literal">pop</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">remove</code>, as well as the <code class="epub__literal">del</code> statement to configure the search path
          at runtime to include all the source directories to which it needs
          access. Python always uses the current <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code> setting to import, no matter what
          you’ve changed it to:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e6337"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sys.path.append(r'C:\mydir')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sys.path</code></strong>
['', 'C:\\PP4thEd\\Examples', <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...more deleted...</span></em>, 'C:\\mydir']</pre>
<p>Changing <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code> directly
          like this is an alternative to setting your <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code> shell variable, but not a very
          permanent one. Changes to <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code> are retained only until the
          Python process ends, and they must be remade every time you start a
          new Python program or session. However, some types of programs
          (e.g., scripts that run on a web server) may not be able to depend
          on <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code> settings; such
          scripts can instead configure <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code> on startup to include all the
          directories from which they will need to import modules. For a more
          concrete use case, see Example 1-34 in the prior <span>chapter—</span>there we had to tweak the
          search path dynamically this way, because the web server violated
          our import path assumptions.</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="windows_directory_paths"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Windows Directory Paths</p>
<p>Notice the use of a raw string literal in the <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code> configuration code: because
            backslashes normally introduce escape code sequences in Python
            strings, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e6379"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e6384"></a>Windows users should be sure to either double up on
            <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e6390"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e6393"></a>backslashes when using them in DOS directory path
            strings (e.g., in <code class="epub__literal">"C:\\dir"</code>,
            <code class="epub__literal">\\</code> is an escape sequence that
            really means <code class="epub__literal">\</code>), or use raw
            string constants to retain backslashes literally (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">r"C:\dir"</code>).</p>
<p>If you inspect directory paths on Windows (as in the
            <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code> interaction listing),
            Python prints double <code class="epub__literal">\\</code> to mean
            a single <code class="epub__literal">\</code>. Technically, you
            can get away with a <span>single <code class="epub__literal">\</code></span> in a string if it is followed
            by a character Python does not recognize as the rest of an escape
            sequence, but doubles and raw strings are usually easier than
            memorizing escape code tables.</p>
<p>Also note that most Python library calls accept either
            <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e6428"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e6431"></a>forward (<code class="epub__literal">/</code>) or
            backward (<code class="epub__literal">\</code>) slashes as
            directory path separators, regardless of the underlying platform.
            That is, <code class="epub__literal">/</code> usually works on
            Windows too and aids in making scripts portable to Unix. Tools in
            the <code class="epub__literal">os</code> and <code class="epub__literal">os.path</code> modules, described later in this
            chapter, further aid in script path portability.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The Loaded Modules Table"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_loaded_modules_table"></a>The Loaded Modules Table</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">sys</code> module <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e6459"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e6464"></a>also contains hooks into the interpreter; <code class="epub__literal">sys.modules</code>, for example, is a dictionary
          containing one <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>name:module</code></em> entry for
          every module imported in your <span>Python</span> session or program (really, in
          the calling Python process):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e6479"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sys.modules</code></strong>
{'reprlib': &lt;module 'reprlib' from 'c:\python31\lib\reprlib.py'&gt;, <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...more deleted...</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(sys.modules.keys())</code></strong>
 ['reprlib', 'heapq', '__future__', 'sre_compile', '_collections', 'locale', '_sre',
'functools', 'encodings', 'site', 'operator', 'io', '__main__', <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...more deleted...</span></em> ]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sys</code></strong>
&lt;module 'sys' (built-in)&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sys.modules['sys']</code></strong>
&lt;module 'sys' (built-in)&gt;</pre>
<p>We might use such a hook to write programs that display or
          otherwise process all the modules loaded by a program (just iterate
          over the keys of <code class="epub__literal">sys.modules</code>).</p>
<p>Also in the interpret hooks category, an object’s reference
          count is available <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e6507"></a>via <code class="epub__literal">sys.getrefcount</code>, and the names of modules
          built-in to the Python executable are listed in <code class="epub__literal">sys.builtin_module_names</code>. See Python’s
          library manual for details; these are mostly Python internals
          information, but such hooks can sometimes become important to
          programmers writing tools for other programmers to use.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Exception Details"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="exception_details"></a>Exception Details</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Other attributes in the <code class="epub__literal">sys</code>
          module <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e6527"></a>allow us to fetch all the information related to the
          most recently raised Python exception. This is handy if we want to
          process exceptions in a more generic fashion. For instance,
          the<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e6533"></a> <code class="epub__literal">sys.exc_info</code>
          function returns a tuple with the latest exception’s type, value,
          and traceback object. In the all class-based exception model that
          Python 3 uses, the first two of these correspond to the most
          recently raised exception’s class, and the instance of it which was
          raised:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e6542"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>try:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>raise IndexError</code></strong>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>except:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(sys.exc_info())</code></strong>
...
(&lt;class 'IndexError'&gt;, IndexError(), &lt;traceback object at 0x019B8288&gt;)</pre>
<p>We might use such information to format our own error message
          to display in a GUI pop-up window or HTML web page (recall that by
          default, uncaught exceptions terminate programs with a Python error
          display). The first two items returned by this call have reasonable
          string displays when printed directly, and the third is a traceback
          object that can be processed with the standard<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e6558"></a> <code class="epub__literal">traceback</code>
          module:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e6567"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import traceback, sys</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def grail(x):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>raise TypeError('already got one')</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>try:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>grail('arthur')</code></strong>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>except:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>exc_info = sys.exc_info()</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(exc_info[0])</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(exc_info[1])</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>traceback.print_tb(exc_info[2])</code></strong>
...
&lt;class 'TypeError'&gt;
already got one
  File "&lt;stdin&gt;", line 2, in &lt;module&gt;
  File "&lt;stdin&gt;", line 2, in grail</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">traceback</code> module can
          also format messages as strings and route them to specific file
          objects; see the Python library manual for more details.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Other sys Module Exports"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="other_sys_module_exports"></a>Other sys Module Exports</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">sys</code> module <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e6613"></a>exports additional commonly-used tools that we will
          meet in the context of larger topics and examples introduced later
          in this part of the book. For instance:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Command-line arguments show up as a list of strings called
              <code class="epub__literal">sys.argv</code>.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Standard streams are available as <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdin</code>, <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">sys.stderr</code>.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Program exit can be forced with <code class="epub__literal">sys.exit</code> calls.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Since these lead us to bigger topics, though, we will cover
          them in sections of their <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e6646"></a>own.</p>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[5] </sup>It’s not impossible that Python sees <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code> differently than you do. A
              syntax error in your system shell configuration files may botch
              the setting of <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code>,
              even if it looks fine to you. On Windows, for example, if a
              space appears around the <code class="epub__literal">=</code> of
              a DOS <code class="epub__literal">set</code> command in your
              configuration file (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">set NAME =
              VALUE</code>), you may actually set <code class="epub__literal">NAME</code> to an empty string, not to
              <code class="epub__literal">VALUE</code>!</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
