<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 3. Script Execution Context</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 3. Script Execution Context"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="script_execution_context"></a>Chapter 3. Script Execution Context</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="“I’d Like to Have an Argument, Please”"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="quotation_mark_i_apostrophy_d_like_to_ha"></a>“I’d Like to Have an Argument, Please”</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Python scripts don’t run in a vacuum (despite what you may have
        heard). Depending on platforms and startup procedures, Python programs
        may have all sorts of enclosing context—information automatically
        passed in to the program by the operating system when the program
        starts up. For instance, scripts have access to the following sorts of
        system-level inputs and interfaces:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Current working directory</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p><code class="epub__literal">os.getcwd</code> gives
              <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e8286"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e8291"></a>access to the directory from which a script is
              started, and many file tools use its value implicitly.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Command-line arguments</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p><code class="epub__literal">sys.argv</code> gives
              <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e8306"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e8311"></a>access to words typed on the command line that are
              used to start the program and that serve as script
              inputs.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Shell variables</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p><code class="epub__literal">os.environ</code> provides
              <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e8326"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e8331"></a>an interface to names assigned in the enclosing
              shell (or a parent program) and passed in to the script.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Standard streams</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p><code class="epub__literal">sys.stdin</code>, <code class="epub__literal">stdout</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">stderr</code> <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e8354"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e8359"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e8364"></a>export the three <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e8370"></a>input/output streams that are at the heart of
              command-line shell tools, and can be leveraged by scripts with
              <code class="epub__literal">print</code> options, the<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e8380"></a> <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code> call
              and <code class="epub__literal">subprocess</code> module
              introduced in Chapter 2, the <code class="epub__literal">io.StringIO</code> class, and more.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Such tools can serve as inputs to scripts, configuration
        parameters, and so on. In this chapter, we will explore all these four
        context’s tools—both their Python interfaces and their typical
        roles.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
