<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Command-Line Arguments</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Command-Line Arguments"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="command-line_arguments"></a>Command-Line Arguments</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">sys</code> module is <a id="sys3.3"></a><a id="com3.3"></a><a id="scr3.3"></a>also where Python makes available the words typed on the
        command that is used to start a Python script. These words are usually
        referred to as command-line arguments and show up in<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e8710"></a> <code class="epub__literal">sys.argv</code>, a built-in
        list of strings. C programmers may notice its similarity to the C
        <code class="epub__literal">argv</code> array (an array of C strings).
        It’s not much to look at interactively, because no command-line
        arguments are passed to start up Python in this mode:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e8723"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import sys</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sys.argv</code></strong>
['']</pre>
<p>To really see what arguments are about, we need to run a script
        from the shell command line. Example 3-1 shows an unreasonably
        simple one that just prints the <code class="epub__literal">argv</code> list for inspection.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id1"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 3-1. PP4E\System\testargv.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import sys
print(sys.argv)</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Running this script prints the command-line arguments list; note
        that the first item is always the name of the executed Python script
        file itself, no matter how the script was started (see Executable Scripts on Unix).</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e8747"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python testargv.py</code></strong>
['testargv.py']

C:\...\PP4E\System&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python testargv.py spam eggs cheese</code></strong>
['testargv.py', 'spam', 'eggs', 'cheese']

C:\...\PP4E\System&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python testargv.py -i data.txt -o results.txt</code></strong>
['testargv.py', '-i', 'data.txt', '-o', 'results.txt']</pre>
<p>The last command here illustrates a common convention. Much like
        function arguments, command-line options are sometimes passed by
        position and sometimes by name using a “-name value” word pair. For
        instance, the pair <code class="epub__literal">-i data.txt</code>
        means the <code class="epub__literal">-i</code>
        option’s value is <code class="epub__literal">data.txt</code> (e.g.,
        an input filename). Any words can be listed, but programs usually
        impose some sort of structure on them.</p>
<p>Command-line arguments play the same role in programs that
        function arguments do in functions: they are simply a way to pass
        information to a program that can vary per program run. Because they
        don’t have to be hardcoded, they allow scripts to be more generally
        useful. For example, a file-processing script can use a command-line
        argument as the name of the file it should process; see Chapter 2’s <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>more.py</em></span> script (Example 2-1) for a prime example. Other
        scripts might accept processing mode flags, Internet addresses, and so
        on.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Parsing Command-Line Arguments"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="parsing_command-line_arguments"></a>Parsing Command-Line Arguments</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Once you <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e8783"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e8788"></a>start using command-line arguments regularly, though,
          you’ll probably find it inconvenient to keep writing code that
          fishes through the list looking for words. More typically, programs
          translate the arguments list on startup into structures that are
          more conveniently processed. Here’s one way to do it: the script in
          Example 3-2 scans the
          <code class="epub__literal">argv</code> list looking for <code class="epub__literal">-optionname optionvalue</code> word pairs and
          stuffs them into a dictionary by option name for easy
          retrieval.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id2"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 3-2. PP4E\System\testargv2.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"collect command-line options in a dictionary"

def getopts(argv):
    opts = {}
    while argv:
        if argv[0][0] == '-':                  # find "-name value" pairs
            opts[argv[0]] = argv[1]            # dict key is "-name" arg
            argv = argv[2:]
        else:
            argv = argv[1:]
    return opts

if __name__ == '__main__':
    from sys import argv                       # example client code
    myargs = getopts(argv)
    if '-i' in myargs:
        print(myargs['-i'])
    print(myargs)</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>You might import and use such a function in all your
          command-line tools. When run by itself, this file just prints the
          formatted argument dictionary:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e8810"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python testargv2.py</code></strong>
{}

C:\...\PP4E\System&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python testargv2.py -i data.txt -o results.txt</code></strong>
data.txt
{'-o': 'results.txt', '-i': 'data.txt'}</pre>
<p>Naturally, we could get much more sophisticated here in terms
          of argument patterns, error checking, and the like. For more complex
          command lines, we could also use command-line processing tools in
          the Python standard library to parse arguments:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">getopt</code> module,
              <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e8827"></a>modeled after a Unix/C utility of the same
              name</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">optparse</code> module, a
              <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e8837"></a>newer alternative, generally considered to be more
              <span>powerful</span></p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Both of these are documented in Python’s library manual, which
          also provides usage examples which we’ll defer to here in the
          interest of space. In general, the more configurable your scripts,
          the more you must invest in command-line processing logic <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e8845"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e8847"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e8849"></a><span>complexity</span>.</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="executable_scripts_on_unix"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Executable Scripts on Unix</p>
<p>Unix and Linux users: <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e8859"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e8864"></a>you can also make text files of Python source code
            directly executable by adding a special line at the top with the
            path to the Python interpreter and giving the file executable
            permission. For instance, type this code into a text file called
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>myscript</em></span>:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e8873"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">#!/usr/bin/python
print('And nice red uniforms')</pre>
<p>The first line is normally taken as a comment by Python (it
            starts with a <code class="epub__literal">#</code>); but when this
            file is run, the operating system sends lines in this file to the
            interpreter listed after <code class="epub__literal">#!</code> in
            line 1. If this file is made directly executable with a shell
            command of the form <code class="epub__literal">chmod +x
            myscript</code>, it can be run directly without typing <code class="epub__literal">python</code> in the command, as though it were
            a binary executable program:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e8889"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>myscript a b c</code></strong>
And nice red uniforms</pre>
<p>When run this way, <code class="epub__literal">sys.argv</code> will still have the script’s
            name as the first word in the list: <code class="epub__literal">["myscript", "a", "b", "c"]</code>, exactly as
            if the script had been run with the more explicit and portable
            command form <code class="epub__literal">python myscript a b
            c</code>. Making scripts directly executable is actually a Unix
            trick, not a Python feature, but it’s worth pointing out that it
            can be made a bit less machine dependent by listing the Unix
            <code class="epub__literal">env</code> command at the top instead
            of a hardcoded path to the Python executable:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e8908"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">#!/usr/bin/env python
print('Wait for it...')</pre>
<p>When coded this way, the operating system will employ your
            environment variable settings to locate your Python interpreter
            (your <code class="epub__literal">PATH</code> variable, on most
            platforms). If you run the same script on many machines, you need
            only change your environment settings on each machine (you don’t
            need to edit Python script code). Of course, you can always run
            Python files with a more explicit command line:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e8915"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python myscript a b c</code></strong></pre>
<p>This assumes that the<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e8921"></a> <code class="epub__literal">python</code>
            interpreter program is on your system’s search path setting
            (otherwise, you need to type its full path), but it works on any
            Python platform with a command line. Since this is more portable,
            I generally use this convention in the book’s examples, but
            consult your Unix manpages for more details on any of the topics
            mentioned here. Even so, these special <code class="epub__literal">#!</code> lines will show up in many examples
            in this book just in case readers want to run them as executables
            on Unix or Linux; on other platforms, they are simply ignored as
            Python comments.</p>
<p>Note that on recent flavors of Windows, you can usually also
            type a script’s filename directly (without the word
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>python</em></span>) to make it go, and you don’t have to
            add a <code class="epub__literal">#!</code> line at the top.
            Python uses the Windows registry on this platform to declare
            itself as the program that opens files with Python extensions
            (<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>.py</em></span> and others). This is also why you can
            launch files on Windows by clicking on them.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
