<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Shell Environment Variables</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Shell Environment Variables"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="shell_environment_variables"></a>Shell Environment Variables</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Shell variables, <a id="scr3.4"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e8952"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e8957"></a>sometimes known as environment variables, are made
        available to Python scripts as<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e8963"></a> <code class="epub__literal">os.environ</code>, a Python
        dictionary-like object with one entry per variable setting in the
        shell. Shell variables live outside the Python system; they are often
        set at your system prompt or within startup files or control-panel
        GUIs and typically serve as system-wide configuration inputs to
        programs.</p>
<p>In fact, by now you should be familiar with a prime example:
        the<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e8976"></a> <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code> module
        search path setting is a shell variable used by Python to import
        modules. By setting it once in your operating system, its value is
        available every time a Python program is run. Shell variables can also
        be set by programs to serve as inputs to other programs in an
        application; because their values are normally inherited by spawned
        programs, they can be used as a simple form of interprocess
        communication.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Fetching Shell Variables"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="fetching_shell_variables"></a>Fetching Shell Variables</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In Python, <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e8990"></a>the surrounding shell environment becomes a simple
          preset object, not special syntax. Indexing <code class="epub__literal">os.environ</code> by the desired shell variable’s
          name string (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">os.environ['USER']</code>) is the moral
          equivalent of adding a dollar sign before a variable name in most
          Unix shells (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">$USER</code>), using
          surrounding percent signs on DOS (<code class="epub__literal">%USER%</code>), and calling <code class="epub__literal">getenv("USER")</code> in a C program. Let’s start
          up an interactive session to experiment (run in Python 3.1 on a
          Windows 7 laptop):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e9012"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import os</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>os.environ.keys()</code></strong>
KeysView(&lt;os._Environ object at 0x013B8C70&gt;)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(os.environ.keys())</code></strong>
['TMP', 'COMPUTERNAME', 'USERDOMAIN', 'PSMODULEPATH', 'COMMONPROGRAMFILES',
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...many more deleted...</span></em>
'NUMBER_OF_PROCESSORS', 'PROCESSOR_LEVEL', 'USERPROFILE', 'OS', 'PUBLIC', 'QTJAVA']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>os.environ['TEMP']</code></strong>
'C:\\Users\\mark\\AppData\\Local\\Temp'</pre>
<p>Here, the <code class="epub__literal">keys</code> method
          returns an iterable of assigned variables, and indexing fetches the
          value of the shell variable <code class="epub__literal">TEMP</code>
          on Windows. This works the same way on Linux, but other variables
          are generally preset when Python starts up. Since we know about
          <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code>, let’s peek at its
          setting within Python to verify its content (as I wrote this, mine
          was set to the root of the book examples tree for this fourth
          edition, as well as a temporary development location):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e9040"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>os.environ['PYTHONPATH']</code></strong>
'C:\\PP4thEd\\Examples;C:\\Users\\Mark\\temp'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for srcdir in os.environ['PYTHONPATH'].split(os.pathsep):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(srcdir)</code></strong>
...
C:\PP4thEd\Examples
C:\Users\Mark\temp

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import sys</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sys.path[:3]</code></strong>
['', 'C:\\PP4thEd\\Examples', 'C:\\Users\\Mark\\temp']</pre>
<p><code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code> is a string of
          directory paths separated by whatever character is used to separate
          items in such paths on your platform (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">;</code> on DOS/Windows, <code class="epub__literal">:</code> on Unix and Linux). To split it into its
          components, we pass to the <code class="epub__literal">split</code>
          string method an <code class="epub__literal">os.pathsep</code>
          delimiter—a portable setting that gives the proper separator for the
          underlying machine. As usual, <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code> is the actual search path at
          runtime, and reflects the result of merging in the <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code> setting after the current
          directory.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Changing Shell Variables"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="changing_shell_variables"></a>Changing Shell Variables</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Like normal dictionaries, <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e9085"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e9090"></a>the <code class="epub__literal">os.environ</code>
          object supports both key indexing and <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><span>assignment</span></em></span>. As for
          dictionaries, assignments change the value of the key:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e9105"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>os.environ['TEMP']</code></strong>
'C:\\Users\\mark\\AppData\\Local\\Temp
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>os.environ['TEMP'] = r'c:\temp'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>os.environ['TEMP']</code></strong>
'c:\\temp'</pre>
<p>But something extra happens here. In all recent Python
          releases, values assigned to <code class="epub__literal">os.environ</code> keys in this fashion are
          automatically <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>exported</em></span> to other parts of the
          application. That is, key assignments change both the <code class="epub__literal">os.environ</code> object in the Python program as
          well as the associated variable in the enclosing
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>shell</em></span> environment of the running program’s
          process. Its new value becomes visible to the Python program, all
          linked-in C modules, and any programs spawned by the Python
          process.</p>
<p>Internally, key assignments to <code class="epub__literal">os.environ</code> call <code class="epub__literal">os.putenv</code>—a function that changes the
          shell variable outside the boundaries of the Python interpreter. To
          demonstrate how this works, we need a couple of scripts that set and
          fetch shell variables; the first is shown in Example 3-3.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id3"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 3-3. PP4E\System\Environment\setenv.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import os
print('setenv...', end=' ')
print(os.environ['USER'])                # show current shell variable value

os.environ['USER'] = 'Brian'             # runs os.putenv behind the scenes
os.system('python echoenv.py')

os.environ['USER'] = 'Arthur'            # changes passed to spawned programs
os.system('python echoenv.py')           # and linked-in C library modules

os.environ['USER'] = input('?')
print(os.popen('python echoenv.py').read())</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>This <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>setenv.py</em></span> script simply changes a
          shell variable, <code class="epub__literal">USER</code>, and spawns
          another script that echoes this variable’s value, as shown in Example 3-4.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id4"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 3-4. PP4E\System\Environment\echoenv.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import os
print('echoenv...', end=' ')
print('Hello,', os.environ['USER'])</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>No matter how we run <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>echoenv.py</em></span>, it
          displays the value of <code class="epub__literal">USER</code> in the
          enclosing shell; when run from the command line, this value comes
          from whatever we’ve set the variable to in the shell itself:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e9168"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Environment&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>set USER=Bob</code></strong>

C:\...\PP4E\System\Environment&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python echoenv.py</code></strong>
echoenv... Hello, Bob</pre>
<p>When spawned by another script such as
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>setenv.py</em></span> using the <code class="epub__literal">os.system</code> and <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code> tools we met earlier, though,
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>echoenv.py</em></span> gets whatever <code class="epub__literal">USER</code> settings its parent program has
          made:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e9194"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Environment&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python setenv.py</code></strong>
setenv... Bob
echoenv... Hello, Brian
echoenv... Hello, Arthur
?Gumby
echoenv... Hello, Gumby

C:\...\PP4E\System\Environment&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>echo %USER%</code></strong>
Bob</pre>
<p>This works the same way on Linux. In general terms, a spawned
          program always <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>inherits</em></span> environment settings
          from its parents. <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Spawned</em></span> programs are
          <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e9210"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e9215"></a>programs started with Python tools such as <code class="epub__literal">os.spawnv</code>, the <code class="epub__literal">os.fork/exec</code> combination on Unix-like
          platforms, and <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code>, <code class="epub__literal">os.system</code>, and the <code class="epub__literal">subprocess</code> module on a variety of
          platforms. All programs thus <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e9237"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e9242"></a>launched get the environment variable settings that
          exist in the parent at launch time.<sup>[7]</sup></p>
<p>From a larger perspective, setting shell variables like this
          before starting a new program is one way to pass information into
          the new program. For instance, a Python configuration script might
          tailor the <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code> variable to
          include custom directories just before launching another Python
          script; the launched script will have the custom search path in its
          <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code> because shell variables
          are passed down to children (in fact, watch for such a launcher
          script to appear at the end of Chapter 6).</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Shell Variable Fine Points: Parents, putenv, and getenv"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="shell_variable_fine_points_colon_parents"></a>Shell Variable Fine Points: Parents, putenv, and
          getenv</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Notice the last command in the preceding example—the <code class="epub__literal">USER</code> variable is back to its original
          value after the top-level Python program exits. Assignments to
          <code class="epub__literal">os.environ</code> keys are passed
          outside the interpreter and <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>down</em></span> the spawned
          programs chain, but never back <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>up</em></span> to parent
          program processes (including the system shell). This is also true in
          C programs that use the <code class="epub__literal">putenv</code>
          library call, and it isn’t a Python limitation per se.</p>
<p>It’s also likely to be a nonissue if a Python script is at the
          top of your application. But keep in mind that shell settings made
          within a program usually endure only for that program’s run and for
          the run of its spawned children. If you need to export a shell
          variable setting so that it lives on after Python exits, you may be
          able to find platform-specific extensions that do this; search
          http://www.python.org or the Web at
          large.</p>
<p>Another subtlety: as implemented today, changes to <code class="epub__literal">os.environ</code> automatically call<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e9304"></a> <code class="epub__literal">os.putenv</code>, which
          runs the <code class="epub__literal">putenv</code> call in the C
          library if it is available on your platform to export the setting
          outside Python to any linked-in C code. However, although <code class="epub__literal">os.environ</code> changes call <code class="epub__literal">os.putenv</code>, direct calls to <code class="epub__literal">os.putenv</code> do not update <code class="epub__literal">os.environ</code> to reflect the change. Because
          of this, the <code class="epub__literal">os.environ</code> mapping
          interface is generally preferred to <code class="epub__literal">os.putenv</code>.</p>
<p>Also note that environment <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e9337"></a>settings are loaded into <code class="epub__literal">os.environ</code> on startup and not on each
          fetch; hence, changes made by linked-in C code after startup may not
          be reflected in <code class="epub__literal">os.environ</code>.
          Python does have a more focused<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e9349"></a> <code class="epub__literal">os.getenv</code> call
          today, but it is simply translated into an <code class="epub__literal">os.environ</code> fetch on most platforms (or
          all, in 3.X), not into a call to <code class="epub__literal">getenv</code> in the C library. Most applications
          won’t need to care, especially if they are pure Python code. On
          platforms without a <code class="epub__literal">putenv</code> call,
          <code class="epub__literal">os.environ</code> can be passed as a
          parameter to program startup tools to set the spawned <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e9371"></a>program’s environment.</p>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[7] </sup>This is by default. Some program-launching tools also let
              scripts pass environment settings that are different from their
              own to child programs. For instance, the <code class="epub__literal">os.spawnve</code> call is like <code class="epub__literal">os.spawnv</code>, but it accepts a dictionary
              argument representing the shell environment to be passed to the
              started program. Some <code class="epub__literal">os.exec*</code> variants (ones with an “e” at
              the end of their names) similarly accept explicit environments;
              see the <code class="epub__literal">os.exec*</code> call formats
              in Chapter 5 for more
              details.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
