<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Standard Streams</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Standard Streams"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="standard_streams"></a>Standard Streams</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">sys</code> module <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e9382"></a><a id="scr3.5"></a><a id="sys3.5"></a>is also the place where the standard input, output, and
        error streams of your Python programs live; these turn out to be
        another common way for programs to communicate:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e9398"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import sys</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for f in (sys.stdin, sys.stdout, sys.stderr): print(f)</code></strong>
...
&lt;_io.TextIOWrapper name='&lt;stdin&gt;' encoding='cp437'&gt;
&lt;_io.TextIOWrapper name='&lt;stdout&gt;' encoding='cp437'&gt;
&lt;_io.TextIOWrapper name='&lt;stderr&gt;' encoding='cp437'&gt;</pre>
<p>The standard streams are simply preopened Python file objects
        that are automatically connected to your program’s standard streams
        when Python starts up. By default, all of them are tied to the console
        window where Python (or a Python program) was started. Because
        the<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e9408"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e9413"></a> <code class="epub__literal">print</code> and <code class="epub__literal">input</code> built-in functions are really nothing
        more than user-friendly interfaces to the standard output and input
        streams, they are similar to using <code class="epub__literal">stdout</code> and <code class="epub__literal">stdin</code> in <code class="epub__literal">sys</code> directly:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e9433"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('hello stdout world')</code></strong>
hello stdout world

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sys.stdout.write('hello stdout world' + '\n')</code></strong>
hello stdout world
19

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>input('hello stdin world&gt;')</code></strong>
hello stdin world&gt;<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>spam</code></strong>
'spam'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('hello stdin world&gt;'); sys.stdin.readline()[:-1]</code></strong>
hello stdin world&gt;
<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>eggs</code></strong>
'eggs'</pre><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="standard_streams_on_windows"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Standard Streams on Windows</p>
<p>Windows users: <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e9461"></a>if you click a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>.py</em></span> Python
          program’s filename in a Windows file explorer to start it (or launch
          it with <code class="epub__literal">os.system</code>), a DOS console
          window automatically pops up to serve as the program’s standard
          stream. If your program makes windows of its own, you can avoid this
          console pop-up window by naming your program’s source-code file with
          a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>.pyw</em></span> extension, not with a
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>.py</em></span> extension. The <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>.pyw</em></span>
          extension simply means a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>.py</em></span> source file
          without a DOS pop up on Windows (it uses Windows registry settings
          to run a custom version of Python). A <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>.pyw</em></span> file
          may also be imported as usual.</p>
<p>Also note that because printed output goes to this DOS pop up
          when a program is clicked, scripts that simply print text and exit
          will generate an odd “flash”—the DOS console box pops up, output is
          printed into it, and the pop up goes away immediately (not the most
          user-friendly of features!). To keep the DOS pop-up box around so
          that you can read printed output, simply add an <code class="epub__literal">input()</code> call at the bottom of your script
          to pause for an Enter key press before exiting.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Redirecting Streams to Files and Programs"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="redirecting_streams_to_files_and_program"></a>Redirecting Streams to Files and Programs</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Technically, <a id="files3.5.1"></a><a id="in3.5.1"></a><a id="pro3.5.1"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e9514"></a>standard output (and <code class="epub__literal">print</code>) text appears in the console window
          where a program was started, standard input (and <code class="epub__literal">input</code>) text comes from the keyboard, and
          standard error text is used to print Python error messages to the
          console window. At least that’s the default. It’s also possible to
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>redirect</em></span> these streams both to files and to
          other programs at the system shell, as well as to arbitrary objects
          within a Python script. On most systems, such redirections make it
          easy to reuse and combine general-purpose command-line
          utilities.</p>
<p>Redirection is useful for things like canned (precoded) test
          inputs: we can apply a single test script to any set of inputs by
          simply redirecting the standard input stream to a different file
          each time the script is run. Similarly, redirecting the standard
          output stream lets us save and later analyze a program’s output; for
          example, testing systems might compare the saved standard output of
          a script with a file of expected output to detect failures.</p>
<p>Although it’s a powerful paradigm, redirection turns out to be
          straightforward to use. For instance, consider the simple
          read-evaluate-print loop program in Example 3-5.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id5"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 3-5. PP4E\System\Streams\teststreams.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"read numbers till eof and show squares"

def interact():
    print('Hello stream world')                     # print sends to sys.stdout
    while True:
        try:
            reply = input('Enter a number&gt;')        # input reads sys.stdin
        except EOFError:
            break                                   # raises an except on eof
        else:                                       # input given as a string
            num = int(reply)
            print("%d squared is %d" % (num, num ** 2))
    print('Bye')

if __name__ == '__main__':
    interact()                                      # when run, not imported</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>As usual, the<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e9543"></a> <code class="epub__literal">interact</code> function
          here is automatically executed when this file is run, not when it is
          imported. By default, running this file from a system command line
          makes that standard stream appear where you typed the Python
          command. The script simply reads numbers until it reaches <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e9550"></a>end-of-file in the standard input stream (on Windows,
          end-of-file is usually the two-key combination<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e9556"></a> Ctrl-Z; on Unix, type Ctrl-D instead<sup>[8]</sup>):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e9585"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Streams&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python teststreams.py</code></strong>
Hello stream world
Enter a number&gt;<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>12</code></strong>
12 squared is 144
Enter a number&gt;<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>10</code></strong>
10 squared is 100
Enter a number&gt;^Z
Bye</pre>
<p>But on both <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e9598"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e9603"></a>Windows and Unix-like platforms, we can redirect the
          standard input stream to come from a file with the <code class="epub__literal">&lt;</code> <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>filename</code></em>
          shell syntax. Here is a command session in a DOS console box on
          Windows that forces the script to read its input from a text file,
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>input.txt</em></span>. It’s the same on Linux, but replace
          the DOS <code class="epub__literal">type</code> command with a Unix
          <code class="epub__literal">cat</code> command:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e9625"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Streams&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type input.txt</code></strong>
8
6

C:\...\PP4E\System\Streams&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python teststreams.py &lt; input.txt</code></strong>
Hello stream world
Enter a number&gt;8 squared is 64
Enter a number&gt;6 squared is 36
Enter a number&gt;Bye</pre>
<p>Here, the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>input.txt</em></span> file automates the
          input we would normally type interactively—the script reads from
          this file rather than from the keyboard. Standard output can be
          similarly redirected to go to a file with the <code class="epub__literal">&gt;</code> <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>filename</code></em>
          shell syntax. In fact, we can combine input and output redirection
          in a single command:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e9645"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Streams&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python teststreams.py &lt; input.txt &gt; output.txt</code></strong>

C:\...\PP4E\System\Streams&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type output.txt</code></strong>
Hello stream world
Enter a number&gt;8 squared is 64
Enter a number&gt;6 squared is 36
Enter a number&gt;Bye</pre>
<p>This time, the Python script’s input and output are both
          mapped to text files, not to the interactive console session.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Chaining programs with pipes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="chaining_programs_with_pipes"></a>Chaining programs with pipes</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>On Windows <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e9660"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e9665"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e9668"></a><a id="pro4.5.1.1"></a>and Unix-like platforms, it’s also possible to send
            the standard output of one program to the standard input of
            another using the <code class="epub__literal">|</code> shell
            character between two commands. This is usually called a “pipe”
            operation because the shell creates a pipeline that connects the
            output and input of two commands. Let’s send the output of the
            Python script to the standard <code class="epub__literal">more</code> command-line program’s input to see
            how this works:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e9683"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Streams&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python teststreams.py &lt; input.txt | more</code></strong>

Hello stream world
Enter a number&gt;8 squared is 64
Enter a number&gt;6 squared is 36
Enter a number&gt;Bye</pre>
<p>Here, <code class="epub__literal">teststreams</code>’s
            standard input comes from a file again, but its output (written by
            <code class="epub__literal">print</code> calls) is sent to another
            program, not to a file or window. The receiving program is
            <code class="epub__literal">more</code>, a standard command-line
            paging program available on Windows and Unix-like platforms.
            Because Python ties scripts into the standard stream model,
            though, Python scripts can be used on both ends. One Python
            script’s output can always be piped into another Python script’s
            input:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e9699"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Streams&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type writer.py</code></strong>
print("Help! Help! I'm being repressed!")
print(42)

C:\...\PP4E\System\Streams&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type reader.py</code></strong>
print('Got this: "%s"' % input())
import sys
data = sys.stdin.readline()[:-1]
print('The meaning of life is', data, int(data) * 2)

C:\...\PP4E\System\Streams&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python writer.py</code></strong>
Help! Help! I'm being repressed!
42

C:\...\PP4E\System\Streams&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python writer.py | python reader.py</code></strong>
Got this: "Help! Help! I'm being repressed!"
The meaning of life is 42 84</pre>
<p>This time, two Python programs are connected. Script
            <code class="epub__literal">reader</code> gets input from script
            <code class="epub__literal">writer</code>; both scripts simply
            read and write, oblivious to stream mechanics. In practice, such
            chaining of programs is a simple form of cross-program
            communications. It makes it easy to <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>reuse</em></span>
            utilities written to communicate via <code class="epub__literal">stdin</code> and <code class="epub__literal">stdout</code> in ways we never anticipated. For
            instance, a Python program that sorts <code class="epub__literal">stdin</code> text could be applied to any data
            source we like, including the output of other scripts. Consider
            the Python command-line utility scripts in Examples 3-6 and 3-7 which sort and sum lines in the
            standard input stream.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id6"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 3-6. PP4E\System\Streams\sorter.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import sys                                  # or sorted(sys.stdin)
lines = sys.stdin.readlines()               # sort stdin input lines,
lines.sort()                                # send result to stdout
for line in lines: print(line, end='')      # for further processing</pre>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id7"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 3-7. PP4E\System\Streams\adder.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import sys
sum = 0
while True:
    try:
        line = input()                     # or call sys.stdin.readlines()
    except EOFError:                       # or for line in sys.stdin:
        break                              # input strips \n at end
    else:
        sum += int(line)                   # was sting.atoi() in 2nd ed
print(sum)</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>We can apply such general-purpose tools in a variety of ways
            at the shell command line to sort and sum arbitrary files and
            program outputs (Windows note: on my prior XP machine and Python
            2.X, I had to type “python file.py” here, not just “file.py,” or
            else the input redirection failed; with Python 3.X on Windows 7
            today, either form works):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e9750"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Streams&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type data.txt</code></strong>
123
000
999
042

C:\...\PP4E\System\Streams&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python sorter.py &lt; data.txt</code></strong>            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">sort a file</span></em>
000
042
123
999

C:\...\PP4E\System\Streams&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python adder.py &lt; data.txt</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">sum file</span></em>
1164

C:\...\PP4E\System\Streams&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type data.txt | python adder.py</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">sum type output</span></em>
1164

C:\...\PP4E\System\Streams&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type writer2.py</code></strong>
for data in (123, 0, 999, 42):
    print('%03d' % data)

C:\...\PP4E\System\Streams&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python writer2.py | python sorter.py</code></strong>   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">sort py output</span></em>
000
042
123
999

C:\...\PP4E\System\Streams&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>writer2.py | sorter.py</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">shorter form</span></em>
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...same output as prior command on Windows...</span></em>

C:\...\PP4E\System\Streams&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python writer2.py | python sorter.py | python adder.py</code></strong>
1164</pre>
<p>The last command here connects three Python scripts by
            standard streams—the output of each prior script is fed to the
            input of the next via pipeline shell syntax.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Coding alternatives for adders and sorters"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="coding_alternatives_for_adders_and_sorte"></a>Coding alternatives for adders and sorters</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>A few coding pointers here: if you look closely, you’ll
            notice that <em class="epub__filename">sorter.py</em> reads
            all of <code class="epub__literal">stdin</code> at once with the
            <code class="epub__literal">readlines</code> method, but <em class="epub__filename">adder.py</em> reads one line at a time. If
            the input source is another program, some platforms run programs
            connected by pipes in <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>parallel</em></span>. On such
            systems, reading line by line works better if the data streams
            being passed are large, because readers don’t have to wait until
            writers are completely finished to get busy processing data.
            Because <code class="epub__literal">input</code> just reads
            <code class="epub__literal">stdin</code>, the line-by-line scheme
            used by <em class="epub__filename">adder.py</em> can always
            be coded with manual <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdin</code>
            reads too:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e9831"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Streams&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type adder2.py</code></strong>
import sys
sum = 0
while True:
    line = sys.stdin.readline()
    if not line: break
    sum += int(line)
print(sum)</pre>
<p>This version utilizes the fact that <code class="epub__literal">int</code> allows the digits to be surrounded
            by whitespace (<code class="epub__literal">readline</code> returns
            a line including its <code class="epub__literal">\n</code>, but we
            don’t have to use <code class="epub__literal">[:-1]</code> or
            <code class="epub__literal">rstrip()</code> to remove it for
            <code class="epub__literal">int</code>). In fact, we can use
            Python’s more recent file iterators to achieve the same effect—the
            <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop, for example,
            automatically grabs one line each time through when we iterate
            over a file object directly (more on file iterators in the next
            chapter):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e9860"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Streams&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type adder3.py</code></strong>
import sys
sum = 0
for line in sys.stdin: sum += int(line)
print(sum)</pre>
<p>Changing <code class="epub__literal">sorter</code> to read
            line by line this way may not be a big performance boost, though,
            because the list <code class="epub__literal">sort</code> method
            requires that the list already be complete. As we’ll see in Chapter 18, manually coded sort algorithms are
            generally prone to be much slower than the Python list sorting
            method.</p>
<p>Interestingly, these two scripts can also be coded in a much
            more compact fashion in Python 2.4 and later by using the
            new<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e9877"></a> <code class="epub__literal">sorted</code> built-in
            function, generator expressions, and file iterators. The following
            work the same way as the originals, with noticeably less
            source-file real estate:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e9884"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Streams&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type sorterSmall.py</code></strong>
import sys
for line in sorted(sys.stdin): print(line, end='')

C:\...\PP4E\System\Streams&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type adderSmall.py</code></strong>
import sys
print(sum(int(line) for line in sys.stdin))</pre>
<p>In its argument to <code class="epub__literal">sum</code>,
            the latter of these employs a generator expression, which is much
            like a list comprehension, but results are returned one at a time,
            not in a physical list. The net effect is space optimization. For
            more details, see a core language resource, such as the <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e9897"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e9899"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e9901"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e9903"></a>book <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Learning
            Python</em></span>.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Redirected Streams and User Interaction"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="redirected_streams_and_user_interaction"></a>Redirected Streams and User Interaction</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Earlier in this section, <a id="in3.5.2"></a>we piped <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>teststreams.py</em></span> output
          into the standard <code class="epub__literal">more</code>
          command-line program with a command like this:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e9927"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Streams&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python teststreams.py &lt; input.txt | more</code></strong></pre>
<p>But since we already wrote our own “more” paging utility in
          Python in the preceding chapter, why not set it up to accept input
          from <code class="epub__literal">stdin</code> too? For example, if
          we change the last three lines of the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>more.py</em></span>
          file listed as Example 2-1 in the
          prior chapter…</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e9941"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">if __name__ == '__main__':                       # when run, not when imported
    import sys
    if len(sys.argv) == 1:                       # page stdin if no cmd args
        more(sys.stdin.read())
    else:
        more(open(sys.argv[1]).read())</pre>
<p>…it almost seems as if we should be able to redirect the
          standard output of <span class="epub__keep-together">teststreams.py</span> into the standard
          input of <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>more.py</em></span>:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e9951"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Streams&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python teststreams.py &lt; input.txt | python ..\more.py</code></strong>
Hello stream world
Enter a number&gt;8 squared is 64
Enter a number&gt;6 squared is 36
Enter a number&gt;Bye</pre>
<p>This technique generally works for Python scripts. Here,
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>teststreams.py</em></span> takes input from a file again.
          And, as in the last section, one Python program’s output is piped to
          another’s input—the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>more.py</em></span> script in the
          parent (<code class="epub__literal">..</code>) directory.</p>
<p>But there’s a subtle problem lurking in the preceding <code class="epub__literal">more.py</code> command. Really, chaining worked
          there only by sheer luck: if the first script’s output is long
          enough that <code class="epub__literal">more</code> has to ask the
          user if it should continue, the script will utterly fail
          (specifically, when <code class="epub__literal">input</code> for
          user interaction triggers <code class="epub__literal">EOFError</code>).</p>
<p>The problem is <a id="sys3.5.2"></a>that the augmented <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>more.py</em></span> uses
          <code class="epub__literal">stdin</code> for two disjointed
          purposes. It reads a reply from an interactive user on <code class="epub__literal">stdin</code> by calling <code class="epub__literal">input</code>, but now it
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>also</em></span> accepts the main input text on <code class="epub__literal">stdin</code>. When the <code class="epub__literal">stdin</code> stream is really redirected to an
          input file or pipe, we can’t use it to input a reply from an
          interactive user; it contains only the text of the input source.
          Moreover, because <code class="epub__literal">stdin</code> is
          redirected before the program even starts up, there is no way to
          know what it meant prior to being redirected in the command
          line.</p>
<p>If we intend to accept input on <code class="epub__literal">stdin</code> <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>and</em></span> use the
          console for user interaction, we have to do a bit more: we would
          also need to use special interfaces to read user replies from a
          keyboard directly, instead of standard input. On Windows, Python’s
          standard library <code class="epub__literal">msvcrt</code> module
          provides such tools; on many Unix-like platforms, reading from
          device file <em class="epub__filename">/dev/tty</em> will
          usually suffice.</p>
<p>Since this is an arguably obscure use case, we’ll delegate a
          complete solution to a suggested exercise. Example 3-8 shows a Windows-only
          modified version of the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>more</em></span> script that pages
          the standard input stream if called with no arguments, but also
          makes use of lower-level and platform-specific tools to converse
          with a user at a keyboard if needed.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id8"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 3-8. PP4E\System\Streams\moreplus.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
split and interactively page a string, file, or stream of
text to stdout; when run as a script, page stdin or file
whose name is passed on cmdline; if input is stdin, can't
use it for user reply--use platform-specific tools or GUI;
"""

import sys

def getreply():
    """
    read a reply key from an interactive user
    even if stdin redirected to a file or pipe
    """
    if sys.stdin.isatty():                       # if stdin is console
        return input('?')                        # read reply line from stdin
    else:
        if sys.platform[:3] == 'win':            # if stdin was redirected
            import msvcrt                        # can't use to ask a user
            msvcrt.putch(b'?')
            key = msvcrt.getche()                # use windows console tools
            msvcrt.putch(b'\n')                  # getch() does not echo key
            return key
        else:
            assert False, 'platform not supported'
            #linux?: open('/dev/tty').readline()[:-1]

def more(text, numlines=10):
    """
    page multiline string to stdout
    """
    lines = text.splitlines()
    while lines:
        chunk = lines[:numlines]
        lines = lines[numlines:]
        for line in chunk: print(line)
        if lines and getreply() not in [b'y', b'Y']: break

if __name__ == '__main__':                       # when run, not when imported
    if len(sys.argv) == 1:                       # if no command-line arguments
        more(sys.stdin.read())                   # page stdin, no inputs
    else:
        more(open(sys.argv[1]).read())           # else page filename argument</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Most of the new code in this version shows up in its <code class="epub__literal">getreply</code> function. The file’s <code class="epub__literal">isatty</code> method tells us whether <code class="epub__literal">stdin</code> is connected to the console; if it
          is, we simply read replies on <code class="epub__literal">stdin</code> as before. Of course, we have to add
          such extra logic only to scripts that intend to interact with
          console users <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>and</em></span> take input on <code class="epub__literal">stdin</code>. In a GUI application, for example,
          we could instead pop up dialogs, bind keyboard-press events to run
          callbacks, and so on (we’ll meet GUIs in Chapter 7).</p>
<p>Armed with the reusable <code class="epub__literal">getreply</code> function, though, we can safely
          run our <code class="epub__literal">moreplus</code> utility in a
          variety of ways. As before, we can import and call this module’s
          function directly, passing in whatever string we wish to
          page:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e10072"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from moreplus import more</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>more(open('adderSmall.py').read())</code></strong>
import sys
print(sum(int(line) for line in sys.stdin))</pre>
<p>Also as before, when run with a command-line
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>argument</em></span>, this script interactively pages
          through the named file’s text:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e10085"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Streams&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python moreplus.py adderSmall.py</code></strong>
import sys
print(sum(int(line) for line in sys.stdin))

C:\...\PP4E\System\Streams&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python moreplus.py moreplus.py</code></strong>
"""
split and interactively page a string, file, or stream of
text to stdout; when run as a script, page stdin or file
whose name is passed on cmdline; if input is stdin, can't
use it for user reply--use platform-specific tools or GUI;
"""

import sys

def getreply():
?<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>n</code></strong></pre>
<p>But now the script also correctly pages text redirected into
          <code class="epub__literal">stdin</code> from either a
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>file</em></span> or a command <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>pipe</em></span>,
          even if that text is too long to fit in a single display chunk. On
          most shells, we send such input via redirection or pipe operators
          like these:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e10106"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Streams&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python moreplus.py &lt; moreplus.py</code></strong>
"""
split and interactively page a string, file, or stream of
text to stdout; when run as a script, page stdin or file
whose name is passed on cmdline; if input is stdin, can't
use it for user reply--use platform-specific tools or GUI;
"""

import sys

def getreply():
?<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>n</code></strong>

C:\...\PP4E\System\Streams&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type moreplus.py | python moreplus.py</code></strong>
"""
split and interactively page a string, file, or stream of
text to stdout; when run as a script, page stdin or file
whose name is passed on cmdline; if input is stdin, can't
use it for user reply--use platform-specific tools or GUI;
"""

import sys

def getreply():
?<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>n</code></strong></pre>
<p>Finally, piping one Python script’s output into this script’s
          input now works as expected, without botching user interaction (and
          not just because we got lucky):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e10121"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">......\System\Streams&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python teststreams.py &lt; input.txt | python moreplus.py</code></strong>
Hello stream world
Enter a number&gt;8 squared is 64
Enter a number&gt;6 squared is 36
Enter a number&gt;Bye</pre>
<p>Here, the standard <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>output</em></span> of one Python
          script is fed to the standard <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>input</em></span> of another
          Python script located in the same directory:
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>moreplus.py</em></span> reads the output of <span class="epub__keep-together">teststreams.py</span>.</p>
<p>All of the redirections in such command lines work only
          because scripts don’t care what standard input and output really
          are—interactive users, files, or pipes between programs. For
          example, when run as a script, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>moreplus.py</em></span>
          simply reads stream <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdin</code>;
          the command-line shell (e.g., DOS on Windows, csh on Linux) attaches
          such streams to the source implied by the command line before the
          script is started. Scripts use the preopened <code class="epub__literal">stdin</code> and <code class="epub__literal">stdout</code> file objects to access those
          sources, regardless of their true nature.</p>
<p>And for readers keeping count, we have just run this single
          <code class="epub__literal">more</code> pager script in four
          different ways: by importing and calling its function, by passing a
          filename command-line argument, by redirecting <code class="epub__literal">stdin</code> to a file, and by piping a command’s
          output to <code class="epub__literal">stdin</code>. By supporting
          importable functions, command-line arguments, and standard streams,
          Python system tools code can be reused in a wide variety of
          <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10166"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10168"></a>modes.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Redirecting Streams to Python Objects"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="redirecting_streams_to_python_objects"></a>Redirecting Streams to Python Objects</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>All of the previous <a id="in3.5.3"></a>standard stream redirections work for programs written
          in any language that hook into the standard streams and rely more on
          the shell’s command-line processor than on Python itself.
          Command-line redirection syntax like <code class="epub__literal">&lt;</code> <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>filename</code></em>
          and <span><code class="epub__literal">|</code>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>program</code></em></span> is evaluated by the
          shell, not by Python. A more Pythonesque form of redirection can be
          done within scripts themselves by resetting <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdin</code> and <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code> to <a id="sys3.5.3a"></a><a id="sys3.5.3b"></a>file-like objects.</p>
<p>The main trick behind this mode is that anything that looks
          like a file in terms of methods will work as a standard stream in
          Python. The object’s interface (sometimes called its protocol), and
          not the object’s specific datatype, is all that matters. That
          is:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Any object that provides file-like
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>read</em></span> methods can be assigned to <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdin</code> to make input come from that
              object’s read methods.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Any object that defines file-like
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>write</em></span> methods can be assigned to <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code>; all standard output will
              be sent to that object’s methods.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Because <code class="epub__literal">print</code> and <code class="epub__literal">input</code> simply call the <code class="epub__literal">write</code> and <code class="epub__literal">readline</code> methods of whatever objects
          <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code> and <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdin</code> happen to reference, we can use
          this technique to both provide and intercept standard stream text
          with objects implemented as classes.</p>
<p>If you’ve already studied Python, you probably know that such
          plug-and-play compatibility is usually called
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>polymorphism</em></span>—<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10260"></a>it doesn’t matter what an object is, and it doesn’t
          matter what its interface does, as long as it provides the expected
          interface. This liberal approach to datatypes accounts for much of
          the conciseness and flexibility of Python code. Here, it provides a
          way for scripts to reset their own streams. Example 3-9 shows a utility module
          that demonstrates this concept.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id9"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 3-9. PP4E\System\Streams\redirect.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
file-like objects that save standard output text in a string and provide
standard input text from a string; redirect runs a passed-in function
with its output and input streams reset to these file-like class objects;
"""

import sys                                      # get built-in modules

class Output:                                   # simulated output file
    def __init__(self):
        self.text = ''                          # empty string when created
    def write(self, string):                    # add a string of bytes
        self.text += string
    def writelines(self, lines):                # add each line in a list
        for line in lines: self.write(line)

class Input:                                    # simulated input file
    def __init__(self, input=''):               # default argument
        self.text = input                       # save string when created
    def read(self, size=None):                  # optional argument
        if size == None:                        # read N bytes, or all
            res, self.text = self.text, ''
        else:
            res, self.text = self.text[:size], self.text[size:]
        return res
    def readline(self):
        eoln = self.text.find('\n')             # find offset of next eoln
        if eoln == −1:                          # slice off through eoln
            res, self.text = self.text, ''
        else:
            res, self.text = self.text[:eoln+1], self.text[eoln+1:]
        return res

def redirect(function, pargs, kargs, input):    # redirect stdin/out
    savestreams = sys.stdin, sys.stdout         # run a function object
    sys.stdin   = Input(input)                  # return stdout text
    sys.stdout  = Output()
    try:
        result = function(*pargs, **kargs)      # run function with args
        output = sys.stdout.text
    finally:
        sys.stdin, sys.stdout = savestreams     # restore if exc or not
    return (result, output)                     # return result if no exc</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>This module defines two classes that masquerade as real
          files:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">Output</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Provides the <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10281"></a>write method interface (a.k.a. protocol)
                expected of output files but saves all output in an in-memory
                string as it is written.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">Input</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Provides the interface <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10292"></a>expected of input files, but provides input on
                demand from an in-memory string passed in at object
                construction time.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">redirect</code> function at
          the bottom of this file combines these two objects to run a single
          function with input and output redirected entirely to Python class
          objects. The passed-in function to run need not know or care that
          its <code class="epub__literal">print</code> and <code class="epub__literal">input</code> function calls and <code class="epub__literal">stdin</code> and <code class="epub__literal">stdout</code> method calls are talking to a class
          rather than to a real file, pipe, or user.</p>
<p>To demonstrate, import and run the <code class="epub__literal">interact</code> function at the heart of the
          <code class="epub__literal">teststreams</code> script of Example 3-5 that we’ve been running
          from the shell (to use the <span>redirection</span> utility function, we need
          to deal in terms of functions, not files). When run directly, the
          function reads from the keyboard and writes to the screen, just as
          if it were run as a program without redirection:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e10327"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Streams&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from teststreams import interact</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>interact()</code></strong>
Hello stream world
Enter a number&gt;<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>2</code></strong>
2 squared is 4
Enter a number&gt;<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>3</code></strong>
3 squared is 9
Enter a number^Z
Bye
&gt;&gt;&gt;</pre>
<p>Now, let’s run this function under the control of the
          redirection function in <span class="epub__keep-together">redirect.py</span> and pass in some canned
          input text. In this mode, the <code class="epub__literal">interact</code> function takes its input from the
          string we pass in (<code class="epub__literal">'4\n5\n6\n'</code>—three lines with explicit
          end-of-line characters), and the result of running the function is a
          tuple with its return value plus a string containing all the text
          written to the standard output stream:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e10355"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from redirect import redirect</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>(result, output) = redirect(interact, (), {}, '4\n5\n6\n')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(result)</code></strong>
None
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>output</code></strong>
'Hello stream world\nEnter a number&gt;4 squared is 16\nEnter a number&gt;5 squared
is 25\nEnter a number&gt;6 squared is 36\nEnter a number&gt;Bye\n'</pre>
<p>The output is a single, long string containing the
          concatenation of all text written to standard output. To make this
          look better, we can pass it to <code class="epub__literal">print</code> or split it up with the string
          object’s <code class="epub__literal">splitlines</code>
          method:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e10377"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for line in output.splitlines(): print(line)</code></strong>
...
Hello stream world
Enter a number&gt;4 squared is 16
Enter a number&gt;5 squared is 25
Enter a number&gt;6 squared is 36
Enter a number&gt;Bye</pre>
<p>Better still, we can reuse the <code class="epub__literal">more.py</code> module we wrote in the preceding
          chapter (<span>Example 2-1</span>); it’s less to
          type and remember, and it’s already known to work well (the
          following, like all cross-directory imports in this book’s examples,
          assumes that the directory containing the <code class="epub__literal">PP4E</code> root is on your module search
          path—change your <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code>
          setting as needed):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e10396"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from PP4E.System.more import more</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>more(output)</code></strong>
Hello stream world
Enter a number&gt;4 squared is 16
Enter a number&gt;5 squared is 25
Enter a number&gt;6 squared is 36
Enter a number&gt;Bye</pre>
<p>This is an artificial example, of course, but the techniques
          illustrated are widely applicable. For instance, it’s
          straightforward to add a GUI interface to a program written to
          interact with a command-line user. Simply intercept standard output
          with an object such as the <code class="epub__literal">Output</code>
          class instance shown earlier and throw the text string up in a
          window. Similarly, standard input can be reset to an object that
          fetches text from a graphical interface (e.g., a popped-up dialog
          box). Because classes are plug-and-play compatible with real files,
          we can use them in any tool that expects a file. Watch for a GUI
          stream-redirection module named <code class="epub__literal">guiStreams</code> in Chapter 10 that provides a concrete
          implementation of some of these <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10414"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10416"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10418"></a>ideas.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The io.StringIO and io.BytesIO Utility Classes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_io.stringio_and_io.bytesio_utility_c"></a>The io.StringIO and io.BytesIO Utility Classes</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The prior section’s <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10426"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10429"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10432"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10437"></a>technique of redirecting streams to objects proved so
          handy that now a standard library module automates the task for many
          use cases (though some use cases, such as GUIs, may still require
          more custom code). The standard library tool provides an object that
          maps a file object interface to and from in-memory strings. For
          example:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e10443"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from io import StringIO</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>buff = StringIO()</code></strong>                   # save written text to a string
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>buff.write('spam\n')</code></strong>
5
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>buff.write('eggs\n')</code></strong>
5
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>buff.getvalue()</code></strong>
'spam\neggs\n'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>buff = StringIO('ham\nspam\n')</code></strong>      # provide input from a string
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>buff.readline()</code></strong>
'ham\n'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>buff.readline()</code></strong>
'spam\n'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>buff.readline()</code></strong>
''</pre>
<p>As in the prior section, instances of <code class="epub__literal">StringIO</code> objects can be assigned to
          <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdin</code> and <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code> to redirect streams for
          <code class="epub__literal">input</code> and <code class="epub__literal">print</code> calls and can be passed to any code
          that was written to expect a real file object. Again, in Python, the
          object <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>interface</em></span>, not the concrete datatype, is
          the name of the game:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e10494"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from io import StringIO</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import sys</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>buff = StringIO()</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>temp = sys.stdout</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sys.stdout = buff</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(42, 'spam', 3.141)</code></strong>              # or print(..., file=buff)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sys.stdout = temp</code></strong>                     # restore original stream
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>buff.getvalue()</code></strong>
'42 spam 3.141\n'</pre>
<p>Note that there is also an <code class="epub__literal">io.BytesIO</code> class with similar behavior,
          but which maps file operations to an in-memory bytes buffer, instead
          of a <code class="epub__literal">str</code> string:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e10529"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from io import BytesIO</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>stream = BytesIO()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>stream.write(b'spam')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>stream.getvalue()</code></strong>
b'spam'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>stream = BytesIO(b'dpam')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>stream.read()</code></strong>
b'dpam'</pre>
<p>Due to the sharp distinction that Python 3X draws between text
          and binary data, this alternative may be better suited for scripts
          that deal with binary data. We’ll learn more about the
          text-versus-binary issue in the next chapter when we explore
          files.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Capturing the stderr Stream"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="capturing_the_stderr_stream"></a>Capturing the stderr Stream</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>We’ve been focusing <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10557"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10562"></a>on <code class="epub__literal">stdin</code> and
          <code class="epub__literal">stdout</code> redirection, but <code class="epub__literal">stderr</code> can be similarly reset to files,
          pipes, and objects. Although some shells support this, it’s also
          straightforward within a Python script. For instance, assigning
          <code class="epub__literal">sys.stderr</code> to another instance of
          a class such as <code class="epub__literal">Output</code> or a
          <code class="epub__literal">StringIO</code> object in the preceding
          section’s example allows your script to intercept text written to
          standard error, too.</p>
<p>Python itself uses standard error for error message text (and
          the IDLE GUI interface intercepts it and colors it red by default).
          However, no higher-level tools for standard error do what <code class="epub__literal">print</code> and <code class="epub__literal">input</code> do for the output and input streams.
          If you wish to print to the error stream, you’ll want to call
          <code class="epub__literal">sys.stderr.write()</code> explicitly or
          read the next section for a <code class="epub__literal">print</code>
          call trick that makes this easier.</p>
<p>Redirecting standard errors from a shell command line is a bit
          more complex and less portable. On most Unix-like systems, we can
          usually capture <code class="epub__literal">stderr</code> output by
          using shell-redirection syntax of the form <code class="epub__literal">command &gt; output 2&gt;&amp;1</code>. This may
          not work on some platforms, though, and can even vary per Unix
          shell; see your shell’s manpages for more details.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Redirection Syntax in Print Calls"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="redirection_syntax_in_print_calls"></a>Redirection Syntax in Print Calls</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Because resetting <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10615"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10620"></a>the stream attributes to new objects was so popular,
          the Python <code class="epub__literal">print</code> built-in is also
          extended to include an explicit file to which output is to be sent.
          A statement of this form:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e10629"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">print(stuff, file=afile)            # afile is an object, not a string name</pre>
<p>prints <code class="epub__literal">stuff</code> to <code class="epub__literal">afile</code> instead of to <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code>. The net effect is similar to
          simply assigning<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10642"></a> <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code> to an
          object, but there is no need to save and restore in order to return
          to the original output stream (as shown in the section on
          redirecting streams to objects). For example:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e10651"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import sys
print('spam' * 2, file=sys.stderr)</pre>
<p>will send text the standard error stream object rather than
          <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code> for the duration of
          this single print call only. The next normal print statement
          (without <code class="epub__literal">file</code>) prints to standard
          output as usual. Similarly, we can use either our custom class or
          the standard library’s class as the output file with this
          hook:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e10661"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from io import StringIO</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>buff = StringIO()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(42, file=buff)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('spam', file=buff)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(buff.getvalue())</code></strong>
42
spam

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from redirect import Output</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>buff = Output()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(43, file=buff)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('eggs', file=buff)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(buff.text)</code></strong>
43
eggs</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Other Redirection Options: os.popen and subprocess Revisited"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="other_redirection_options_colon_os.popen"></a>Other Redirection Options: os.popen and subprocess
          Revisited</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Near the end of <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10699"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10704"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10709"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10716"></a>the preceding chapter, we took a first look at the
          built-in <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code> function and
          its <code class="epub__literal">subprocess.Popen</code> relative,
          which provide a way to redirect another command’s streams from
          within a Python program. As we saw, these tools can be used to run a
          shell command line (a string we would normally type at a DOS or
          <code class="epub__literal">csh</code> prompt) but also provide a
          Python file-like object connected to the command’s output <span>stream—</span>reading the file object allows
          a script to read another program’s output. I suggested that these
          tools may be used to tap into input streams as well.</p>
<p>Because of that, the <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code> and <code class="epub__literal">subprocess</code> tools are another way to
          redirect streams of spawned programs and are close cousins to some
          of the techniques we just met. Their effect is much like the shell
          <code class="epub__literal">|</code> command-line pipe syntax for
          redirecting streams to programs (in fact, their names mean “pipe
          open”), but they are run within a script and provide a file-like
          interface to piped streams. They are similar in spirit to the
          <code class="epub__literal">redirect</code> function, but are based
          on running programs (not calling functions), and the command’s
          streams are processed in the spawning script as files (not tied to
          class objects). These tools redirect the streams of a program that a
          script starts, instead of redirecting the streams of the script
          itself.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Redirecting input or output with os.popen"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="redirecting_input_or_output_with_os.pope"></a>Redirecting input or output with os.popen</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In fact, by <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10754"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10759"></a>passing in the desired mode flag, we redirect either
            a spawned program’s output <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>or</em></span> input streams
            to a file in the calling scripts, and we can obtain the spawned
            program’s exit status code from the <code class="epub__literal">close</code> method (<code class="epub__literal">None</code> means “no error” here). To
            illustrate, consider the following two scripts:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e10776"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Streams&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type hello-out.py</code></strong>
print('Hello shell world')

C:\...\PP4E\System\Streams&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type hello-in.py</code></strong>
inp = input()
open('hello-in.txt', 'w').write('Hello ' + inp + '\n')</pre>
<p>These scripts can be run from a system shell window as
            usual:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e10786"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Streams&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python hello-out.py</code></strong>
Hello shell world

C:\...\PP4E\System\Streams&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python hello-in.py</code></strong>
Brian

C:\...\PP4E\System\Streams&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type hello-in.txt</code></strong>
Hello Brian</pre>
<p>As we saw in the prior chapter, Python scripts can read
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>output</em></span> from other programs and scripts like
            these, too, using code like the following:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e10802"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Streams&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import os</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pipe = os.popen('python hello-out.py')</code></strong>         # 'r' is default--read stdout
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pipe.read()</code></strong>
'Hello shell world\n'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(pipe.close())</code></strong>                            # exit status: None is good
None</pre>
<p>But Python scripts can also provide
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>input</em></span> to spawned programs’ standard input
            <span>streams—</span>passing a “w” mode
            argument, instead of the default “r”, connects the returned object
            to the spawned program’s input stream. What we write on the
            spawning end shows up as input in the program started:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e10827"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pipe = os.popen('python hello-in.py', 'w')</code></strong>     # 'w'--write to program stdin
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pipe.write('Gumby\n')</code></strong>
6
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pipe.close()</code></strong>                                   # \n at end is optional
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('hello-in.txt').read()</code></strong>                    # output sent to a file
'Hello Gumby\n'</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">popen</code> call is also
            smart enough to run the command string as an independent process
            on platforms that support such a notion. It accepts an optional
            third argument that can be used to control buffering of written
            text, which we’ll finesse here.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Redirecting input and output with subprocess"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="redirecting_input_and_output_with_subpro"></a>Redirecting input and output with subprocess</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>For even more <a id="in3.5.7.2"></a><a id="sub3.5.7.2"></a>control over the streams of spawned programs, we can
            employ the <code class="epub__literal">subprocess</code> module we
            introduced in the preceding chapter. As we learned earlier, this
            module can emulate <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code>
            functionality, but it can also achieve feats such as <span>bidirectional</span> stream communication
            (accessing both a program’s input and output) and tying the output
            of one program to the input of another.</p>
<p>For instance, this module provides multiple ways to spawn a
            program and get both its standard output text and exit status.
            Here are three common ways to leverage this module to start a
            program and redirect its <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>output</em></span> stream
            (recall from Chapter 2 that you may need to
            pass a <code class="epub__literal">shell=True</code> argument to
            <code class="epub__literal">Popen</code> and <code class="epub__literal">call</code> to make this section’s examples
            work on Unix-like platforms as they are coded here):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e10887"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Streams&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from subprocess import Popen, PIPE, call</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = call('python hello-out.py')</code></strong>                            # convenience
Hello shell world
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X</code></strong>
0

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pipe = Popen('python hello-out.py', stdout=PIPE)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pipe.communicate()[0]</code></strong>                                      # (stdout, stderr)
b'Hello shell world\r\n'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pipe.returncode</code></strong>                                            # exit status
0

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pipe = Popen('python hello-out.py', stdout=PIPE)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pipe.stdout.read()</code></strong>
b'Hello shell world\r\n'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pipe.wait()</code></strong>                                                # exit status
0</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">call</code> in the first of
            these three techniques is just a convenience function (there are
            more of these which you can look up in the Python library manual),
            and the <code class="epub__literal">communicate</code> in the second is
            roughly a convenience for the third (it sends data to stdin, reads
            data from stdout until end-of-file, and waits for the process to
            end):</p>
<p>Redirecting and connecting to the spawned program’s
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>input</em></span> stream is just as simple, though a bit
            more complex than the <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code>
            approach with <code class="epub__literal">'w'</code> file mode
            shown in the preceding section (as mentioned in the last chapter,
            <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code> is implemented with
            <code class="epub__literal">subprocess</code>, and is thus itself
            just something of a convenience function today):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e10945"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pipe = Popen('python hello-in.py', stdin=PIPE)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pipe.stdin.write(b'Pokey\n')</code></strong>
6
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pipe.stdin.close()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pipe.wait()</code></strong>
0
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('hello-in.txt').read()</code></strong>                       # output sent to a file
'Hello Pokey\n'</pre>
<p>In fact, we can use obtain <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>both the input and
            output</em></span> streams of a spawned program with this module.
            Let’s reuse the simple writer and reader scripts we wrote earlier
            to <span>demonstrate</span>:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e10970"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Streams&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type writer.py</code></strong>
print("Help! Help! I'm being repressed!")
print(42)

C:\...\PP4E\System\Streams&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type reader.py</code></strong>
print('Got this: "%s"' % input())
import sys
data = sys.stdin.readline()[:-1]
print('The meaning of life is', data, int(data) * 2)</pre>
<p>Code like the following can both read from and write to the
            reader script—the pipe object has two file-like objects available
            as attached attributes, one connecting to the input stream, and
            one to the output (Python 2.X users might recognize these as
            equivalent to the tuple returned by the now-defunct <code class="epub__literal">os.popen2</code>):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e10983"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pipe = Popen('python reader.py', stdin=PIPE, stdout=PIPE)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pipe.stdin.write(b'Lumberjack\n')</code></strong>
11
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pipe.stdin.write(b'12\n')</code></strong>
3
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pipe.stdin.close()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>output = pipe.stdout.read()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pipe.wait()</code></strong>
0
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>output</code></strong>
b'Got this: "Lumberjack"\r\nThe meaning of life is 12 24\r\n'</pre>
<p>As we’ll learn in Chapter 5,
            we have to be cautious when talking back and forth to a program
            like this; buffered output streams can lead to deadlock if writes
            and reads are interleaved, and we may eventually need to consider
            tools like the Pexpect utility <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e11012"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e11017"></a>as a workaround (more on this later).</p>
<p>Finally, even more exotic stream control is possible—the
            following <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>connects two programs</em></span>, by piping
            the output of one Python script into another, first with shell
            syntax, and then with the <code class="epub__literal">subprocess</code> module:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e11031"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Streams&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python writer.py | python reader.py</code></strong>
Got this: "Help! Help! I'm being repressed!"
The meaning of life is 42 84

C:\...\PP4E\System\Streams&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from subprocess import Popen, PIPE</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>p1 = Popen('python writer.py', stdout=PIPE)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>p2 = Popen('python reader.py', stdin=p1.stdout, stdout=PIPE)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>output = p2.communicate()[0]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>output</code></strong>
b'Got this: "Help! Help! I\'m being repressed!"\r\nThe meaning of life is 42 84\r\n'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>p2.returncode</code></strong>
0</pre>
<p>We can get close to this with <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code>, but that the fact that its
            pipes are read or write (and not both) prevents us from catching
            the second script’s output in our <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e11063"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e11065"></a>code:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e11068"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import os</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>p1 = os.popen('python writer.py', 'r')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>p2 = os.popen('python reader.py', 'w')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>p2.write( p1.read() )</code></strong>
36
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = p2.close()</code></strong>
Got this: "Help! Help! I'm being repressed!"
The meaning of life is 42 84
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(X)</code></strong>
None</pre>
<p>From the broader perspective, the <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code> call and <code class="epub__literal">subprocess</code> module are Python’s portable
            equivalents of Unix-like shell syntax for redirecting the streams
            of spawned programs. The Python versions also work on Windows,
            though, and are the most <span>platform</span>-<span>neutral</span> way to launch another
            program from a Python script. The command-line strings you pass to
            them may vary per platform (e.g., a directory listing requires an
            <code class="epub__literal">ls</code> on Unix but a <code class="epub__literal">dir</code> on Windows), but the call itself
            works on all major Python <span>platforms</span>.</p>
<p>On Unix-like platforms, the combination of the
            calls<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e11115"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e11122"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e11129"></a> <code class="epub__literal">os.fork</code>,
            <code class="epub__literal">os.pipe</code>, <code class="epub__literal">os.dup</code>, and some <code class="epub__literal">os.exec</code> variants can also be used to
            start a new independent program with streams connected to the
            parent program’s streams. As such, it’s yet another way to
            redirect streams and a low-level equivalent to tools such as
            <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code> (<code class="epub__literal">os.fork</code> is available in Cygwin’s Python
            on Windows).</p>
<p>Since these are all more advanced parallel processing tools,
            though, we’ll defer further details on this front until Chapter 5, especially its coverage of
            pipes and exit status codes. And we’ll resurrect <code class="epub__literal">subprocess</code> again in Chapter 6, to code a regression tester
            that intercepts all <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>three</em></span> standard streams of
            spawned test scripts—inputs, outputs, and errors.</p>
<p>But first, Chapter 4
            continues our survey of Python system interfaces by exploring the
            tools available for processing files and directories. Although
            we’ll be shifting focus somewhat, we’ll find that some of what
            we’ve learned here will already begin to come in handy as general
            system-related tools. Spawning shell commands, for instance,
            provides ways to inspect directories, and the file interface we
            will expand on in the next chapter is at the heart of the stream
            processing techniques we have studied <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e11170"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e11172"></a>here.</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="python_versus_csh"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Python Versus csh</p>
<p>If you are familiar with other common shell script
              languages, it might be useful to see how Python compares. Here
              is a simple script in a Unix shell language <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e11181"></a>called <code class="epub__literal">csh</code> that
              mails all the files in the current working directory with a
              suffix of <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>.py</em></span> (i.e., all Python source
              files) to a hopefully fictitious address:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e11192"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">#!/bin/csh
foreach x (*.py)
    echo $x
    mail eric@halfabee.com -s $x &lt; $x
end</pre>
<p>An equivalent Python script looks similar:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e11196"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">#!/usr/bin/python
import os, glob
for x in glob.glob('*.py'):
    print(x)
    os.system('mail eric@halfabee.com -s %s &lt; %s' % (x, x))</pre>
<p>but is slightly more verbose. Since Python, unlike
              <code class="epub__literal">csh</code>, isn’t meant just for
              shell scripts, system interfaces must be imported and called
              explicitly. And since Python isn’t just a string-processing
              language, character strings must be enclosed in quotes, as in
              C.</p>
<p>Although this can add a few extra keystrokes in simple
              scripts like this, being a general-purpose language makes Python
              a better tool once we leave the realm of trivial programs. We
              could, for example, extend the preceding script to do things
              like transfer files by FTP, pop up a GUI message selector and
              status bar, fetch messages from an SQL database, and employ COM
              objects on Windows, all using standard Python tools.</p>
<p>Python scripts also tend to be more portable to other
              platforms than <code class="epub__literal">csh</code>. For
              instance, if we used the Python SMTP interface module to send
              mail instead of relying on a Unix command-line mail tool, the
              script would run on any machine with Python and an Internet link
              (as we’ll see in Chapter 13, SMTP
              requires only sockets). And like C, we don’t need <code class="epub__literal">$</code> to evaluate variables; what else
              would you expect in a free language?</p>
</div>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[8] </sup>Notice that <code class="epub__literal">input</code>
              raises an exception to signal end-of-file, but file read methods
              simply return an empty string for this condition. Because
              <code class="epub__literal">input</code> also strips the
              end-of-line character at the end of lines, an empty string
              result means an empty line, so an exception is necessary to
              specify the end-of-file condition. File read methods retain the
              end-of-line character and denote an empty line as <code class="epub__literal">"\n"</code> instead of <code class="epub__literal">""</code>. This is one way in which reading
              <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdin</code> directly differs
              from <code class="epub__literal">input</code>. The latter also
              accepts a prompt string that is automatically printed before
              input is accepted.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
