<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>File Tools</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="File Tools"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="file_tools"></a>File Tools</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>External files <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e11232"></a>are at the heart of much of what we do with system
        utilities. For instance, a testing system may read its inputs from one
        file, store program results in another file, and check expected
        results by loading yet another file. Even user interface and
        Internet-oriented programs may load binary images and audio clips from
        files on the underlying computer. It’s a core programming
        concept.</p>
<p>In Python, the built-in <code class="epub__literal">open</code>
<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e11243"></a>function is the primary tool scripts use to access the
        files on the underlying computer system. Since this function is an
        inherent part of the Python language, you may already be familiar with
        its basic workings. When called, the <code class="epub__literal">open</code> function returns a new<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e11252"></a> <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>file object</em></span> that is connected to
        the external file; the file object has methods that transfer data to
        and from the file and perform a variety of file-related operations.
        The <code class="epub__literal">open</code> function also provides a
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>portable</em></span> interface to the underlying
        filesystem—it works the same way on every platform on which Python
        runs.</p>
<p>Other file-related modules built into Python allow us to do
        things such as manipulate lower-level descriptor-based files (<code class="epub__literal">os</code>); copy, remove, and move files and
        collections of files (<code class="epub__literal">os</code> and
        <code class="epub__literal">shutil</code>); store data and objects in
        files by key (<code class="epub__literal">dbm</code> and <code class="epub__literal">shelve</code>); and access SQL databases (<code class="epub__literal">sqlite3</code> and third-party add-ons). The last
        two of these categories are related to database topics, addressed in
        Chapter 17.</p>
<p>In this section, we’ll take a brief tutorial look at the
        built-in file object and explore a handful of more advanced
        file-related topics. As usual, you should consult either Python’s
        library manual or reference books such as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Python Pocket
        Reference</em></span> for further details and methods we don’t
        have space to cover here. Remember, for quick interactive help, you
        can also run <code class="epub__literal">dir(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>file</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code> on an open file object to see an
        attributes list that includes methods; <code class="epub__literal">help(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>file</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code> for general help; and <code class="epub__literal">help(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>file</code></em><code class="epub__literal">.read)</code> for help on a specific method such as
        <code class="epub__literal">read</code>, though the file object
        implementation in 3.1 provides less information for <code class="epub__literal">help</code> than the library manual and other
        resources.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The File Object Model in Python 3.X"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_file_object_model_in_python_3.x"></a>The File Object Model in Python 3.X</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Just like the string <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e11330"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e11335"></a>types we noted in Chapter 2,
          file support in Python 3.X is a bit richer than it was in the past.
          As we noted earlier, in Python 3.X <code class="epub__literal">str</code> strings always represent Unicode text
          (ASCII or wider), and <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> and
          <code class="epub__literal">bytearray</code> strings represent raw
          binary data. Python 3.X draws a similar and related distinction
          between files containing text and binary data:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Text files</em></span> <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e11358"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e11363"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e11368"></a>contain Unicode text. In your script, text file
              content is always a <code class="epub__literal">str</code>
<span>string—</span>a sequence of
              characters (technically, Unicode “code points”). Text files
              perform the automatic line-end translations described in this
              chapter by default and automatically apply Unicode encodings to
              file content: they encode to and decode from raw binary bytes on
              transfers to and from the file, according to a provided or
              default encoding name. Encoding is trivial for ASCII text, but
              may be sophisticated in other cases.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Binary files</em></span> <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e11385"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e11390"></a>contain raw 8-bit bytes. In your script, binary
              file content is always a byte string, usually a <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> object—a sequence of small
              integers, which supports most <code class="epub__literal">str</code> operations and displays as ASCII
              characters whenever possible. Binary files perform no
              translations of data when it is transferred to and from files:
              no line-end translations or Unicode encodings are
              performed.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>In practice, text files are used for all truly text-related
          data, and binary files store items like packed binary data, images,
          audio files, executables, and so on. As a programmer you distinguish
          between the two file types in the mode string argument you pass to
          <code class="epub__literal">open</code>: adding a “b” (e.g.,
          <code class="epub__literal">'rb'</code>, <code class="epub__literal">'wb'</code>) means the file contains binary data.
          For coding new file content, use normal strings for text (e.g.,
          <code class="epub__literal">'spam'</code> or <code class="epub__literal">bytes.decode()</code>) and byte strings for
          binary (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">b'spam'</code> or <code class="epub__literal">str.encode()</code>).</p>
<p>Unless your file scope is limited to ASCII text, the 3.X
          text/binary distinction can sometimes impact your code. Text files
          create and require <code class="epub__literal">str</code> strings,
          and binary files use byte strings; because you cannot freely mix the
          two string types in expressions, you must choose file mode
          carefully. Many built-in tools we’ll use in this book make the
          choice for us; the <code class="epub__literal">struct</code> and
          <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> modules, for instance,
          deal in byte strings in 3.X, and the <code class="epub__literal">xml</code> package in Unicode <code class="epub__literal">str</code>. You must even be aware of the 3.X
          text/binary distinction when using system tools like pipe
          descriptors and <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>sockets</em></span>, because they transfer
          data as byte strings today (though their content can be decoded and
          encoded as Unicode text if needed).</p>
<p>Moreover, because text-mode files require that content be
          decodable per a Unicode encoding scheme, you must read undecodable
          file content in binary mode, as byte strings (or catch Unicode
          exceptions in <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statements and
          skip the file altogether). This may include both truly binary files
          as well as text files that use encodings that are nondefault and
          unknown. As we’ll see later in this chapter, because <code class="epub__literal">str</code> strings are always Unicode in 3.X,
          it’s sometimes also necessary to select byte string mode for the
          names of files in directory tools such as <code class="epub__literal">os.listdir</code>, <code class="epub__literal">glob.glob</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code> if they cannot be decoded (passing
          in byte strings essentially suppresses decoding).</p>
<p>In fact, we’ll see examples where the Python 3.X distinction
          between <code class="epub__literal">str</code> text and <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> binary pops up in tools beyond basic
          files throughout this book—in Chapters 5
          and 12 when we explore sockets; in
          Chapters 6 and 11
          when we’ll need to ignore Unicode errors in file and directory
          searches; in Chapter 12, where we’ll see
          how client-side Internet protocol modules such as FTP and email,
          which run atop sockets, imply file modes and encoding requirements;
          and more.</p>
<p>But just as for string types, although we will see some of
          these concepts in action in this chapter, we’re going to take much
          of this story as a given here. File and string objects are core
          language material and are prerequisite to this text. As mentioned
          earlier, because they are addressed by a 45-page chapter in the book
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Learning
          Python</em></span>, Fourth Edition, I won’t repeat their
          coverage in full in this book. If you find yourself confused by the
          Unicode and binary file and string concepts in the following
          sections, I encourage you to refer to that text or other resources
          for more background information in this <span>domain</span>.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Using Built-in File Objects"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="using_built-in_file_objects"></a>Using Built-in File Objects</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Despite the text/binary <a id="file4.2.2a"></a><a id="file4.2.2b"></a>dichotomy in Python 3.X, files are still very
          straightforward to use. For most purposes, in fact, the<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e11508"></a> <code class="epub__literal">open</code> built-in
          function and its files objects are all you need to remember to
          process files in your scripts. The file object returned by <code class="epub__literal">open</code> has methods for reading data
          (<code class="epub__literal">read</code>, <code class="epub__literal">readline</code>, <code class="epub__literal">readlines</code>); writing data (<code class="epub__literal">write</code>, <code class="epub__literal">writelines</code>); freeing system resources
          (<code class="epub__literal">close</code>); moving to arbitrary
          positions in the file (<code class="epub__literal">seek</code>);
          forcing data in output buffers to be transferred to disk (<code class="epub__literal">flush</code>); fetching the underlying file
          handle (<code class="epub__literal">fileno</code>); and more. Since
          the built-in file object is so easy to use, let’s jump right into a
          few interactive examples.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Output files"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="output_files"></a>Output files</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To make a new <a id="out4.2.2.1"></a><a id="file4.2.2.1"></a>file, call <code class="epub__literal">open</code>
            with two arguments: the external <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>name</em></span> of the
            file to be created and a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>mode</em></span> string <code class="epub__literal">w</code> (short for
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>write</em></span>). To store data on the file, call the
            <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e11579"></a>file object’s <code class="epub__literal">write</code> method with a string containing
            the data to store, and then call the<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e11588"></a> <code class="epub__literal">close</code> method to
            close the file. File <code class="epub__literal">write</code>
            calls return the number of characters or bytes written (which
            we’ll sometimes omit in this book to save space), and as we’ll
            see, <code class="epub__literal">close</code> calls are often
            optional, unless you need to open and read the file again during
            the same program or session:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e11604"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\temp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file = open('data.txt', 'w')</code></strong>            # open output file object: creates
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.write('Hello file world!\n')</code></strong>       # writes strings verbatim
18
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.write('Bye   file world.\n')</code></strong>       # returns number chars/bytes written
18
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.close()</code></strong>                            # closed on gc and exit too</pre>
<p>And that’s it—you’ve just generated a brand-new text file on
            your computer, regardless of the computer on which you type this
            code:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e11623"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\temp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dir data.txt /B</code></strong>
data.txt

C:\temp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type data.txt</code></strong>
Hello file world!
Bye   file world.</pre>
<p>There is nothing unusual about the new file; here, I use the
            DOS <code class="epub__literal">dir</code> and <code class="epub__literal">type</code> commands to list and display the
            new file, but it shows up in a file explorer GUI, too.</p>
<div class="epub__sect4" title="Opening"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h4 class="epub__title"><a id="opening"></a>Opening</h4>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In the <code class="epub__literal">open</code> function
              <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e11647"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e11650"></a>call shown in the preceding example, the first
              argument can optionally specify a complete directory path as
              part of the filename string. If we pass just a simple filename
              without a path, the file will appear in Python’s current working
              directory. That is, it shows up in the place where the code is
              run. Here, the directory <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>C:\temp</em></span> on my
              machine is implied by the bare filename
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>data.txt</em></span>, so this actually creates a file
              at <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>C:\temp\data.txt</em></span>. More accurately, the
              filename is relative to the current working directory if it does
              not include a complete absolute directory path. See Current Working Directory (Chapter 3), for a refresher on this
              topic.</p>
<p>Also note that when opening in <code class="epub__literal">w</code> mode, Python either creates the
              external file if it does not yet exist or erases the file’s
              current contents if it is already present on your machine (so be
              careful out there—you’ll delete whatever was in the file
              before).</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect4" title="Writing"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h4 class="epub__title"><a id="writing"></a>Writing</h4>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Notice that we <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e11680"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e11685"></a>added an explicit <code class="epub__literal">\n</code> end-of-line character to lines
              written to the file; unlike the <code class="epub__literal">print</code> built-in function, file object
              <code class="epub__literal">write</code> methods write exactly
              what they are passed without adding any extra formatting. The
              string passed to <code class="epub__literal">write</code> shows
              up character for character on the external file. In text files,
              data written may undergo line-end or Unicode translations which
              we’ll describe ahead, but these are undone when the data is
              later read back.</p>
<p>Output files also sport <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e11705"></a>a <code class="epub__literal">writelines</code>
              method, which simply writes all of the strings in a list one at
              a time without adding any extra formatting. For example, here is
              a <code class="epub__literal">writelines</code> equivalent to
              the two <code class="epub__literal">write</code> calls shown
              earlier:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e11720"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">file.writelines(['Hello file world!\n', 'Bye   file world.\n'])</pre>
<p>This call isn’t as commonly used (and can be emulated with
              a simple <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop or other
              iteration tool), but it is convenient in scripts that save
              output in a list to be written later.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect4" title="Closing"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h4 class="epub__title"><a id="closing"></a>Closing</h4>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The file <code class="epub__literal">close</code> method
              <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e11735"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e11740"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e11743"></a>used earlier finalizes file contents and frees up
              system resources. For instance, closing forces buffered output
              data to be flushed out to disk. Normally, files are
              automatically closed when the file object is garbage collected
              by the interpreter (that is, when it is no longer referenced).
              This includes all remaining open files when the Python session
              or program exits. Because of that, <code class="epub__literal">close</code> calls are often optional. In
              fact, it’s common to see file-processing code in Python in this
              idiom:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e11752"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">open('somefile.txt', 'w').write("G'day Bruce\n")       # write to temporary object
open('somefile.txt', 'r').read()                       # read from temporary object</pre>
<p>Since both these expressions make a temporary file object,
              use it immediately, and do not save a reference to it, the file
              object is reclaimed right after data is transferred, and is
              automatically closed in the process. There is usually no need
              for such code to call the <code class="epub__literal">close</code> method explicitly.</p>
<p>In some contexts, though, you may wish to explicitly close
              anyhow:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>For one, because the Jython implementation relies on
                  Java’s garbage collector, you can’t always be as sure about
                  when files will be reclaimed as you can in standard Python.
                  If you run your Python code with Jython, you may need to
                  close manually if many files are created in a short amount
                  of time (e.g. in a loop), in order to avoid running out of
                  file resources on operating systems where this
                  matters.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>For another, some IDEs, such as Python’s standard IDLE
                  GUI, may hold on to your file objects longer than you expect
                  (in stack tracebacks of prior errors, for instance), and
                  thus prevent them from being garbage collected as soon as
                  you might expect. If you write to an output file in IDLE, be
                  sure to explicitly close (or flush) your file if you need to
                  reliably read it back during the same IDLE session.
                  Otherwise, output buffers might not be flushed to disk and
                  your file may be incomplete when read.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>And while it seems very unlikely today, it’s not
                  impossible that this auto-close on reclaim file feature
                  could change in future. This is technically a feature of the
                  file object’s implementation, which may or may not be
                  considered part of the language definition over time.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>For these reasons, manual close calls are not a bad idea
              in nontrivial programs, even if they are technically not
              required. Closing is a generally harmless but robust habit to
              <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e11773"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e11775"></a>form.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Ensuring file closure: Exception handlers and context managers"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="ensuring_file_closure_colon_exception_ha"></a>Ensuring file closure: Exception handlers and context
            managers</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Manual file <a id="file4.2.2.2"></a><a id="ex4.2.2.2"></a><a id="con4.2.2.2"></a><a id="cl4.2.2.2"></a><a id="files4.2.2.2"></a>close method calls are easy in straight-line code,
            but how do you ensure file closure when exceptions might kick your
            program beyond the point where the close call is coded? First of
            all, make sure you must—files close themselves when they are
            collected, and this will happen eventually, even when exceptions
            occur.</p>
<p>If closure is required, though, there are two basic
            alternatives: the<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e11807"></a> <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement’s
            <code class="epub__literal">finally</code> clause is the most
            general, since it allows you to provide general exit actions for
            any type of exceptions:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e11817"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">myfile = open(filename, 'w')
try:
    ...process myfile...
finally:
    myfile.close()</pre>
<p>In recent Python releases, though, the<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e11821"></a> <code class="epub__literal">with</code> statement
            provides a more concise alternative for some specific objects and
            exit actions, including closing files:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e11828"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">with open(filename, 'w') as myfile:
    ...process myfile, auto-closed on statement exit...</pre>
<p>This statement relies on the file object’s context manager:
            code automatically run both on statement entry and on statement
            exit regardless of exception behavior. Because the file object’s
            exit code closes the file automatically, this guarantees file
            closure whether an exception occurs during the statement or
            not.</p>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">with</code> statement is
            notably shorter (3 lines) than the <code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">finally</code> alternative, but it’s also less
            general—<code class="epub__literal">with</code> applies only to
            objects that support the context manager protocol, whereas
            <code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">finally</code> allows arbitrary exit actions
            for arbitrary exception contexts. While some other object types
            have context managers, too (e.g., thread locks), <code class="epub__literal">with</code> is limited in scope. In fact, if
            you want to remember just one exit actions option, <code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">finally</code> is the most inclusive. Still,
            <code class="epub__literal">with</code> yields less code for files
            that must be closed and can serve well in such specific roles. It
            can even save a line of code when no <span>exceptions</span> are expected (albeit at
            the expense of further nesting and indenting file <span>processing</span> logic):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e11872"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">myfile = open(filename, 'w')               # traditional form
...process myfile...
myfile.close()

with open(filename) as myfile:             # context manager form
    ...process myfile...</pre>
<p>In Python 3.1 and later, this statement can also specify
            multiple (a.k.a. nested) context managers—any number of context
            manager items may be separated by commas, and multiple items work
            the same as nested <code class="epub__literal">with</code>
            statements. In general terms, the 3.1 and later code:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e11879"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">with A() as a, B() as b:
    ...statements...</pre>
<p>Runs the same as the following, which works in 3.1, 3.0, and
            2.6:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e11884"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">with A() as a:
    with B() as b:
        ...statements...</pre>
<p>For example, when the <code class="epub__literal">with</code> statement block exits in the
            following, both files’ exit actions are automatically run to close
            the files, regardless of exception outcomes:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e11891"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">with open('data') as fin, open('results', 'w') as fout:
    for line in fin:
        fout.write(transform(line))</pre>
<p>Context manager–dependent code like this seems to have
            become more common in recent years, but this is likely at least in
            part because newcomers are accustomed to languages that require
            manual close calls in all cases. In most contexts there is no need
            to wrap all your Python file-processing code in <code class="epub__literal">with</code> statements—the files object’s
            auto-close-on-collection behavior often suffices, and manual close
            calls are enough for many other scripts. You should use the
            <code class="epub__literal">with</code> or <code class="epub__literal">try</code> options outlined here only if you
            must close, and only in the presence of potential exceptions.
            Since standard C Python automatically closes files on collection,
            though, neither option is required in many (and perhaps <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e11904"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e11906"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e11908"></a>most) scripts.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Input files"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="input_files"></a>Input files</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Reading data <a id="file4.2.2.3"></a><a id="in4.2.2.3"></a>from external files is just as easy as writing, but
            there are more methods that let us load data in a variety of
            modes. Input text files are opened with either a mode flag of
            <code class="epub__literal">r</code> (for “read”) or no mode flag
            at all—it defaults to <code class="epub__literal">r</code> if
            omitted, and it commonly is. Once opened, we can read the lines of
            a text file with the<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e11931"></a> <code class="epub__literal">readlines</code>
            method:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e11940"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\temp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file = open('data.txt')</code></strong>                  # open input file object: 'r' default
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>lines = file.readlines()</code></strong>                 # read into line string list
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for line in lines:</code></strong>                       # BUT use file line iterator! (ahead)
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(line, end='')</code></strong>                  # lines have a '\n' at end
...
Hello file world!
Bye   file world.</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">readlines</code> method
            loads the entire contents of the file into memory and gives it to
            our scripts as a list of line strings that we can step through in
            a loop. In fact, there are many ways to read an input file:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">file.read()</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Returns a string <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e11970"></a>containing all the characters (or bytes)
                  stored in the file</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">file.read(N)</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Returns a string containing the next N characters (or
                  bytes) from the file</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">file.readline()</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Reads through <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e11990"></a>the next <code class="epub__literal">\n</code>
                  and returns a line string</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">file.readlines()</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Reads the entire <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e12006"></a>file and returns a list of line strings</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Let’s run these method calls to read files, lines, and
            characters from a text file—the <code class="epub__literal">seek(0)</code> call is used here before each
            test to rewind the file to its beginning (more on this call in a
            moment):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e12018"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.seek(0)</code></strong>                               # go back to the front of file
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.read()</code></strong>                                # read entire file into string
'Hello file world!\nBye   file world.\n'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.seek(0)</code></strong>                               # read entire file into lines list
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.readlines()</code></strong>
['Hello file world!\n', 'Bye   file world.\n']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.seek(0)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.readline()</code></strong>                            # read one line at a time
'Hello file world!\n'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.readline()</code></strong>
'Bye   file world.\n'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.readline()</code></strong>                            # empty string at end-of-file
''

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.seek(0)</code></strong>                               # read N (or remaining) chars/bytes
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.read(1), file.read(8)</code></strong>                 # empty string at end-of-file
('H', 'ello fil')</pre>
<p>All of these input methods let us be specific about how much
            to fetch. Here are a few rules of thumb about which to
            choose:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">read()</code> and <code class="epub__literal">readlines()</code> load the
                <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>entire file</em></span> into memory all at once. That
                makes them handy for grabbing a file’s contents with as little
                code as possible. It also makes them generally fast, but
                costly in terms of memory for huge files—loading a
                multigigabyte file into memory is not generally a good thing
                to do (and might not be possible at all on a given
                computer).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>On the other hand, because the <code class="epub__literal">readline()</code> and <code class="epub__literal">read(N)</code> calls fetch just
                <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>part of the file</em></span> (the next line or
                N-character-or-byte block), they are safer for potentially big
                files but a bit less convenient and sometimes slower. Both
                return an empty string when they reach end-of-file. If speed
                matters and your files aren’t huge, <code class="epub__literal">read</code> or <code class="epub__literal">readlines</code> may be a generally better
                choice.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>See also the discussion of the newer file iterators in
                the next section. As we’ll see, iterators combine the
                convenience of <code class="epub__literal">readlines()</code>
                with the space efficiency of <code class="epub__literal">readline()</code> and are the preferred way
                to read text files by lines today.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">seek(0)</code> call used
            repeatedly here means “go back to the start of the file.” In our
            example, it is an alternative to reopening the file each time. In
            files, all read and write operations take place at the current
            position; files normally start at offset 0 when opened and advance
            as data is transferred. The <code class="epub__literal">seek</code> call simply lets us move to a new
            position for the next transfer operation. More on this method
            later when we explore random access <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e12100"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e12102"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e12104"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e12106"></a>files.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Reading lines with file iterators"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="reading_lines_with_file_iterators"></a>Reading lines with file iterators</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In older versions <a id="it4.2.2.4"></a>of Python, the traditional way to read a file line
            by line in a <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop was to
            read the file into a list that could be stepped through as
            usual:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e12122"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file = open('data.txt')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for line in file.readlines():</code></strong>    # DON'T DO THIS ANYMORE!
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(line, end='')</code></strong></pre>
<p>If you’ve already studied the core language using a first
            book like <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Learning
            Python</em></span>, you may already know that this coding
            pattern is actually more work than is needed <span>today—</span>both for you and your
            computer’s memory. In recent Pythons, the file object includes an
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>iterator</em></span> which is smart enough to grab just
            one line per request in all iteration contexts, including <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops and list comprehensions. The
            practical benefit of this extension is that you no longer need to
            call<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e12147"></a> <code class="epub__literal">readlines</code> in a
            <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop to scan line by
            line—the iterator reads lines on request automatically:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e12160"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file = open('data.txt')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for line in file:</code></strong>                  # no need to call readlines
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(line, end='')</code></strong>            # iterator reads next line each time
...
Hello file world!
Bye   file world.</pre>
<p>Better still, you can open the file in the loop statement
            itself, as a temporary which will be automatically closed on
            garbage collection when the loop ends (that’s normally the file’s
            sole reference):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e12173"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for line in open('data.txt'):</code></strong>      # even shorter: temporary file object
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(line, end='')</code></strong>            # auto-closed when garbage collected
...
Hello file world!
Bye   file world.</pre>
<p>Moreover, this file line-iterator form does not load the
            entire file into a line’s list all at once, so it will be more
            space efficient for large text files. Because of that, this is the
            prescribed way to read line by line today. If you want to see what
            really happens inside the <code class="epub__literal">for</code>
            loop, you can use the iterator manually; it’s just a <code class="epub__literal">__next__</code> method (run by the <code class="epub__literal">next</code> built-in function), which is
            similar to calling the<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e12192"></a> <code class="epub__literal">readline</code> method
            each time through, except that read methods return an empty string
            at end-of-file (<code class="epub__literal">EOF</code>) and the
            iterator raises an exception to end the iteration:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e12205"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file = open('data.txt')</code></strong>      # read methods: empty at EOF
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.readline()</code></strong>
'Hello file world!\n'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.readline()</code></strong>
'Bye   file world.\n'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.readline()</code></strong>
''

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file = open('data.txt')</code></strong>      # iterators: exception at EOF
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.__next__()</code></strong>              # no need to call iter(file) first,
'Hello file world!\n'            # since files are their own iterator
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.__next__()</code></strong>
'Bye   file world.\n'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.__next__()</code></strong>
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "&lt;stdin&gt;", line 1, in &lt;module&gt;
StopIteration</pre>
<p>Interestingly, iterators are automatically used in all
            iteration contexts, including the <code class="epub__literal">list</code> constructor call, list
            comprehension expressions, <code class="epub__literal">map</code>
            calls, and <code class="epub__literal">in</code> membership
            checks:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e12243"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('data.txt').readlines()</code></strong>                             # always read lines
['Hello file world!\n', 'Bye   file world.\n']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(open('data.txt'))</code></strong>                                   # force line iteration
['Hello file world!\n', 'Bye   file world.\n']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>lines = [line.rstrip() for line in open('data.txt')]</code></strong>     # comprehension
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>lines</code></strong>
['Hello file world!', 'Bye   file world.']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>lines = [line.upper() for line in open('data.txt')]</code></strong>      # arbitrary actions
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>lines</code></strong>
['HELLO FILE WORLD!\n', 'BYE   FILE WORLD.\n']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(map(str.split, open('data.txt')))</code></strong>                   # apply a function
[['Hello', 'file', 'world!'], ['Bye', 'file', 'world.']]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>line = 'Hello file world!\n'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>line in open('data.txt')</code></strong>                                 # line membership
True</pre>
<p>Iterators may seem somewhat implicit at first glance, but
            they’re representative of the many ways that Python makes
            developers’ lives easier over <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e12276"></a>time.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Other open options"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="other_open_options"></a>Other open options</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Besides the <code class="epub__literal">w</code> <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e12287"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e12292"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e12297"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e12300"></a>and (default) <code class="epub__literal">r</code>
            file open modes, most platforms support an <code class="epub__literal">a</code> mode string, meaning “append.” In this
            output mode, <code class="epub__literal">write</code> methods add
            data to the end of the file, and the <code class="epub__literal">open</code> call will not erase the current
            contents of the file:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e12319"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file = open('data.txt', 'a')</code></strong>          # open in append mode: doesn't erase
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.write('The Life of Brian')</code></strong>       # added at end of existing data
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.close()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('data.txt').read()</code></strong>               # open and read entire file
'Hello file world!\nBye   file world.\nThe Life of Brian'</pre>
<p>In fact, although most files are opened using the sorts of
            calls we just ran, <code class="epub__literal">open</code>
            actually supports additional arguments for more specific
            processing needs, the first three of which are the most commonly
            used—the filename, the open mode, and a buffering specification.
            All but the first of these are optional: if omitted, the open mode
            argument defaults to <code class="epub__literal">r</code> (input),
            and the buffering policy is to enable full buffering. For special
            needs, here are a few things you should know about these three
            <code class="epub__literal">open</code> arguments:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Filename</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>As mentioned earlier, filenames can include an
                  explicit directory path to refer to files in arbitrary
                  places on your computer; if they do not, they are taken to
                  be names relative to the current working directory
                  (described in the prior chapter). In general, most filename
                  forms you can type in your system shell will work in an
                  <code class="epub__literal">open</code> call. For instance,
                  a relative filename argument <code class="epub__literal">r'..\temp\spam.txt'</code> on Windows
                  means <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>spam.txt</em></span> in the
                  <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>temp</em></span> subdirectory of the current
                  working directory’s <span>parent—</span>up one, and down to
                  directory <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>temp</em></span>.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Open mode</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">open</code> function
                  <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e12381"></a>accepts other modes, too, some of which we’ll
                  see at work later in this chapter: <code class="epub__literal">r+</code>, <code class="epub__literal">w+</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">a+</code> to open for reads
                  <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>and</em></span> writes, and any mode string with a
                  <code class="epub__literal">b</code> to designate binary
                  mode. For instance, mode <code class="epub__literal">r+</code> means both reads and writes are
                  allowed on an existing file; <code class="epub__literal">w+</code> allows reads and writes but
                  creates the file anew, erasing any prior content; <code class="epub__literal">rb</code> and <code class="epub__literal">wb</code> read and write data in binary
                  mode without any translations; and <code class="epub__literal">wb+</code> and <code class="epub__literal">r+b</code> both combine binary mode and
                  input plus output. In general, the mode string defaults to
                  <code class="epub__literal">r</code> for read but can be
                  <code class="epub__literal">w</code> for write and <code class="epub__literal">a</code> for append, and you may add a
                  <code class="epub__literal">+</code> for update, as well as
                  a <code class="epub__literal">b</code> or <code class="epub__literal">t</code> for binary or text mode; order
                  is largely irrelevant.</p>
<p>As we’ll see later in this chapter, the <code class="epub__literal">+</code> modes are often used in
                  conjunction with the file object’s <code class="epub__literal">seek</code> method to achieve random
                  read/write access. Regardless of mode, file contents are
                  always strings in Python programs—read methods return a
                  string, and we pass a string to write methods. As also
                  described later, though, the mode string implies which type
                  of string is used: <code class="epub__literal">str</code>
                  for text mode or <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>
                  and other byte string types for binary mode.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Buffering policy</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">open</code> call also
                  takes an optional third buffering policy argument which lets
                  you control buffering for the file—the way that data is
                  queued up before being transferred, to boost performance. If
                  passed, 0 means file operations are unbuffered (data is
                  transferred immediately, but allowed in binary modes only),
                  1 means they are line buffered, and any other positive value
                  means to use a full buffering (which is the default, if no
                  buffering argument is passed).</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>As usual, Python’s library manual and reference texts have
            the full story on additional <code class="epub__literal">open</code> arguments beyond these three. For
            instance, the <code class="epub__literal">open</code> call
            supports additional arguments related to the
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>end-of-line</em></span> mapping behavior and the
            automatic Unicode <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>encoding</em></span> of content
            performed for text-mode files. Since we’ll discuss both of these
            concepts in the next section, let’s move <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e12479"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e12481"></a>ahead.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Binary and Text Files"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="binary_and_text_files"></a>Binary and Text Files</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>All of the <a id="file4.2.3a"></a><a id="file4.2.3b"></a>preceding examples process simple text files, but
          Python scripts can also open and process files containing<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e12500"></a> <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>binary</em></span> data—JPEG images, audio
          clips, packed binary data produced by FORTRAN and C programs,
          encoded text, and anything else that can be stored in files as
          bytes. The primary difference in terms of your code is the
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>mode</em></span> argument passed to the built-in <code class="epub__literal">open</code> function:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e12515"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file = open('data.txt', 'wb')</code></strong>      # open binary output file
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file = open('data.txt', 'rb')</code></strong>      # open binary input file</pre>
<p>Once you’ve opened binary files in this way, you may read and
          write their contents using the same methods just illustrated:
          <code class="epub__literal">read</code>, <code class="epub__literal">write</code>, and so on. The <code class="epub__literal">readline</code> and <code class="epub__literal">readlines</code> methods as well as the file’s
          line iterator still work here for text files opened in binary mode,
          but they don’t make sense for truly binary data that isn’t line
          oriented (end-of-line bytes are meaningless, if they appear at
          all).</p>
<p>In all cases, data transferred between files and your programs
          is represented as Python strings within scripts, even if it is
          binary data. For binary mode files, though, file content is
          represented as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>byte strings</em></span>. Continuing with
          our text file from preceding examples:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e12542"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('data.txt').read()</code></strong>                                   # text mode: str
'Hello file world!\nBye   file world.\nThe Life of Brian'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('data.txt', 'rb').read()</code></strong>                             # binary mode: bytes
b'Hello file world!\r\nBye   file world.\r\nThe Life of Brian'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file = open('data.txt', 'rb')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for line in file: print(line)</code></strong>
...
b'Hello file world!\r\n'
b'Bye   file world.\r\n'
b'The Life of Brian'</pre>
<p>This occurs because Python 3.X treats <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e12558"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e12563"></a>text-mode files as Unicode, and automatically decodes
          content on input and encodes it on output. Binary mode files instead
          give us access to file content as raw byte strings, with no
          translation of content—they reflect exactly what is stored on the
          file. Because <code class="epub__literal">str</code> strings are
          always Unicode text in 3.X, the special <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> string is required to represent
          binary data as a sequence of byte-size integers which may contain
          any 8-bit value. Because normal and byte strings have almost
          identical operation sets, many programs can largely take this on
          faith; but keep in mind that you really <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>must</em></span>
          open truly binary data in binary mode for input, because it will not
          generally be decodable as Unicode text.</p>
<p>Similarly, you must also supply byte strings for binary mode
          output—normal strings are not raw binary data, but are decoded
          Unicode characters (a.k.a. code points) which are encoded to binary
          on text-mode output:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e12580"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('data.bin', 'wb').write(b'Spam\n')</code></strong>
5
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('data.bin', 'rb').read()</code></strong>
b'Spam\n'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('data.bin', 'wb').write('spam\n')</code></strong>
TypeError: must be bytes or buffer, not str</pre>
<p>But notice that this file’s line ends with just <code class="epub__literal">\n</code>, instead of the Windows <code class="epub__literal">\r\n</code> that showed up in the preceding
          example for the text file in binary mode. Strictly speaking, binary
          mode disables Unicode encoding translation, but it also prevents the
          automatic end-of-line character translation performed by text-mode
          files by default. Before we can understand this fully, though, we
          need to study the two main ways in which text files differ from
          binary.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Unicode encodings for text files"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="unicode_encodings_for_text_files"></a>Unicode encodings for text files</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As mentioned earlier, <a id="text4.2.3.1"></a><a id="uni4.2.3.1"></a>text-mode file objects always translate data
            according to a default or provided Unicode encoding type, when the
            data is transferred to and from external file. Their content is
            encoded on files, but decoded in memory. Binary mode files don’t
            perform any such translation, which is what we want for truly
            binary data. For instance, consider the following string, which
            embeds a Unicode character whose binary value is outside the
            normal 7-bit range of the ASCII encoding standard:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e12615"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>data = 'sp\xe4m'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>data</code></strong>
'späm'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>0xe4, bin(0xe4), chr(0xe4)</code></strong>
(228, '0b11100100', 'ä')</pre>
<p>It’s possible to manually encode this string according to a
            variety of Unicode encoding types—its raw binary byte string form
            is different under some encodings:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e12628"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>data.encode('latin1')</code></strong>                  # 8-bit characters: ascii + extras
b'sp\xe4m'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>data.encode('utf8')</code></strong>                    # 2 bytes for special characters only
b'sp\xc3\xa4m'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>data.encode('ascii')</code></strong>                   # does not encode per ascii
UnicodeEncodeError: 'ascii' codec can't encode character '\xe4' in position 2:
ordinal not in range(128)</pre>
<p>Python displays printable characters in these strings
            normally, but nonprintable bytes show as <code class="epub__literal">\xNN</code> hexadecimal escapes which become
            more prevalent under more sophisticated encoding schemes (<code class="epub__literal">cp500</code> in the following is an<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e12647"></a> EBCDIC encoding):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e12651"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>data.encode('utf16')</code></strong>                   # 2 bytes per character plus preamble
b'\xff\xfes\x00p\x00\xe4\x00m\x00'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>data.encode('cp500')</code></strong>                   # an ebcdic encoding: very different
b'\xa2\x97C\x94'</pre>
<p>The encoded results here reflect the string’s raw binary
            form when stored in files. Manual encoding is usually unnecessary,
            though, because text files handle encodings <span>automatically</span> on data
            transfers—reads decode and writes encode, according <span>to the encoding name</span> passed in (or a
            default for the underlying platform: see<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e12667"></a> <code class="epub__literal">sys.</code><code class="epub__literal">get</code><code class="epub__literal">default</code><code class="epub__literal">encoding</code>). Continuing our
            interactive session:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e12682"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('data.txt', 'w', encoding='latin1').write(data)</code></strong>
4
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('data.txt', 'r', encoding='latin1').read()</code></strong>
'späm'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('data.txt', 'rb').read()</code></strong>
b'sp\xe4m'</pre>
<p>If we open in binary mode, though, no encoding translation
            occurs—the last command in the preceding example shows us what’s
            actually stored on the file. To see how file content differs for
            other encodings, let’s save the same string again:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e12695"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('data.txt', 'w', encoding='utf8').write(data)</code></strong>        # encode data per utf8
4
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('data.txt', 'r', encoding='utf8').read()</code></strong>             # decode: undo encoding
'späm'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('data.txt', 'rb').read()</code></strong>                             # no data translations
b'sp\xc3\xa4m'</pre>
<p>This time, raw file content is different, but text mode’s
            auto-decoding makes the string the same by the time it’s read back
            by our script. Really, encodings pertain only to strings while
            they are in files; once they are loaded into memory, strings are
            simply sequences of Unicode characters (“code points”). This
            translation step is what we want for text files, but not for
            binary. Because binary modes skip the translation, you’ll want to
            use them for truly binary data. If fact, you usually must—trying
            to write unencodable data and attempting to read undecodable data
            is an error:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e12709"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('data.txt', 'w', encoding='ascii').write(data)</code></strong>
UnicodeEncodeError: 'ascii' codec can't encode character '\xe4' in position 2:
ordinal not in range(128)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open(r'C:\Python31\python.exe', 'r').read()</code></strong>
UnicodeDecodeError: 'charmap' codec can't decode byte 0x90 in position 2:
character maps to &lt;undefined&gt;</pre>
<p>Binary mode is also a last resort for reading text files, if
            they cannot be decoded per the underlying platform’s default, and
            the encoding type is unknown—the following recreates the original
            strings if encoding type is known, but fails if it is not known
            unless binary mode is used (such failure may occur either on
            inputting the data or printing it, but it fails
            nevertheless):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e12719"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('data.txt', 'w', encoding='cp500').writelines(['spam\n', 'ham\n'])</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('data.txt', 'r', encoding='cp500').readlines()</code></strong>
['spam\n', 'ham\n']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('data.txt', 'r').readlines()</code></strong>
UnicodeDecodeError: 'charmap' codec can't decode byte 0x81 in position 2:
character maps to &lt;undefined&gt;

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('data.txt', 'rb').readlines()</code></strong>
[b'\xa2\x97\x81\x94\r%\x88\x81\x94\r%']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('data.txt', 'rb').read()</code></strong>
b'\xa2\x97\x81\x94\r%\x88\x81\x94\r%'</pre>
<p>If all your text is <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e12738"></a>ASCII you generally can ignore encoding altogether;
            data in files maps directly to characters in strings, because
            ASCII is a subset of most platforms’ default encodings. If you
            must process files created with other encodings, and possibly on
            different platforms (obtained from the Web, for instance), binary
            mode may be required if encoding type is unknown. Keep in mind,
            however, that text in still-encoded binary form might not work as
            you expect: because it is encoded per a given encoding scheme, it
            might not accurately compare or combine with text encoded in other
            schemes.</p>
<p>Again, see other resources for more on the Unicode story.
            We’ll revisit the Unicode story at various points in this book,
            especially in Chapter 9, to
            see how it relates to the tkinter <code class="epub__literal">Text</code> widget, and in Part IV, covering Internet programming,
            to learn what it means for data shipped over networks by protocols
            such as FTP, email, and the Web at large. Text files have another
            feature, though, which is similarly a nonfeature for binary data:
            line-end translations, the topic of the next <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e12751"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e12753"></a>section.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="End-of-line translations for text files"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="end-of-line_translations_for_text_files"></a>End-of-line translations for text files</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>For historical reasons, <a id="end4.2.3.2"></a><a id="text4.2.3.2"></a>the end of a line of text in a file is represented
            by different characters on different platforms. It’s a single
            <code class="epub__literal">\n</code> character on Unix-like
            platforms, but the two-character sequence <code class="epub__literal">\r\n</code> on Windows. That’s why files moved
            between Linux and Windows may look odd in your text editor after
            transfer—they may still be stored using the original platform’s
            end-of-line convention.</p>
<p>For example, most Windows editors handle text in Unix
            format, but Notepad has been a notable exception—text files copied
            from Unix or Linux may look like one long line when viewed in
            Notepad, with strange characters inside (<code class="epub__literal">\n</code>). Similarly, transferring a file from
            Windows to Unix in binary mode retains the <code class="epub__literal">\r</code> characters (which often appear as
            <code class="epub__literal">^M</code> in text editors).</p>
<p>Python scripts that process text files don’t normally have
            to care, because the files object automatically maps the DOS
            <code class="epub__literal">\r\n</code> sequence to a single
            <code class="epub__literal">\n</code>. It works like this by
            <span>default—</span>when scripts are run
            on Windows:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>For files opened in text mode, <code class="epub__literal">\r\n</code> is translated to <code class="epub__literal">\n</code> when input.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>For files opened in text mode, <code class="epub__literal">\n</code> is translated to <code class="epub__literal">\r\n</code> when output.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>For files opened in binary mode, no translation occurs
                on input or output.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>On Unix-like platforms, no translations occur, because
            <code class="epub__literal">\n</code> is used in files. You should
            keep in mind two important consequences of these rules. First, the
            end-of-line character for text-mode files is almost always
            represented as a single <code class="epub__literal">\n</code>
            within Python scripts, regardless of how it is stored in external
            files on the underlying platform. By mapping to and from <code class="epub__literal">\n</code> on input and output, Python hides the
            platform-specific difference.</p>
<p>The second consequence of the mapping is subtler: when
            processing binary files, binary open modes (e.g, <code class="epub__literal">rb</code>, <code class="epub__literal">wb</code>) effectively turn off line-end
            translations. If they did not, the translations listed previously
            could very well corrupt data as it is input or output—a random
            <code class="epub__literal">\r</code> in data might be dropped on
            input, or added for a <code class="epub__literal">\n</code> in the
            data on output. The net effect is that your binary data would be
            trashed when read and written—probably not quite what you want for
            your audio files and images!</p>
<p>This issue has become almost secondary in Python 3.X,
            because we generally cannot use binary data with text-mode files
            anyhow—because text-mode files automatically apply Unicode
            encodings to content, transfers will generally fail when the data
            cannot be decoded on input or encoded on output. Using binary mode
            avoids Unicode errors, and automatically disables line-end
            translations as well (Unicode error can be caught in <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statements as well). Still, the fact
            that binary mode prevents end-of-line translations to protect file
            content is best noted as a separate feature, especially if you
            work in an ASCII-only world where Unicode encoding issues are
            irrelevant.</p>
<p>Here’s the end-of-line translation at work in Python 3.1 on
            Windows—text mode translates to and from the platform-specific
            line-end sequence so our scripts are <span>portable</span>:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e12858"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('temp.txt', 'w').write('shrubbery\n')</code></strong>   # text output mode: \n -&gt; \r\n
10
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('temp.txt', 'rb').read()</code></strong>                # binary input: actual file bytes
b'shrubbery\r\n'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('temp.txt', 'r').read()</code></strong>                 # test input mode: \r\n -&gt; \n
'shrubbery\n'</pre>
<p>By contrast, writing data in binary mode prevents all
            translations as expected, even if the data happens to contain
            bytes that are part of line-ends in text mode (byte strings print
            their characters as ASCII if printable, else as hexadecimal
            escapes):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e12872"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>data = b'a\0b\rc\r\nd'</code></strong>                       # 4 escape code bytes, 4 normal
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>len(data)</code></strong>
8
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('temp.bin', 'wb').write(data)</code></strong>           # write binary data to file as is
8
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('temp.bin', 'rb').read()</code></strong>                # read as binary: no translation
b'a\x00b\rc\r\nd'</pre>
<p>But reading binary data in text mode, whether accidental or
            not, can corrupt the data when transferred because of line-end
            translations (assuming it passes as decodable at all; ASCII bytes
            like these do on this Windows platform):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e12888"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('temp.bin', 'r').read()</code></strong>                 # text mode read: botches \r !
'a\x00b\nc\nd'</pre>
<p>Similarly, writing binary data in text mode can have as the
            same effect—line-end bytes may be changed or inserted (again,
            assuming the data is encodable per the platform’s default):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e12895"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('temp.bin', 'w').write(data)</code></strong>            # must pass str for text mode
TypeError: must be str, not bytes                # use bytes.decode() for to-str
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>data.decode()</code></strong>
'a\x00b\rc\r\nd'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('temp.bin', 'w').write(data.decode())</code></strong>
8
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('temp.bin', 'rb').read()</code></strong>                # text mode write: added \r !
b'a\x00b\rc\r\r\nd'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('temp.bin', 'r').read()</code></strong>                 # again drops, alters \r on input
'a\x00b\nc\n\nd'</pre>
<p>The short story to remember here is that you should
            generally use <code class="epub__literal">\n</code> to refer to
            end-line in all your text file content, and you should always open
            binary data in binary file modes to suppress both end-of-line
            translations and any Unicode encodings. A file’s content generally
            determines its open mode, and file open modes usually process file
            content exactly as we want.</p>
<p>Keep in mind, though, that you might also need to use binary
            file modes for text in special contexts. For instance, in Chapter 6’s examples, we’ll sometimes
            open text files in binary mode to avoid possible Unicode decoding
            errors, for files generated on arbitrary platforms that may have
            been encoded in arbitrary ways. Doing so avoids encoding errors,
            but also can mean that some text might not work as
            expected—searches might not always be accurate when applied to
            such raw text, since the search key must be in bytes string
            formatted and encoded according to a specific and possibly
            incompatible encoding scheme.</p>
<p>In Chapter 11’s PyEdit, we’ll
            also need to catch Unicode exceptions in a “grep” directory file
            search utility, and we’ll go further to allow Unicode encodings to
            be specified for file content across entire trees. Moreover, a
            script that attempts to translate between different platforms’
            end-of-line character conventions explicitly may need to read text
            in binary mode to retain the original line-end representation
            truly present in the file; in text mode, they would already be
            translated to <code class="epub__literal">\n</code> by the time
            they reached the script.</p>
<p>It’s also possible to disable or further tailor end-of-line
            translations in text mode with additional <code class="epub__literal">open</code> arguments we will finesse here. See
            the <code class="epub__literal">newline</code> argument in
            <code class="epub__literal">open</code> reference documentation
            for details; in short, passing an empty string to this argument
            also prevents line-end translation but retains other text-mode
            behavior. For this chapter, let’s turn next to two common use
            cases for binary data files: packed binary data and random
            <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e12939"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e12941"></a>access.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Parsing packed binary data with the struct module"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="parsing_packed_binary_data_with_the_stru"></a>Parsing packed binary data with the struct module</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>By using the <a id="bi4.2.3.3"></a><a id="struct4.2.3.3"></a><a id="parsing4.2.3.3"></a>letter <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>b</em></span> in the <code class="epub__literal">open</code> call, you can open binary datafiles
            in a platform-neutral way and read and write their content with
            normal file object methods. But how do you process binary data
            once it has been read? It will be returned to your script as a
            simple string of bytes, most of which are probably not printable
            characters.</p>
<p>If you just need to pass binary data along to another file
            or program, your work is <span>done—</span>for instance, simply pass the
            byte string to another file opened in binary mode. And if you just
            need to extract a number of bytes from a specific position, string
            slicing will do the job; you can even follow up with bitwise
            operations if you need to. To get at the contents of binary data
            in a structured way, though, as well as to construct its contents,
            the standard library <code class="epub__literal">struct</code>
            module is a more powerful alternative.</p>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">struct</code> module
            provides calls to pack and unpack binary data, as though the data
            was laid out in a C-language <code class="epub__literal">struct</code> declaration. It is also capable
            of composing and decomposing using any endian-ness you
            desire<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e12987"></a> (endian-ness determines whether the most
            significant bits of binary numbers are on the left or right side).
            Building a binary datafile, for instance, is straightforward—pack
            Python values into a byte string and write them to a file. The
            format string here in the <code class="epub__literal">pack</code>
            call means big-endian (<code class="epub__literal">&gt;</code>),
            with an integer, four-character string, half integer, and
            floating-point number:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e12997"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import struct</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>data = struct.pack('&gt;i4shf', 2, 'spam', 3, 1.234)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>data</code></strong>
b'\x00\x00\x00\x02spam\x00\x03?\x9d\xf3\xb6'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file = open('data.bin', 'wb')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.write(data)</code></strong>
14
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.close()</code></strong></pre>
<p>Notice how the <code class="epub__literal">struct</code>
            module returns a bytes string: we’re in the realm of binary data
            here, not text, and must use binary mode files to store. As usual,
            Python displays most of the packed binary data’s bytes here with
            <code class="epub__literal">\xNN</code> hexadecimal escape
            sequences, because the bytes are not printable characters. To
            parse data like that which we just produced, read it off the file
            and pass it to the <code class="epub__literal">struct</code>
            module with the same format string—you get back a tuple containing
            the values parsed out of the string and converted to Python
            objects:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e13028"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import struct</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file   = open('data.bin', 'rb')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>data   = file.read()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>values = struct.unpack('&gt;&gt;i4shf', data)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>values</code></strong>
(2, b'spam', 3, 1.2339999675750732)</pre>
<p>Parsed-out strings are byte strings again, and we can apply
            string and bitwise operations to probe deeper:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e13047"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bin(values[0] | 0b1)</code></strong>                            # accessing bits and bytes
'0b11'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>values[1], list(values[1]), values[1][0]</code></strong>
(b'spam', [115, 112, 97, 109], 115)</pre>
<p>Also note that slicing comes in handy in this domain; to
            grab just the four-character string in the middle of the packed
            binary data we just read, we can simply slice it out. Numeric
            values could similarly be sliced out and then passed to <code class="epub__literal">struct.unpack</code> <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e13060"></a>for conversion:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e13066"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bytes</code></strong>
b'\x00\x00\x00\x02spam\x00\x03?\x9d\xf3\xb6'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bytes[4:8]</code></strong>
b'spam'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>number = bytes[8:10]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>number</code></strong>
b'\x00\x03'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>struct.unpack('&gt;h', number)</code></strong>
(3,)</pre>
<p>Packed binary data crops up in many contexts, including some
            networking tasks, and in data produced by other programming
            languages. Because it’s not part of every programming job’s
            description, though, we’ll defer to the <code class="epub__literal">struct</code> module’s entry in the Python
            library manual for more <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e13089"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e13091"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e13093"></a>details.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Random access files"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="random_access_files"></a>Random access files</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Binary files <a id="ran4.2.3.4"></a><a id="bi4.2.3.4"></a>also typically see action in random access
            processing. Earlier, we mentioned that adding a <code class="epub__literal">+</code> to the <code class="epub__literal">open</code> mode string allows a file to be
            both read and written. This mode is typically used in conjunction
            with the file object’s <code class="epub__literal">seek</code>
<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e13119"></a>method to support random read/write access. Such
            flexible file processing modes allow us to read bytes from one
            location, write to another, and so on. When scripts combine this
            with binary file modes, they may fetch and update arbitrary bytes
            within a file.</p>
<p>We used <code class="epub__literal">seek</code> earlier to
            rewind files instead of closing and reopening. As mentioned, read
            and write operations always take place at the current position in
            the file; files normally start at offset 0 when opened and advance
            as data is transferred. The <code class="epub__literal">seek</code> call lets us move to a new position
            for the next transfer operation by passing in a byte
            offset.</p>
<p>Python’s <code class="epub__literal">seek</code> method also
            accepts an optional second argument that has one of three values—0
            for absolute file positioning (the default); 1 to seek relative to
            the current position; and 2 to seek relative to the file’s end.
            That’s why passing just an offset of 0 to <code class="epub__literal">seek</code> is roughly a file
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>rewind</em></span> operation: it repositions the file to
            its absolute start. In general, <code class="epub__literal">seek</code> supports random access on a
            byte-offset basis. Seeking to a multiple of a record’s size in a
            binary file, for instance, allows us to fetch a record by its
            relative position.</p>
<p>Although you can use <code class="epub__literal">seek</code>
            without <code class="epub__literal">+</code> modes in <code class="epub__literal">open</code> (e.g., to just read from random
            locations), it’s most flexible when combined with input/output
            files. And while you can perform random access in <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>text
            mode</em></span>, too, the fact that text modes perform Unicode
            encodings and line-end translations make them difficult to use
            when absolute byte offsets and lengths are required for seeks and
            reads—your data may look very different when stored in files. Text
            mode may also make your data nonportable to platforms with
            different default encodings, unless you’re willing to always
            specify an explicit encoding for opens. Except for simple
            unencoded ASCII text without line-ends, <code class="epub__literal">seek</code> tends to works best with binary
            mode files.</p>
<p>To demonstrate, let’s create a file in <code class="epub__literal">w+b</code> mode (equivalent to <code class="epub__literal">wb+</code>) and write some data to it; this
            mode allows us to both read and write, but initializes the file to
            be empty if it’s already present (all <code class="epub__literal">w</code> modes do). After writing some data, we
            seek back to file start to read its content (some integer return
            values are omitted in this example again for brevity):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e13175"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>records = [bytes([char] * 8) for char in b'spam']</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>records</code></strong>
[b'ssssssss', b'pppppppp', b'aaaaaaaa', b'mmmmmmmm']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file = open('random.bin', 'w+b')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for rec in records:</code></strong>                                   # write four records
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>size = file.write(rec)</code></strong>                            # bytes for binary mode
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.flush()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pos = file.seek(0)</code></strong>                                    # read entire file
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(file.read()</code></strong>)
b'ssssssssppppppppaaaaaaaammmmmmmm'</pre>
<p>Now, let’s reopen our file in <code class="epub__literal">r+b</code> mode; this mode allows both reads
            and writes again, but does not initialize the file to be empty.
            This time, we seek and read in multiples of the size of data items
            (“records”) stored, to both fetch and update them at
            random:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e13207"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">c:\temp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file = open('random.bin', 'r+b')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(file.read())</code></strong>                           # read entire file
b'ssssssssppppppppaaaaaaaammmmmmmm'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>record = b'X' * 8</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.seek(0)</code></strong>                                 # update first record
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.write(record)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.seek(len(record) * 2)</code></strong>                   # update third record
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.write(b'Y' * 8)</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.seek(8)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.read(len(record))</code></strong>                       # fetch second record
b'pppppppp'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.read(len(record))</code></strong>                       # fetch next (third) record
b'YYYYYYYY'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.seek(0)</code></strong>                                 # read entire file
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.read()</code></strong>
b'XXXXXXXXppppppppYYYYYYYYmmmmmmmm'

c:\temp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type random.bin</code></strong>                         # the view outside Python
XXXXXXXXppppppppYYYYYYYYmmmmmmmm</pre>
<p>Finally, keep in mind that <code class="epub__literal">seek</code> can be used to achieve random
            access, even if it’s just for input. The following seeks in
            multiples of record size to read (but not write) fixed-length
            records at random. Notice that it also uses <code class="epub__literal">r</code> text mode: since this data is simple
            ASCII text bytes and has no line-ends, text and binary modes work
            the same on this platform:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e13261"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">c:\temp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file = open('random.bin', 'r')</code></strong>        # text mode ok if no encoding/endlines
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>reclen = 8</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.seek(reclen * 3)</code></strong>                 # fetch record 4
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.read(reclen)</code></strong>
'mmmmmmmm'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.seek(reclen * 1)</code></strong>                 # fetch record 2
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.read(reclen)</code></strong>
'pppppppp'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file = open('random.bin', 'rb')</code></strong>       # binary mode works the same here
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.seek(reclen * 2)</code></strong>                 # fetch record 3
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.read(reclen)</code></strong>                     # returns byte strings
b'YYYYYYYY'</pre>
<p>But unless your file’s content is always a simple unencoded
            text form like ASCII and has no translated line-ends, text mode
            should not generally be used if you are going to seek—line-ends
            may be translated on Windows and Unicode encodings may make
            arbitrary transformations, both of which can make absolute seek
            offsets difficult to use. In the following, for example, the
            positions of characters after the first non-ASCII no longer match
            between the string in Python and its encoded representation on the
            file:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e13297"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>data = 'sp\xe4m'</code></strong>                                 # data to your script
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>data, len(data)</code></strong>                                  # 4 unicode chars, 1 nonascii
('späm', 4)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>data.encode('utf8'), len(data.encode('utf8'))</code></strong>    # bytes written to file
(b'sp\xc3\xa4m', 5)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f = open('test', mode='w+', encoding='utf8')</code></strong>     # use text mode, encoded
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f.write(data)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f.flush()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f.seek(0); f.read(1)</code></strong>                             # ascii bytes work
's'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f.seek(2); f.read(1)</code></strong>                             # as does 2-byte nonascii
'ä'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>data[3]</code></strong>                                          # but offset 3 is not 'm' !
'm'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f.seek(3); f.read(1)</code></strong>
UnicodeDecodeError: 'utf8' codec can't decode byte 0xa4 in position 0:
unexpected code byte</pre>
<p>As you can see, Python’s file modes provide flexible file
            processing for programs that require it. In fact, the <code class="epub__literal">os</code> module offers even more file
            processing options, as the next section <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e13335"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e13337"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e13339"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e13341"></a>describes.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Lower-Level File Tools in the os Module"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="lower-level_file_tools_in_the_os_module"></a>Lower-Level File Tools in the os Module</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">os</code> module <a id="file4.2.4"></a><a id="os4.2.4"></a>contains an additional set of file-processing
          functions that are distinct from the built-in file
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>object</em></span> tools demonstrated in previous examples.
          For instance, here is a partial list of <code class="epub__literal">os</code> file-related calls:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">os.open(</code>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>path, flags, mode</code></em> <code class="epub__literal">)</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Opens a <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e13383"></a>file and returns its descriptor</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">os.read(</code>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>descriptor, N</code></em> <code class="epub__literal">)</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Reads at <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e13402"></a>most <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>N</code></em> bytes and
                returns a byte string</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">os.write(</code>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>descriptor, string</code></em> <code class="epub__literal">)</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Writes <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e13424"></a>bytes in byte string
                <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>string</code></em> to the file</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">os.lseek(</code>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>descriptor, position</code></em> <code class="epub__literal">,</code> <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>how</code></em>
<code class="epub__literal">)</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Moves <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e13452"></a>to <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>position</code></em> in the
                file</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Technically, <code class="epub__literal">os</code> calls
          process files by their <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>descriptors</em></span>, which are
          integer codes or “handles” that identify files in the operating
          system. Descriptor-based files deal in raw bytes, and have no notion
          of the line-end or Unicode translations for text that we studied in
          the prior section. In fact, apart from extras like buffering,
          descriptor-based files generally correspond to binary mode file
          objects, and we similarly read and write <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> strings, not <code class="epub__literal">str</code> strings. However, because the
          descriptor-based file tools in <code class="epub__literal">os</code>
          are lower level and more complex than the built-in file objects
          created with the built-in <code class="epub__literal">open</code>
          function, you should generally use the latter for all but very
          special file-processing needs.<sup>[9]</sup></p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Using os.open files"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="using_os.open_files"></a>Using os.open files</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To give you the general <a id="os4.2.4.1"></a>flavor of this tool set, though, let’s run a few
            interactive experiments. Although built-in file objects and
            <code class="epub__literal">os</code> module descriptor files are
            processed with distinct tool sets, they are in fact related—the
            file system used by file objects simply adds a layer of logic on
            top of descriptor-based files.</p>
<p>In fact, the <code class="epub__literal">fileno</code> file
            object method returns the integer descriptor associated with a
            built-in file object. For instance, the standard stream file
            objects have descriptors 0, 1, and 2; calling the <code class="epub__literal">os.write</code> function to send data to
            <code class="epub__literal">stdout</code> by descriptor has the
            same effect as calling the <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout.write</code> method:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e13531"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import sys</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for stream in (sys.stdin, sys.stdout, sys.stderr):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(stream.fileno())</code></strong>
...
0
1
2

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sys.stdout.write('Hello stdio world\n')</code></strong>        # write via file method
Hello stdio world
18
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import os</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>os.write(1, b'Hello descriptor world\n')</code></strong>       # write via os module
Hello descriptor world
23</pre>
<p>Because file objects we open explicitly behave the same way,
            it’s also possible to process a given real external file on the
            underlying computer through the built-in <code class="epub__literal">open</code> function, tools in the <code class="epub__literal">os</code> module, or both (some integer return
            values are omitted here for brevity):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e13560"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file = open(r'C:\temp\spam.txt', 'w')</code></strong>       # create external file, object
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.write('Hello stdio file\n')</code></strong>            # write via file object method
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.flush()</code></strong>                                # else os.write to disk first!
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>fd = file.fileno()</code></strong>                          # get descriptor from object
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>fd</code></strong>
3
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import os</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>os.write(fd, b'Hello descriptor file\n')</code></strong>    # write via os module
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.close()</code></strong>

C:\temp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type spam.txt</code></strong>                          # lines from both schemes
Hello stdio file
Hello descriptor file</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="os.open mode flags"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="os.open_mode_flags"></a>os.open mode flags</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>So why the extra file tools in <code class="epub__literal">os</code>? In short, they give more low-level
            control over file processing. The built-in <code class="epub__literal">open</code> function is easy to use, but it may
            be limited by the underlying filesystem that it uses, and it adds
            extra behavior that we do not want. The <code class="epub__literal">os</code> module lets scripts be more
            specific—for example, the following opens a descriptor-based file
            in read-write and binary modes by performing a binary “or” on two
            mode flags exported by <code class="epub__literal">os</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e13607"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>fdfile = os.open(r'C:\temp\spam.txt', (os.O_RDWR | os.O_BINARY))</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>os.read(fdfile, 20)</code></strong>
b'Hello stdio file\r\nHe'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>os.lseek(fdfile, 0, 0)</code></strong>                        # go back to start of file
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>os.read(fdfile, 100)</code></strong>                          # binary mode retains "\r\n"
b'Hello stdio file\r\nHello descriptor file\n'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>os.lseek(fdfile, 0, 0)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>os.write(fdfile, b'HELLO')</code></strong>                    # overwrite first 5 bytes
5

C:\temp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type spam.txt</code></strong>
HELLO stdio file
Hello descriptor file</pre>
<p>In this case, binary mode strings <code class="epub__literal">rb+</code> and <code class="epub__literal">r+b</code> in the basic <code class="epub__literal">open</code> call are equivalent:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e13642"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file = open(r'C:\temp\spam.txt', 'rb+')</code></strong>       # same but with open/objects
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.read(20)</code></strong>
b'HELLO stdio file\r\nHe'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.seek(0)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.read(100)</code></strong>
b'HELLO stdio file\r\nHello descriptor file\n'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.seek(0)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.write(b'Jello')</code></strong>
5
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.seek(0)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.read()</code></strong>
b'Jello stdio file\r\nHello descriptor file\n'</pre>
<p>But on some systems, <code class="epub__literal">os.open</code> flags let us specify more
            advanced things like <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>exclusive access</em></span>
            (<code class="epub__literal">O_EXCL</code>) and
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>nonblocking</em></span> modes (<code class="epub__literal">O_NONBLOCK</code>) when a file is opened. Some
            of these flags are not portable across platforms (another reason
            to use built-in file objects most of the time); see the library
            manual or run a <code class="epub__literal">dir(os)</code> call on
            your machine for an exhaustive list of other open flags
            available.</p>
<p>One final note here: using <code class="epub__literal">os.open</code> with the <code class="epub__literal">O_EXCL</code> flag is the most portable way to
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>lock files</em></span> for concurrent updates or other
            process synchronization in Python today. We’ll see contexts where
            this can matter in the next chapter, when we begin to explore
            <span>multi</span>processing tools.
            Programs running in parallel on a server machine, for instance,
            may need to lock files before performing updates, if multiple
            threads or processes might attempt such updates at the same
            <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e13704"></a>time.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Wrapping descriptors in file objects"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="wrapping_descriptors_in_file_objects"></a>Wrapping descriptors in file objects</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>We saw earlier how to <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e13712"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e13717"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e13722"></a>go from file object to field descriptor with the
            <code class="epub__literal">fileno</code> file object method;
            given a descriptor, we can use <code class="epub__literal">os</code> module tools for lower-level file
            access to the underlying file. We can also go the other
            way—the<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e13734"></a> <code class="epub__literal">os.fdopen</code> call
            wraps a file descriptor in a file object. Because conversions work
            both ways, we can generally use either tool set—file object or
            <code class="epub__literal">os</code> module:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e13747"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>fdfile = os.open(r'C:\temp\spam.txt', (os.O_RDWR | os.O_BINARY))</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>fdfile</code></strong>
3
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>objfile = os.fdopen(fdfile, 'rb')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>objfile.read()</code></strong>
b'Jello stdio file\r\nHello descriptor file\n'</pre>
<p>In fact, we can wrap a file descriptor in either a binary or
            text-mode file object: in text mode, reads and writes perform the
            Unicode encodings and line-end translations we studied earlier and
            deal in <code class="epub__literal">str</code> strings instead of
            <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e13769"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import os</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>fdfile = os.open(r'C:\temp\spam.txt', (os.O_RDWR | os.O_BINARY))</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>objfile = os.fdopen(fdfile, 'r')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>objfile.read()</code></strong>
'Jello stdio file\nHello descriptor file\n'</pre>
<p>In Python 3.X, the built-in <code class="epub__literal">open</code> call also accepts a file descriptor
            instead of a file name string; in this mode it works much like
            <code class="epub__literal">os.fdopen</code>, but gives you
            greater control—for example, you can use additional arguments to
            specify a nondefault Unicode encoding for text and suppress the
            default descriptor close. Really, though, <code class="epub__literal">os.fdopen</code> accepts the same extra-control
            arguments in 3.X, because it has been redefined to do little but
            call back to the built-in <code class="epub__literal">open</code>
            (see <em class="epub__filename">os.py</em> in the standard
            library):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e13803"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import os</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>fdfile = os.open(r'C:\temp\spam.txt', (os.O_RDWR | os.O_BINARY))</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>fdfile</code></strong>
3
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>objfile = open(fdfile, 'r', encoding='latin1', closefd=False)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>objfile.read()</code></strong>
'Jello stdio file\nHello descriptor file\n'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>objfile = os.fdopen(fdfile, 'r', encoding='latin1', closefd=True)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>objfile.seek(0)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>objfile.read()</code></strong>
'Jello stdio file\nHello descriptor file\n'</pre>
<p>We’ll make use of this file object wrapper technique to
            simplify text-oriented pipes and other descriptor-like objects
            later in this book (e.g., sockets have a <code class="epub__literal">makefile</code> method which achieves similar
            effects).</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Other os module file tools"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="other_os_module_file_tools"></a>Other os module file tools</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">os</code> module also
            includes an assortment of file tools that accept a file pathname
            string and accomplish file-related tasks such as renaming
            (<code class="epub__literal">os.rename</code>), deleting (<code class="epub__literal">os.remove</code>), and changing the file’s
            owner and permission settings (<code class="epub__literal">os.chown</code>, <code class="epub__literal">os.chmod</code>). Let’s step through a few
            examples of these tools in action:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e13858"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>os.chmod('spam.txt', 0o777)</code></strong>          # enable all accesses</pre>
<p>This <code class="epub__literal">os.chmod</code> <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e13868"></a>file permissions call passes a 9-bit string composed
            of three sets of three bits each. From left to right, the three
            sets represent the file’s owning user, the file’s group, and all
            others. Within each set, the three bits reflect read, write, and
            execute access permissions. When a bit is “1” in this string, it
            means that the corresponding operation is allowed for the
            assessor. For instance, octal 0777 is a string of nine “1” bits in
            binary, so it enables all three kinds of accesses for all three
            user groups; octal 0600 means that the file can be read and
            written only by the user that owns it (when written in binary,
            0600 octal is really bits 110 000 000).</p>
<p>This scheme stems from Unix file permission settings, but
            the call works on Windows as well. If it’s puzzling, see your
            system’s documentation (e.g., a Unix manpage) for
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>chmod</em></span>. Moving on:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e13879"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>os.rename(r'C:\temp\spam.txt', r'C:\temp\eggs.txt')</code></strong>      # from, to

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>os.remove(r'C:\temp\spam.txt')</code></strong>                           # delete file?
WindowsError: [Error 2] The system cannot find the file specified: 'C:\\temp\\...'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>os.remove(r'C:\temp\eggs.txt')</code></strong></pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">os.rename</code> <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e13894"></a>call used here changes a file’s name; the<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e13900"></a> <code class="epub__literal">os.remove</code> file
            deletion call deletes a file from your system and is synonymous
            with<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e13909"></a> <code class="epub__literal">os.unlink</code> (the
            latter reflects the call’s name on Unix but was obscure to
            users<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e13919"></a> of other platforms).<sup>[10]</sup> The <code class="epub__literal">os</code> module
            also exports the <code class="epub__literal">stat</code> system
            call:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e13940"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('spam.txt', 'w').write('Hello stat world\n')</code></strong>        # +1 for \r added
17
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import os</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>info = os.stat(r'C:\temp\spam.txt')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>info</code></strong>
nt.stat_result(st_mode=33206, st_ino=0, st_dev=0, st_nlink=0, st_uid=0, st_gid=0,
st_size=18, st_atime=1267645806, st_mtime=1267646072, st_ctime=1267645806)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>info.st_mode, info.st_size</code></strong>                  # via named-tuple item attr names
(33206, 18)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import stat</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>info[stat.ST_MODE], info[stat.ST_SIZE]</code></strong>      # via stat module presets
(33206, 18)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>stat.S_ISDIR(info.st_mode), stat.S_ISREG(info.st_mode)</code></strong>
(False, True)</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">os.stat</code> <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e13972"></a>call returns a tuple of values (really, in 3.X a
            special kind of tuple with named items) giving low-level
            information about the named file, and the <code class="epub__literal">stat</code> module exports constants and
            functions for querying this information in a portable way. For
            instance, indexing an <code class="epub__literal">os.stat</code>
            result on offset <code class="epub__literal">stat.ST_SIZE</code>
            returns the file’s size, and calling <code class="epub__literal">stat.S_ISDIR</code> with the mode item from an
            <code class="epub__literal">os.stat</code> result checks whether
            the file is a directory. As shown earlier, though, both of these
            operations are available in the <code class="epub__literal">os.path</code> module, too, so it’s rarely
            necessary to use <code class="epub__literal">os.stat</code> except
            for low-level file queries:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e14000"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>path = r'C:\temp\spam.txt'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>os.path.isdir(path), os.path.isfile(path), os.path.getsize(path)</code></strong>
(False, True, 18)</pre>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="File Scanners"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="file_scanners"></a>File Scanners</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Before we leave <a id="file4.2.5a"></a><a id="file4.2.5b"></a>our file tools survey, it’s time for something that
          performs a more tangible task and illustrates some of what we’ve
          learned so far. Unlike some shell-tool languages, Python doesn’t
          have an implicit file-scanning loop procedure, but it’s simple to
          write a general one that we can reuse for all time. The module in
          Example 4-1 defines a
          general file-scanning routine, which simply applies a passed-in
          Python function to each line in an external file.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id10"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 4-1. PP4E\System\Filetools\scanfile.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def scanner(name, function):
    file = open(name, 'r')               # create a file object
    while True:
        line = file.readline()           # call file methods
        if not line: break               # until end-of-file
        function(line)                   # call a function object
    file.close()</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">scanner</code> function
          <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e14034"></a>doesn’t care what line-processing function is passed
          in, and that accounts for most of its generality—it is happy to
          apply <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>any</em></span> single-argument function that exists
          now or in the future to all of the lines in a text file. If we code
          this module and put it in a directory on the module search path, we
          can use it any time we need to step through a file line by line.
          Example 4-2 is a client
          script that does simple line translations.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id11"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 4-2. PP4E\System\Filetools\commands.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">#!/usr/local/bin/python
from sys import argv
from scanfile import scanner
class UnknownCommand(Exception): pass

def processLine(line):                      # define a function
    if line[0] == '*':                      # applied to each line
        print("Ms.", line[1:-1])
    elif line[0] == '+':
        print("Mr.", line[1:-1])            # strip first and last char: \n
    else:
        raise UnknownCommand(line)          # raise an exception

filename = 'data.txt'
if len(argv) == 2: filename = argv[1]       # allow filename cmd arg
scanner(filename, processLine)              # start the scanner</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>The text file <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>hillbillies.txt</em></span> contains
          the following lines:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e14053"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">*Granny
+Jethro
*Elly May
+"Uncle Jed"</pre>
<p>and our commands script could be run as follows:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e14057"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python commands.py hillbillies.txt</code></strong>
Ms. Granny
Mr. Jethro
Ms. Elly May
Mr. "Uncle Jed"</pre>
<p>This works, but there are a variety of coding alternatives for
          both files, some of which may be better than those listed above. For
          instance, we could also code the command processor of Example 4-2 in the following way;
          especially if the number of command options starts to become large,
          such a data-driven approach may be more concise <span>and easier</span> to maintain than a large
          <code class="epub__literal">if</code> statement with essentially
          redundant actions (if you ever have to change the way output lines
          print, you’ll have to change it in only one place with this
          form):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e14072"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">commands = {'*': 'Ms.', '+': 'Mr.'}     # data is easier to expand than code?

def processLine(line):
    try:
        print(commands[line[0]], line[1:-1])
    except KeyError:
        raise UnknownCommand(line)</pre>
<p>The scanner could similarly be improved. As a rule of thumb,
          we can also usually speed things up by shifting processing from
          Python code to built-in tools. For instance, if we’re concerned with
          speed, we can probably make our file scanner faster by using the
          file’s <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>line iterator</em></span> to step through the file
          instead of the manual <code class="epub__literal">readline</code>
          loop in Example 4-1 (though
          you’d have to time this with your Python to be sure):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e14085"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def scanner(name, function):
    for line in open(name, 'r'):         # scan line by line
        function(line)                   # call a function object</pre>
<p>And we can work more magic in Example 4-1 with the iteration
          tools like the <code class="epub__literal">map</code> built-in
          function, the list comprehension expression, and the generator
          expression. Here are three minimalist’s versions; the <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop is replaced by <code class="epub__literal">map</code> or a comprehension, and we let Python
          close the file for us when it is garbage collected or the script
          exits (these all build a temporary list of results along the way to
          run through their iterations, but this overhead is likely trivial
          for all but the largest of files):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e14100"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def scanner(name, function):
    list(map(function, open(name, 'r')))

def scanner(name, function):
    [function(line) for line in open(name, 'r')]

def scanner(name, function):
    list(function(line) for line in open(name, 'r'))</pre>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="File filters"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="file_filters"></a>File filters</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The preceding <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e14107"></a>works as planned, but what if we also want to
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>change</em></span> a file while scanning it? Example 4-3 shows two
            approaches: one uses explicit files, and the other uses the
            standard input/output streams to allow for redirection on the
            command line.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id12"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 4-3. PP4E\System\Filetools\filters.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import sys

def filter_files(name, function):         # filter file through function
    input  = open(name, 'r')              # create file objects
    output = open(name + '.out', 'w')     # explicit output file too
    for line in input:
        output.write(function(line))      # write the modified line
    input.close()
    output.close()                        # output has a '.out' suffix

def filter_stream(function):              # no explicit files
    while True:                           # use standard streams
        line = sys.stdin.readline()       # or: input()
        if not line: break
        print(function(line), end='')     # or: sys.stdout.write()

if __name__ == '__main__':
    filter_stream(lambda line: line)      # copy stdin to stdout if run</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Notice that the newer <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>context managers</em></span>
<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e14128"></a>feature discussed earlier could save us a few lines
            here in the file-based filter of Example 4-3, and also guarantee
            immediate file closures if the processing function fails with an
            exception:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e14136"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def filter_files(name, function):
    with open(name, 'r') as input, open(name + '.out', 'w') as output:
        for line in input:
            output.write(function(line))      # write the modified line</pre>
<p>And again, file object <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>line iterators</em></span>
<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e14143"></a>could simplify the stream-based filter’s code in
            this example as well:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e14147"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def filter_stream(function):
    for line in sys.stdin:                    # read by lines automatically
        print(function(line), end='')</pre>
<p>Since the standard streams are preopened for us, they’re
            often easier to use. When run standalone, it simply parrots
            <code class="epub__literal">stdin</code> to <code class="epub__literal">stdout</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e14157"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>filters.py &lt; hillbillies.txt</code></strong>
*Granny
+Jethro
*Elly May
+"Uncle Jed"</pre>
<p>But this module is also useful when imported as a library
            (clients provide the line-processing function):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e14164"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from filters import filter_files</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>filter_files('hillbillies.txt', str.upper)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(open('hillbillies.txt.out').read())</code></strong>
*GRANNY
+JETHRO
*ELLY MAY
+"UNCLE JED"</pre>
<p>We’ll see files in action often in the remainder of this
            book, especially in the more complete and functional system
            examples of Chapter 6. First
            though, we turn to tools for processing our files’ <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e14180"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e14182"></a>home.</p>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[9] </sup>For instance, to process <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>pipes</em></span>,
              described in Chapter 5. The
              Python <code class="epub__literal">os.pipe</code> call returns
              two file descriptors, which can be processed with <code class="epub__literal">os</code> module file tools or wrapped in a
              file object with <code class="epub__literal">os.fdopen</code>.
              When used with descriptor-based file tools in <code class="epub__literal">os</code>, pipes deal in byte strings, not
              text. Some device files may require lower-level control as
              well.</p>
</div><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[10] </sup>For related tools, see also the <code class="epub__literal">shutil</code> module in Python’s standard
                library; it has higher-level tools for copying and removing
                files and more. We’ll also write directory compare, copy, and
                search tools of our own in Chapter 6, after we’ve had a
                chance to study the directory tools presented later in this
                chapter.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
