<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Directory Tools</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Directory Tools"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="directory_tools"></a>Directory Tools</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>One of the more <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e14190"></a>common tasks in the shell utilities domain is applying
        an operation to a set of files in a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>directory</em></span>—a
        “folder” in Windows-speak. By running a script on a batch of files, we
        can automate (that is, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>script</em></span>) tasks we might
        have to otherwise run repeatedly by hand.</p>
<p>For instance, suppose you need to search all of your Python
        files in a development directory for a global variable name (perhaps
        you’ve forgotten where it is used). There are many platform-specific
        ways to do this (e.g., the <code class="epub__literal">find</code> and
        <code class="epub__literal">grep</code> commands in Unix), but Python
        scripts that accomplish such tasks will work on every platform where
        Python works—Windows, Unix, Linux, Macintosh, and just about any other
        platform commonly used today. If you simply copy your script to any
        machine you wish to use it on, it will work regardless of which other
        tools are available there; all you need is Python. Moreover, coding
        such tasks in Python also allows you to perform arbitrary actions
        along the way—replacements, deletions, and whatever else you can code
        in the Python language.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Walking One Directory"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="walking_one_directory"></a>Walking One Directory</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The most common <a id="dir4.3.1"></a><a id="direct4.3.1"></a>way to go about writing such tools is to first grab a
          list of the names of the files you wish to process, and then step
          through that list with a Python <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop or other iteration tool,
          processing each file in turn. The trick we need to learn here, then,
          is how to get such a directory list within our scripts. For scanning
          directories there are at least three options: running shell listing
          commands with <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code>, matching
          filename patterns with <code class="epub__literal">glob.glob</code>,
          and getting directory listings with <code class="epub__literal">os.listdir</code>. They vary in interface, result
          format, and portability.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Running shell listing commands with os.popen"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="running_shell_listing_commands_with_os.p"></a>Running shell listing commands with os.popen</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>How did you go <a id="os4.3.1.1"></a>about getting directory file listings before you
            heard of Python? If you’re new to shell tools programming, the
            answer may be “Well, I started a Windows file explorer and clicked
            on things,” but I’m thinking here in terms of less GUI-oriented
            command-line mechanisms.</p>
<p>On Unix, directory listings are usually obtained by typing
            <code class="epub__literal">ls</code> in a shell; on Windows, they
            can be generated with a <code class="epub__literal">dir</code>
            command typed in an MS-DOS console box. Because Python scripts may
            use <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code> to run any command
            line that we can type in a shell, they are the most general way to
            grab a directory listing inside a Python program. We met <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code> in the prior chapters; it runs
            a shell command string and gives us a file object from which we
            can read the command’s output. To illustrate, let’s first assume
            the following directory structures—I have both the usual <code class="epub__literal">dir</code> and a Unix-like <code class="epub__literal">ls</code> command from Cygwin on my Windows
            laptop:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e14272"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">c:\temp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dir /B</code></strong>
parts
PP3E
random.bin
spam.txt
temp.bin
temp.txt

c:\temp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\cygwin\bin\ls</code></strong>
PP3E  parts  random.bin  spam.txt  temp.bin  temp.txt

c:\temp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\cygwin\bin\ls parts</code></strong>
part0001  part0002  part0003  part0004</pre>
<p>The <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>parts</em></span> and <em class="epub__filename">PP3E</em> names are a nested subdirectory in
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>C:\temp</em></span> here (the latter is a copy of the
            prior edition’s examples tree, which I used occasionally in this
            text). Now, as we’ve seen, scripts can grab a listing of file and
            directory names at this level by simply spawning the appropriate
            platform-specific command line and reading its output (the text
            normally thrown up on the console window):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e14294"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\temp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import os</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>os.popen('dir /B').readlines()</code></strong>
['parts\n', 'PP3E\n', 'random.bin\n', 'spam.txt\n', 'temp.bin\n', 'temp.txt\n']</pre>
<p>Lines read from a shell command come back with a trailing
            end-of-line character, but it’s easy enough to slice it off; the
            <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code> result also gives us a
            line iterator just like normal files:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e14310"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for line in os.popen('dir /B'):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(line[:-1])</code></strong>
...
parts
PP3E
random.bin
spam.txt
temp.bin
temp.txt

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>lines = [line[:-1] for line in os.popen('dir /B')]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>lines</code></strong>
['parts', 'PP3E', 'random.bin', 'spam.txt', 'temp.bin', 'temp.txt']</pre>
<p>For pipe objects, the effect of iterators may be even more
            useful than simply avoiding loading the entire result into memory
            all at once: <code class="epub__literal">readlines</code> will
            always block the caller until the spawned program is completely
            finished, whereas the iterator might not.</p>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">dir</code> and <code class="epub__literal">ls</code> <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e14337"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e14342"></a>commands let us be specific about filename patterns
            to be matched and directory names to be listed by using name
            patterns; again, we’re just running shell commands here, so
            anything you can type at a shell prompt goes:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e14348"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"> &gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>os.popen('dir *.bin /B').readlines()</code></strong>
['random.bin\n', 'temp.bin\n']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>os.popen(r'c:\cygwin\bin\ls *.bin').readlines()</code></strong>
['random.bin\n', 'temp.bin\n']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(os.popen(r'dir parts /B'))</code></strong>
['part0001\n', 'part0002\n', 'part0003\n', 'part0004\n']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[fname for fname in os.popen(r'c:\cygwin\bin\ls parts')]</code></strong>
['part0001\n', 'part0002\n', 'part0003\n', 'part0004\n']</pre>
<p>These calls use general tools and work as advertised. As I
            noted earlier, though, the downsides of <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code> are that it requires using a
            platform-specific shell command and it incurs a performance hit to
            start up an independent program. In fact, different listing tools
            may sometimes produce different results:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e14368"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(os.popen(r'dir parts\part* /B'))</code></strong>
['part0001\n', 'part0002\n', 'part0003\n', 'part0004\n']
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(os.popen(r'c:\cygwin\bin\ls parts/part*'))</code></strong>
['parts/part0001\n', 'parts/part0002\n', 'parts/part0003\n', 'parts/part0004\n']</pre>
<p>The next two alternative techniques do better on both
            <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e14378"></a>counts.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="The glob module"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="the_glob_module"></a>The glob module</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The term <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>globbing</em></span> comes <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e14389"></a>from the<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e14395"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e14398"></a> <code class="epub__literal">*</code> wildcard
            character in filename patterns; per computing folklore, a <code class="epub__literal">*</code> matches a “glob” of characters. In
            less poetic terms, globbing simply means collecting the names of
            all entries in a directory—files and subdirectories—whose names
            match a given filename pattern. In Unix shells, globbing expands
            filename patterns within a command line into all matching
            filenames before the command is ever run. In Python, we can do
            something similar by calling the<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e14409"></a> <code class="epub__literal">glob.glob</code>
            built-in—a tool that accepts a filename pattern to expand, and
            returns a list (not a generator) of matching file names:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e14418"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import glob</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>glob.glob('*')</code></strong>
['parts', 'PP3E', 'random.bin', 'spam.txt', 'temp.bin', 'temp.txt']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>glob.glob('*.bin')</code></strong>
['random.bin', 'temp.bin']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>glob.glob('parts')</code></strong>
['parts']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>glob.glob('parts/*')</code></strong>
['parts\\part0001', 'parts\\part0002', 'parts\\part0003', 'parts\\part0004']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>glob.glob('parts\part*')</code></strong>
['parts\\part0001', 'parts\\part0002', 'parts\\part0003', 'parts\\part0004']</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">glob</code> call accepts the
            usual filename pattern syntax used in shells: <code class="epub__literal">?</code> means any one character, <code class="epub__literal">*</code> means any number of characters, and
            <code class="epub__literal">[]</code> is a character selection
            <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e14453"></a>set.<sup>[11]</sup> The pattern should include a directory path if you
            wish to glob in something other than the current working
            directory, and the module accepts either Unix or DOS-style
            directory separators (<code class="epub__literal">/</code> or
            <code class="epub__literal">\</code>). This call is implemented
            without spawning a shell command (it uses <code class="epub__literal">os.listdir</code>, described in the next
            section) and so is likely to be faster and more portable and
            uniform across all Python platforms than the <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code> schemes shown earlier.</p>
<p>Technically speaking, <code class="epub__literal">glob</code> is a bit more powerful than
            described so far. In fact, using it to list files in one directory
            is just one use of its pattern-matching skills. For instance, it
            can also be used to collect matching names across multiple
            directories, simply because each level in a passed-in directory
            path can be a pattern too:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e14493"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for path in glob.glob(r'PP3E\Examples\PP3E\*\s*.py'): print(path)</code></strong>
...
PP3E\Examples\PP3E\Lang\summer-alt.py
PP3E\Examples\PP3E\Lang\summer.py
PP3E\Examples\PP3E\PyTools\search_all.py</pre>
<p>Here, we get back filenames from two different directories
            that match the <code class="epub__literal">s*.py</code> pattern;
            because the directory name preceding this is a <code class="epub__literal">*</code> wildcard, Python collects all possible
            ways to reach the base filenames. Using <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code> to spawn shell commands
            achieves the same effect, but only if the underlying shell or
            listing command does, too, and with possibly different result
            formats across tools and platforms.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="The os.listdir call"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="the_os.listdir_call"></a>The os.listdir call</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">os</code> module’s <code class="epub__literal">listdir</code> <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e14520"></a>call provides yet another way to collect filenames
            in a Python list. It takes a simple directory name string, not a
            filename pattern, and returns a list containing the names of all
            entries in that directory—both simple files and nested <span>directories—</span>for use in the calling
            script:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e14531"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import os</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>os.listdir('.')</code></strong>
['parts', 'PP3E', 'random.bin', 'spam.txt', 'temp.bin', 'temp.txt']
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>os.listdir(os.curdir)</code></strong>
['parts', 'PP3E', 'random.bin', 'spam.txt', 'temp.bin', 'temp.txt']
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>os.listdir('parts')</code></strong>
['part0001', 'part0002', 'part0003', 'part0004']</pre>
<p>This, too, is done without resorting to shell commands and
            so is both fast and portable to all major Python platforms. The
            result is not in any particular order across platforms (but can be
            sorted with the list <code class="epub__literal">sort</code>
            method or <code class="epub__literal">sorted</code> built-in
            function); returns base filenames without their directory path
            prefixes; does not include names “.” or “..” if present; and
            includes names of both files and directories at the listed
            level.</p>
<p>To compare all three listing techniques, let’s run them here
            side by side on an explicit directory. They differ in some ways
            but are mostly just variations on a theme for this task—<code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code> returns end-of-lines and may
            sort filenames on some platforms, <code class="epub__literal">glob.glob</code> accepts a pattern and returns
            filenames with directory prefixes, and <code class="epub__literal">os.listdir</code> takes a simple directory name
            and returns names without directory prefixes:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e14564"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>os.popen('dir /b parts').readlines()</code></strong>
['part0001\n', 'part0002\n', 'part0003\n', 'part0004\n']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>glob.glob(r'parts\*')</code></strong>
['parts\\part0001', 'parts\\part0002', 'parts\\part0003', 'parts\\part0004']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>os.listdir('parts')</code></strong>
['part0001', 'part0002', 'part0003', 'part0004']</pre>
<p>Of these three, <code class="epub__literal">glob</code> and
            <code class="epub__literal">listdir</code> are generally better
            options if you care about script portability and result
            uniformity, and <code class="epub__literal">listdir</code> seems
            fastest in recent Python releases (but gauge its performance
            yourself—implementations may change over time).</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Splitting and joining listing results"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="splitting_and_joining_listing_results"></a>Splitting and joining listing results</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In the last example, I <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e14591"></a>pointed out that <code class="epub__literal">glob</code> returns names with directory paths,
            whereas <code class="epub__literal">listdir</code> gives raw base
            filenames. For convenient processing, scripts often need to split
            <code class="epub__literal">glob</code> results into base files or
            expand <code class="epub__literal">listdir</code> results into
            full paths. Such translations are easy if we let the <code class="epub__literal">os.path</code> module do all the work for us.
            For example, a script that intends to copy all files elsewhere
            will typically need to first split off the base filenames from
            <code class="epub__literal">glob</code> results so that it can add
            different directory names on the front:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e14616"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dirname = r'C:\temp\parts'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import glob</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for file in glob.glob(dirname + '/*'):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>head, tail = os.path.split(file)</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(head, tail, '=&gt;', ('C:\\Other\\' + tail))</code></strong>
...
C:\temp\parts part0001 =&gt; C:\Other\part0001
C:\temp\parts part0002 =&gt; C:\Other\part0002
C:\temp\parts part0003 =&gt; C:\Other\part0003
C:\temp\parts part0004 =&gt; C:\Other\part0004</pre>
<p>Here, the names after the <code class="epub__literal">=&gt;</code> represent names that files might
            be moved to. Conversely, a script that means to process all files
            in a different directory than the one it runs in will probably
            need to prepend <code class="epub__literal">listdir</code> results
            with the target directory name before passing filenames on to
            other tools:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e14641"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import os</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for file in os.listdir(dirname):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(dirname, file, '=&gt;', os.path.join(dirname, file))</code></strong>
...
C:\temp\parts part0001 =&gt; C:\temp\parts\part0001
C:\temp\parts part0002 =&gt; C:\temp\parts\part0002
C:\temp\parts part0003 =&gt; C:\temp\parts\part0003
C:\temp\parts part0004 =&gt; C:\temp\parts\part0004</pre>
<p>When you begin writing realistic directory processing tools
            of the sort we’ll develop in Chapter 6, you’ll find these calls to
            be almost <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e14656"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e14658"></a>habit.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Walking Directory Trees"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="walking_directory_trees"></a>Walking Directory Trees</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>You may have <a id="dir4.3.2a"></a><a id="dir4.3.2b"></a>noticed that almost all of the techniques in this
          section so far return the names of files in only a
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>single</em></span> directory (globbing with more involved
          patterns is the only exception). That’s fine for many tasks, but
          what if you want to apply an operation to every file in every
          directory and subdirectory in an entire directory
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>tree</em></span>?</p>
<p>For instance, suppose again that we need to find every
          occurrence of a global name in our Python scripts. This time,
          though, our scripts are arranged into a module
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>package</em></span>: a directory with nested
          subdirectories, which may have subdirectories of their own. We could
          rerun our hypothetical single-directory searcher manually in every
          directory in the tree, but that’s tedious, error prone, and just
          plain not fun.</p>
<p>Luckily, in Python it’s almost as easy to process a directory
          tree as it is to inspect a single directory. We can either write a
          recursive routine to traverse the tree, or use a tree-walker utility
          built into the <code class="epub__literal">os</code> module. Such
          tools can be used to search, copy, compare, and otherwise process
          arbitrary directory trees on any platform that Python runs on (and
          that’s just about everywhere).</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="The os.walk visitor"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="the_os.walk_visitor"></a>The os.walk visitor</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To make it easy to <a id="os4.3.2.1"></a><a id="dir4.3.2.1"></a>apply an operation to all files in a complete
            directory tree, Python comes with a utility that scans trees for
            us and runs code we provide at every directory along the way: the
            <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code> function is called with
            a directory root name and automatically walks the entire tree at
            root and below.</p>
<p>Operationally, <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code> is
            <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e14719"></a>a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>generator function</em></span>—at each
            directory in the tree, it yields a three-item tuple, containing
            the name of the current directory as well as lists of both all the
            files and all the subdirectories in the current directory. Because
            it’s a generator, its walk is usually run by a <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop (or other iteration tool); on
            each iteration, the walker advances to the next subdirectory, and
            the loop runs its code for the next level of the tree (for
            instance, opening and searching all the files at that
            level).</p>
<p>That description might sound complex the first time you hear
            it, but <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code> is fairly
            straightforward once you get the hang of it. In the following, for
            example, the loop body’s code is run for each directory in the
            tree rooted at the current working directory (<code class="epub__literal">.</code>). Along the way, the loop simply
            prints the directory name and all the files at the current level
            after prepending the directory name. It’s simpler in Python than
            in English (I removed the PP3E subdirectory for this test to keep
            the output short):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e14737"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import os</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for (dirname, subshere, fileshere) in os.walk('.'):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('[' + dirname + ']')</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for fname in fileshere:</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(os.path.join(dirname, fname))</code></strong>        # handle one file
...
[.]
.\random.bin
.\spam.txt
.\temp.bin
.\temp.txt
[.\parts]
.\parts\part0001
.\parts\part0002
.\parts\part0003
.\parts\part0004</pre>
<p>In other words, we’ve coded our own custom and easily
            changed recursive directory listing tool in Python. Because this
            may be something we would like to tweak and reuse elsewhere, let’s
            make it permanently available in a module file, as shown in Example 4-4, now that we’ve
            worked out the details interactively.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id13"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 4-4. PP4E\System\Filetools\lister_walk.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"list file tree with os.walk"

import sys, os

def lister(root):                                           # for a root dir
    for (thisdir, subshere, fileshere) in os.walk(root):    # generate dirs in tree
        print('[' + thisdir + ']')
        for fname in fileshere:                             # print files in this dir
            path = os.path.join(thisdir, fname)             # add dir name prefix
            print(path)

if __name__ == '__main__':
    lister(sys.argv[1])                                     # dir name in cmdline</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>When packaged this way, the code can also be run from a
            shell command line. Here it is being launched with the root
            directory to be listed passed in as a command-line
            argument:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e14765"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python lister_walk.py C:\temp\test</code></strong>
[C:\temp\test]
C:\temp\test\random.bin
C:\temp\test\spam.txt
C:\temp\test\temp.bin
C:\temp\test\temp.txt
[C:\temp\test\parts]
C:\temp\test\parts\part0001
C:\temp\test\parts\part0002
C:\temp\test\parts\part0003
C:\temp\test\parts\part0004</pre>
<p>Here’s a more involved example of <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code> in action. Suppose you have a
            directory tree of files and you want to find all Python source
            files within it that reference the <code class="epub__literal">mimetypes</code> module we’ll study in Chapter 6. The following is one
            (albeit hardcoded and overly specific) way to accomplish this
            task:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e14780"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import os</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>matches = []</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for (dirname, dirshere, fileshere) in os.walk(r'C:\temp\PP3E\Examples'):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for filename in fileshere:</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if filename.endswith('.py'):</code></strong>
...             <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pathname = os.path.join(dirname, filename)</code></strong>
...             <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if 'mimetypes' in open(pathname).read():</code></strong>
...                 <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>matches.append(pathname)</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for name in matches: print(name)</code></strong>
...
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\Internet\Email\mailtools\mailParser.py
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\Internet\Email\mailtools\mailSender.py
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\Internet\Ftp\mirror\downloadflat.py
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\Internet\Ftp\mirror\downloadflat_modular.py
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\Internet\Ftp\mirror\ftptools.py
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\Internet\Ftp\mirror\uploadflat.py
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\System\Media\playfile.py</pre>
<p>This code loops through all the files at each level, looking
            for files with <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>.py</em></span> at the end of their names
            and which contain the search string. When a match is found, its
            full name is appended to the results list object; alternatively,
            we could also simply build a list of all <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>.py</em></span>
            files and search each in a <code class="epub__literal">for</code>
            loop after the walk. Since we’re going to code much more general
            solution to this type of problem in Chapter 6, though, we’ll let this
            stand for now.</p>
<p>If you want to see what’s really going on in the <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code> generator, call its <code class="epub__literal">__next__</code> method (or equivalently, pass
            it to the <code class="epub__literal">next</code> built-in
            function) manually a few times, just as the <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop does automatically; each time,
            you advance to the next subdirectory in the tree:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e14838"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>gen = os.walk(r'C:\temp\test')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>gen.__next__()</code></strong>
('C:\\temp\\test', ['parts'], ['random.bin', 'spam.txt', 'temp.bin', 'temp.txt'])
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>gen.__next__()</code></strong>
('C:\\temp\\test\\parts', [], ['part0001', 'part0002', 'part0003', 'part0004'])
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>gen.__next__()</code></strong>
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "&lt;stdin&gt;", line 1, in &lt;module&gt;
StopIteration</pre>
<p>The library manual documents <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code> further than we will here. For
            instance, it supports bottom-up instead of top-down walks with its
            optional <code class="epub__literal">topdown=False</code>
            argument, and callers may prune tree branches by deleting names in
            the subdirectories lists of the yielded tuples.</p>
<p>Internally, the <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code>
            call generates filename lists at each level with the <code class="epub__literal">os.listdir</code> call we met earlier, which
            collects both file and directory names in no particular order and
            returns them without their directory paths; <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code> segregates this list into
            subdirectories and files (technically, nondirectories) before
            yielding a result. Also note that <code class="epub__literal">walk</code> uses the very same subdirectories
            list it yields to callers in order to later descend into
            subdirectories. Because lists are mutable objects that can be
            changed in place, if your code modifies the yielded subdirectory
            names list, it will impact what <code class="epub__literal">walk</code> does next. For example, deleting
            directory names will prune traversal branches, and sorting the
            list will order the <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e14878"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e14880"></a>walk.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Recursive os.listdir traversals"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="recursive_os.listdir_traversals"></a>Recursive os.listdir traversals</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code> tool
            <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e14891"></a>does the work of tree traversals for us; we simply
            provide loop code with task-specific logic. However, it’s
            sometimes more flexible and hardly any more work to do the walking
            ourselves. The following script recodes the directory listing
            script with a manual <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>recursive</em></span> traversal
            function (a function that calls itself to repeat its actions). The
            <code class="epub__literal">mylister</code> function in Example 4-5 is almost the same
            as <code class="epub__literal">lister</code> in Example 4-4 but calls <code class="epub__literal">os.listdir</code> to generate file paths
            manually and calls itself recursively to descend into
            subdirectories.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id14"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 4-5. PP4E\System\Filetools\lister_recur.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting"># list files in dir tree by recursion

import sys, os

def mylister(currdir):
    print('[' + currdir + ']')
    for file in os.listdir(currdir):              # list files here
        path = os.path.join(currdir, file)        # add dir path back
        if not os.path.isdir(path):
            print(path)
        else:
            mylister(path)                        # recur into subdirs

if __name__ == '__main__':
    mylister(sys.argv[1])                         # dir name in cmdline</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>As usual, this file can be both imported and called or run
            as a script, though the fact that its result is printed text makes
            it less useful as an imported component unless its output stream
            is captured by another program.</p>
<p>When run as a script, this file’s output is equivalent to
            that of Example 4-4, but
            not identical—unlike the <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code> version, our recursive walker
            here doesn’t order the walk to visit files before stepping into
            subdirectories. It could by looping through the filenames list
            twice (selecting files first), but as coded, the order is
            dependent on <code class="epub__literal">os.listdir</code>
            results. For most use cases, the walk order would be
            irrelevant:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e14933"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python lister_recur.py C:\temp\test</code></strong>
[C:\temp\test]
[C:\temp\test\parts]
C:\temp\test\parts\part0001
C:\temp\test\parts\part0002
C:\temp\test\parts\part0003
C:\temp\test\parts\part0004
C:\temp\test\random.bin
C:\temp\test\spam.txt
C:\temp\test\temp.bin
C:\temp\test\temp.txt</pre>
<p>We’ll make better use of most of this section’s techniques
            in later examples in Chapter 6
            and in this book at large. For example, scripts for copying and
            comparing directory trees use the tree-walker techniques
            introduced here. Watch for these tools in action along the way.
            We’ll also code a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>find</em></span> utility in Chapter 6 that combines the tree
            traversal of <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code> with the
            filename pattern <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e14950"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e14952"></a>expansion of <code class="epub__literal">glob.glob</code>.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Handling Unicode Filenames in 3.X: listdir, walk, glob"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="handling_unicode_filenames_in_3.x_colon"></a>Handling Unicode Filenames in 3.X: listdir, walk,
          glob</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Because all <a id="dir4.3.3"></a><a id="uni4.3.3"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e14974"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e14981"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e14988"></a>normal strings are Unicode in Python 3.X, the
          directory and file names generated by <code class="epub__literal">os.listdir</code>, <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">glob.glob</code> so far in this chapter are
          technically Unicode strings. This can have some ramifications if
          your directories contain unusual names that might not decode
          properly.</p>
<p>Technically, because filenames may contain arbitrary text, the
          <code class="epub__literal">os.listdir</code> works in two modes in
          3.X: given a <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> argument, this
          function will return filenames as encoded byte strings; given a
          normal <code class="epub__literal">str</code> string argument, it
          instead returns filenames as Unicode strings, decoded per the
          filesystem’s encoding scheme:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e15015"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import os</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>os.listdir('.')[:4]</code></strong>
['bigext-tree.py', 'bigpy-dir.py', 'bigpy-path.py', 'bigpy-tree.py']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>os.listdir(b'.')[:4]</code></strong>
[b'bigext-tree.py', b'bigpy-dir.py', b'bigpy-path.py', b'bigpy-tree.py']</pre>
<p>The byte string version can be used if undecodable file names
          may be present. Because <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code>
          and <code class="epub__literal">glob.glob</code> both work by
          calling <code class="epub__literal">os.listdir</code> internally,
          they inherit this behavior by proxy. The <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code> tree walker, for example, calls
          <code class="epub__literal">os.listdir</code> at each directory
          level; passing byte string arguments suppresses decoding and returns
          byte string results:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e15046"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for (dir, subs, files) in os.walk('..'):</code></strong> <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(dir)</code></strong>
...
..
..\Environment
..\Filetools
..\Processes

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for (dir, subs, files) in os.walk(b'..'): print(dir)</code></strong>
...
b'..'
b'..\\Environment'
b'..\\Filetools'
b'..\\Processes'</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">glob.glob</code> tool
          similarly calls <code class="epub__literal">os.listdir</code>
          internally before applying name patterns, and so also returns
          undecoded byte string names for byte string arguments:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e15065"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>glob.glob('.\*')[:3]</code></strong>
['.\\bigext-out.txt', '.\\bigext-tree.py', '.\\bigpy-dir.py']
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>glob.glob(b'.\*')[:3]</code></strong>
[b'.\\bigext-out.txt', b'.\\bigext-tree.py', b'.\\bigpy-dir.py']</pre>
<p>Given a normal string name (as a command-line argument, for
          example), you can force the issue by converting to byte strings with
          manual encoding to suppress decoding:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e15075"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>name = '.'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>os.listdir(name.encode())[:4]</code></strong>
[b'bigext-out.txt', b'bigext-tree.py', b'bigpy-dir.py', b'bigpy-path.py']</pre>
<p>The upshot is that if your directories may contain names which
          cannot be decoded according to the underlying platform’s Unicode
          encoding scheme, you may need to pass byte strings to these tools to
          avoid Unicode encoding errors. You’ll get byte strings back, which
          may be less readable if printed, but you’ll avoid errors while
          traversing directories and files.</p>
<p>This might be especially useful on systems that use simple
          encodings such as ASCII or Latin-1, but may contain files with
          arbitrarily encoded names from cross-machine copies, the Web, and so
          on. Depending upon context, exception handlers may be used to
          suppress some types of encoding errors as well.</p>
<p>We’ll see an example of how this can matter in the first
          section of Chapter 6, where an
          undecodable directory name generates an error if printed during a
          full disk scan (although that specific error seems more related to
          printing than to decoding in general).</p>
<p>Note that the basic <code class="epub__literal">open</code>
          built-in function allows the name of the file being opened to be
          passed as either Unicode <code class="epub__literal">str</code> or
          raw <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>, too, though this is
          used only to name the file initially; the additional mode argument
          determines whether the file’s content is handled in text or binary
          modes. Passing a byte string filename allows you to name files with
          arbitrarily encoded names.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Unicode policies: File content versus file names"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="unicode_policies_colon_file_content_vers"></a>Unicode policies: File content versus file names</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In fact, it’s <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e15108"></a>important to keep in mind that there are two
            different Unicode concepts related to files: the encoding of file
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>content</em></span> and the encoding of file
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>name</em></span>. Python provides your platform’s
            defaults for these settings in two different attributes; on
            <span>Windows 7</span>:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e15123"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import sys</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sys.getdefaultencoding()</code></strong>          # file content encoding, platform default
'utf-8'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sys.getfilesystemencoding()</code></strong>       # file name encoding, platform scheme
'mbcs'</pre>
<p>These settings allow you to be explicit when needed—the
            content encoding is used when data is read and written to the
            file, and the name encoding is used when dealing with names prior
            to transferring data. In addition, using <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> for file name tools may work
            around incompatibilities with the underlying file system’s scheme,
            and opening files in binary mode can suppress Unicode decoding
            errors for content.</p>
<p>As we’ve seen, though, opening text files in
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>binary mode</em></span> may also mean that the raw and
            still-encoded text will not match search strings as expected:
            search strings must also be byte strings encoded per a specific
            and possibly incompatible encoding scheme. In fact, this approach
            essentially mimics the behavior of text files in Python 2.X, and
            underscores why elevating Unicode in 3.X is generally
            desirable—such text files sometimes may appear to work even though
            they probably shouldn’t. On the other hand, opening text in binary
            mode to suppress Unicode content decoding and avoid decoding
            errors might still be useful if you do not wish to skip
            undecodable files and content is largely irrelevant.</p>
<p>As a rule of thumb, you should try to always provide an
            encoding name for text content if it might be outside the platform
            default, and you should rely on the default Unicode API for file
            names in most cases. Again, see Python’s manuals for more on the
            Unicode file name story than we have space to cover fully here,
            and see <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Learning
            Python</em></span>, Fourth Edition, for more on Unicode in
            <span>general</span>.</p>
<p>In Chapter 6, we’re going
            to put the tools we met in this chapter to realistic use. For
            example, we’ll apply file and directory tools to implement file
            splitters, testing systems, directory copies and compares, and a
            variety of utilities based on tree walking. We’ll find that
            Python’s directory tools we met here have an enabling quality that
            allows us to automate a large set of real-world tasks. First,
            though, Chapter 5 concludes our
            basic tool survey, by exploring another system topic that tends to
            weave its way into a wide variety of application domains—parallel
            processing in <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e15160"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e15162"></a>Python.</p>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[11] </sup>In fact, <code class="epub__literal">glob</code> just
                uses the standard <code class="epub__literal">fnmatch</code>
                module to match name patterns; see the <code class="epub__literal">fnmatch</code> description in Chapter 6’s <code class="epub__literal">find</code> module example for more
                details.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
