<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 5. Parallel System Tools</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 5. Parallel System Tools"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="parallel_system_tools"></a>Chapter 5. Parallel System Tools</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="“Telling the Monkeys What to Do”"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="quotation_mark_telling_the_monkeys_what"></a>“Telling the Monkeys What to Do”</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Most computers <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15173"></a>spend a lot of time doing nothing. If you start a system
        monitor tool and watch the CPU utilization, you’ll see what I
        mean—it’s rare to see one hit 100 percent, even when you are running
        multiple programs.<sup>[12]</sup> There are just too many delays built into software: disk
        accesses, network traffic, database queries, waiting for users to
        click a button, and so on. In fact, the majority of a modern CPU’s
        capacity is often spent in an idle state; faster chips help speed up
        performance demand peaks, but much of their power can go largely
        unused.</p>
<p>Early on in computing, programmers realized that they could tap
        into such unused processing power by running more than one program at
        the same time. By dividing the CPU’s attention among a set of tasks,
        its capacity need not go to waste while any given task is waiting for
        an external event to occur. The technique is usually called<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15188"></a> <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>parallel processing</em></span> (and sometimes
        “multiprocessing” <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15197"></a>or even “multitasking”) because many tasks seem to be
        performed at once, overlapping and parallel in time. It’s at the heart
        of modern operating systems, and it gave rise to the notion of
        multiple-active-window computer interfaces we’ve all come to take for
        granted. Even within a single program, dividing processing into tasks
        that run in parallel can make the overall system faster, at least as
        measured by the clock on your wall.</p>
<p>Just as important is that modern software systems are expected
        to be responsive to users regardless of the amount of work they must
        perform behind the scenes. It’s usually unacceptable for a program to
        stall while busy carrying out a request. Consider an email-browser
        user interface, for example; when asked to fetch email from a server,
        the program must download text from a server over a network. If you
        have enough email or a slow enough Internet link, that step alone can
        take minutes to finish. But while the download task proceeds, the
        program as a whole shouldn’t stall—it still must respond to screen
        redraws, mouse clicks, and so on.</p>
<p>Parallel processing comes to the rescue here, too. By performing
        such long-running tasks in parallel with the rest of the program, the
        system at large can remain responsive no matter how busy some of its
        parts may be. Moreover, the parallel processing model is a natural fit
        for structuring such programs and others; some tasks are more easily
        conceptualized and coded as components running as independent,
        parallel entities.</p>
<p>There are two fundamental ways to get tasks running at the same
        time in Python<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15209"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15214"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15219"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15224"></a>—<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>process forks</em></span> and
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>spawned threads</em></span>. Functionally, both rely on
        underlying operating system services to run bits of Python code in
        parallel. Procedurally, they are very different in terms of interface,
        portability, and communication. For instance, at this writing direct
        process forks are not supported on Windows under standard Python
        (though they are under Cygwin Python on Windows).</p>
<p>By contrast, Python’s thread support works on all major
        platforms. Moreover, the <code class="epub__literal">os.spawn</code>
        family of calls provides additional ways to launch programs in a
        platform-neutral way that is similar to forks, and the <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code> and <code class="epub__literal">os.system</code> calls and <code class="epub__literal">subprocess</code> module we studied in
        Chapters 2 and 3
        can be used to portably spawn programs with shell commands. The newer
        <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code> module offers
        additional ways to run processes portably in many contexts.</p>
<p>In this chapter, which is a continuation of our look at system
        interfaces available to Python programmers, we explore Python’s
        built-in tools for starting tasks in parallel, as well as
        communicating with those tasks. In some sense, we’ve already begun
        doing so—<code class="epub__literal">os.system</code>, <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">subprocess</code>, which we learned and applied
        over the last three chapters, are a fairly portable way to spawn and
        speak with command-line programs, too. We won’t repeat full coverage
        of those tools here.</p>
<p>Instead, our emphasis in this chapter is on introducing more
        direct techniques—forks, threads, pipes, signals, sockets, and other
        launching techniques—and on using Python’s built-in tools that support
        them, such as the <code class="epub__literal">os.fork</code> call and
        the <code class="epub__literal">threading</code>, <code class="epub__literal">queue</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code> modules. In the next chapter
        (and in the remainder of this book), we use these techniques in more
        realistic programs, so be sure you understand the basics here before
        flipping ahead.</p>
<p>One note up front: although the process, thread, and IPC
        mechanisms we will explore in this chapter are the primary parallel
        processing tools in Python scripts, the third party domain offers
        additional options which may serve more advanced or specialized roles.
        As just one example, the MPI for Python system allows Python scripts
        to also employ the Message Passing Interface (MPI) standard<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15285"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15288"></a>, allowing Python programs to exploit multiple
        processors in various ways (see the Web for details). While such
        specific extensions are beyond our scope in this book, the
        fundamentals of multiprocessing that we will explore here should apply
        to more advanced techniques you may encounter in your parallel
        futures.</p>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[12] </sup>To watch on Windows, click the Start button, select All
            Programs → Accessories → System Tools → Resource Monitor, and
            monitor CPU/Processor usage (Task Manager’s Performance tab may
            give similar results). The graph rarely climbed above single-digit
            percentages on my laptop machine while writing this footnote (at
            least until I typed <code class="epub__literal">while True:
            pass</code> in a Python interactive session window…).</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
