<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Forking Processes</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Forking Processes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="forking_processes"></a>Forking Processes</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Forked <a id="par5.2"></a><a id="fork5.2"></a>processes are a traditional way to structure parallel
        tasks, and they are a fundamental part of the Unix tool set. Forking
        is a straightforward way to start an independent program, whether it
        is different from the calling program or not. Forking is based on the
        notion of <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>copying</em></span> programs: when a program calls
        the fork routine, the operating system makes a new copy of that
        program and its process in memory and starts running that copy in
        parallel with the original. Some systems don’t really copy the
        original program (it’s an expensive operation), but the new copy works
        as if it were a literal copy.</p>
<p>After a fork operation, the original copy of the program is
        called the<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15313"></a> <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>parent</em></span> process, and the copy
        created by<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15320"></a> <code class="epub__literal">os.fork</code> is called
        the<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15331"></a> <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>child</em></span> process. In general, parents
        can make any number of children, and children can create child
        processes of their own; all forked processes run independently and in
        parallel under the operating system’s control, and children may
        continue to run after their parent exits.</p>
<p>This is probably simpler in practice than in theory, though. The
        Python script in Example 5-1
        forks new child processes until you type the letter
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>q</em></span> at the console.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id15"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 5-1. PP4E\System\Processes\fork1.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"forks child processes until you type 'q'"

import os

def child():
    print('Hello from child',  os.getpid())
    os._exit(0)  # else goes back to parent loop

def parent():
    while True:
        newpid = os.fork()
        if newpid == 0:
            child()
        else:
            print('Hello from parent', os.getpid(), newpid)
        if input() == 'q': break

parent()</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Python’s process forking tools, available in the<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15355"></a> <code class="epub__literal">os</code> module, are
        simply thin wrappers over standard forking calls in the system library
        also used by C language programs. To start a new, parallel process,
        call the <code class="epub__literal">os.fork</code> built-in function.
        Because this function generates a copy of the calling program, it
        returns a different value in each copy: zero in the child process and
        the process ID of the new child in the parent.</p>
<p>Programs generally test this result to begin different
        processing in the child only; this script, for instance, runs the
        <code class="epub__literal">child</code> function in child processes
        only.<sup>[13]</sup></p>
<p>Because forking is ingrained in the <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15384"></a>Unix programming model, this script works well on Unix,
        Linux, and modern Macs. Unfortunately, this script won’t work on the
        standard version of Python for Windows today, because <code class="epub__literal">fork</code> is too much at odds with the Windows
        model. Python scripts can always spawn threads on Windows, and the
        <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code> module described
        later in this chapter provides an alternative for running processes
        portably, which can obviate the need for process forks on Windows in
        contexts that conform to its constraints (albeit at some potential
        cost in low-level control).</p>
<p>The script in Example 5-1 does work on Windows,
        however, if you use the Python shipped with the Cygwin
        system<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15400"></a> (or build one of your own from source-code with
        Cygwin’s libraries). Cygwin is a free, open source system that
        provides full Unix-like functionality for Windows (and is described
        further in More on Cygwin Python for Windows). You
        can fork with Python on Windows under Cygwin, even though its behavior
        is not exactly the same as true Unix forks. Because it’s close enough
        for this book’s examples, though, let’s use it to run our script
        live:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e15408"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">[C:\...\PP4E\System\Processes]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python fork1.py</code></strong>
Hello from parent 7296 7920
Hello from child 7920

Hello from parent 7296 3988
Hello from child 3988

Hello from parent 7296 6796
Hello from child 6796
<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>q</code></strong></pre>
<p>These messages represent three forked child processes; the
        unique identifiers of all the processes involved are fetched and
        displayed with the<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15418"></a> <code class="epub__literal">os.getpid</code> call. A
        subtle point: the <code class="epub__literal">child</code> process
        function is also careful to exit explicitly with an <code class="epub__literal">os._exit</code> call. We’ll discuss this call in
        more detail later in this chapter, but if it’s not made, the child
        process would live on after the <code class="epub__literal">child</code> function returns (remember, it’s just
        a copy of the original process). The net effect is that the child
        would go back to the loop in <code class="epub__literal">parent</code>
        and start forking children of its own (i.e., the parent would have
        grandchildren). If you delete the exit call and rerun, you’ll likely
        have to type more than one q to stop, because multiple processes are
        running in the <code class="epub__literal">parent</code>
        function.</p>
<p>In Example 5-1, each
        process exits very soon after it starts, so there’s little overlap in
        time. Let’s do something slightly more sophisticated to better
        illustrate multiple forked processes running in parallel. Example 5-2 starts up 5 copies of
        itself, each copy counting up to 5 with a one-second delay between
        iterations. The<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15449"></a> <code class="epub__literal">time.sleep</code> standard
        library call simply pauses the calling process for a number of seconds
        (you can pass a floating-point value to pause for fractions of
        seconds).</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id16"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 5-2. PP4E\System\Processes\fork-count.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
fork basics: start 5 copies of this program running in parallel with
the original; each copy counts up to 5 on the same stdout stream--forks
copy process memory, including file descriptors; fork doesn't currently
work on Windows without Cygwin: use os.spawnv or multiprocessing on
Windows instead; spawnv is roughly like a fork+exec combination;
"""

import os, time

def counter(count):                                    # run in new process
    for i in range(count):
        time.sleep(1)                                  # simulate real work
        print('[%s] =&gt; %s' % (os.getpid(), i))

for i in range(5):
    pid = os.fork()
    if pid != 0:
        print('Process %d spawned' % pid)              # in parent: continue
    else:
        counter(5)                                     # else in child/new process
        os._exit(0)                                    # run function and exit

print('Main process exiting.')                         # parent need not wait</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>When run, this script starts 5 processes immediately and exits.
        All 5 forked processes check in with their first count display one
        second later and every second thereafter. Notice that child processes
        continue to run, even if the parent process that created them
        terminates:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e15465"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">[C:\...\PP4E\System\Processes]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python fork-count.py</code></strong>
Process 4556 spawned
Process 3724 spawned
Process 6360 spawned
Process 6476 spawned
Process 6684 spawned
Main process exiting.
[4556] =&gt; 0
[3724] =&gt; 0
[6360] =&gt; 0
[6476] =&gt; 0
[6684] =&gt; 0
[4556] =&gt; 1
[3724] =&gt; 1
[6360] =&gt; 1
[6476] =&gt; 1
[6684] =&gt; 1
[4556] =&gt; 2
[3724] =&gt; 2
[6360] =&gt; 2
[6476] =&gt; 2
[6684] =&gt; 2
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...more output omitted...</span></em></pre>
<p>The output of all of these processes shows up on the same
        screen, because all of them share the standard output stream (and a
        system prompt may show up along the way, too). Technically, a forked
        process gets a copy of the original process’s global memory, including
        open file descriptors. Because of that, global objects like files
        start out with the same values in a child process, so all the
        processes here are tied to the same single stream. But it’s important
        to remember that global memory is copied, not shared; if a child
        process changes a global object, it changes only its own copy. (As
        we’ll see, this works differently in threads, the topic of the next
        <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15474"></a>section.)</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The fork/exec Combination"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_fork_solidus_exec_combination"></a>The fork/exec Combination</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In Examples 5-1 and 5-2, child processes simply ran a
          function within the <a id="fork5.2.1"></a><a id="os5.2.1a"></a><a id="os5.2.1b"></a>Python program and then exited. On Unix-like
          platforms, forks are often the basis of starting independently
          running programs that are completely different from the program that
          performed the <code class="epub__literal">fork</code> call. For
          instance, Example 5-3 forks
          new processes until we type <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>q</em></span> again, but child
          processes run a brand-new program instead of calling a function in
          the same file.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id17"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 5-3. PP4E\System\Processes\fork-exec.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"starts programs until you type 'q'"

import os

parm = 0
while True:
    parm += 1
    pid = os.fork()
    if pid == 0:                                             # copy process
        os.execlp('python', 'python', 'child.py', str(parm)) # overlay program
        assert False, 'error starting program'               # shouldn't return
    else:
        print('Child is', pid)
        if input() == 'q': break</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>If you’ve done much Unix development, the <code class="epub__literal">fork</code>/<code class="epub__literal">exec</code> combination will probably look
          familiar. The main thing to notice is the <code class="epub__literal">os.execlp</code> call in this code. In a
          nutshell, this call replaces (overlays) the program running in the
          current process with a brand new program. Because of that, the
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>combination</em></span> of <code class="epub__literal">os.fork</code> and <code class="epub__literal">os.execlp</code> means start a new process and
          run a new program in that process—in other words, launch a new
          program in parallel with the original program.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="os.exec call formats"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="os.exec_call_formats"></a>os.exec call formats</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The arguments <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15544"></a>to <code class="epub__literal">os.execlp</code>
            specify the program to be run by giving command-line arguments
            used to start the program (i.e., what Python scripts know as
            <code class="epub__literal">sys.argv</code>). If successful, the
            new program begins running and the call to <code class="epub__literal">os.execlp</code> itself never returns (since
            the original program has been replaced, there’s really nothing to
            return to). If the call does return, an error has occurred, so we
            code an <code class="epub__literal">assert</code> after it that
            will always raise an exception if reached.</p>
<p>There are a handful of <code class="epub__literal">os.exec</code> variants in the Python standard
            library; some allow us to configure environment variables for the
            new program, pass command-line arguments in different forms, and
            so on. All are available on both Unix and Windows, and they
            replace the calling program (i.e., the Python interpreter).
            <code class="epub__literal">exec</code> comes in eight flavors,
            which can be a bit confusing unless you generalize:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">os.execv(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>program,
                commandlinesequence</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>The basic “v” <code class="epub__literal">exec</code>
                  form is <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15585"></a>passed an executable program’s name, along
                  with a list or tuple of command-line argument strings used
                  to run the executable (that is, the words you would normally
                  type in a shell to start a program).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">os.execl(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>program,
                cmdarg1, cmdarg2,... cmdargN</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>The basic “l” <code class="epub__literal">exec</code>
                  form is <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15605"></a>passed an executable’s name, followed by one
                  or more command-line arguments passed as individual function
                  arguments. This is the same as <code class="epub__literal">os.execv(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>program,</code></em>
<code class="epub__literal">(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>cmdarg1,
                  cmdarg2,...</code></em><code class="epub__literal">))</code>.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">os.execlp</code><br/></span><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">os.execvp</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Adding the <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15633"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15638"></a>letter p to the <code class="epub__literal">execv</code> and <code class="epub__literal">execl</code> names means that Python will
                  locate the executable’s directory using your system
                  search-path setting (i.e., <code class="epub__literal">PATH</code>).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">os.execle</code><br/></span><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">os.execve</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Adding a <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15663"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15668"></a>letter e to the <code class="epub__literal">execv</code> and <code class="epub__literal">execl</code> names means an extra,
                  <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>last</em></span> argument is a dictionary
                  containing shell environment variables to send to the
                  program.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">os.execvpe</code><br/></span><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">os.execlpe</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Adding the <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15693"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15698"></a>letters p and e to the basic <code class="epub__literal">exec</code> names means to use the search
                  path <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>and</em></span> to accept a shell environment
                  settings dictionary.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>So when the script in Example 5-3 calls <code class="epub__literal">os.execlp</code>, individually passed
            parameters specify a command line for the program to be run on,
            and the word <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>python</em></span> maps to an executable
            file according to the underlying system search-path setting
            environment variable (<code class="epub__literal">PATH</code>).
            It’s as if we were running a command of the form <code class="epub__literal">python child.py 1</code> in a shell, but with a
            different command-line argument on the end each time.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Spawned child program"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="spawned_child_program"></a>Spawned child program</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Just as when <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15731"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15736"></a>typed at a shell, the string of arguments passed to
            <code class="epub__literal">os.execlp</code> by the <code class="epub__literal">fork-exec</code> script in Example 5-3 starts another
            Python program file, as shown in Example 5-4.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id18"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 5-4. PP4E\System\Processes\child.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import os, sys
print('Hello from child', os.getpid(), sys.argv[1])</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Here is this code in action on Linux. It doesn’t look much
            different from the original <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>fork1.py</em></span>, but
            it’s really running a new <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>program</em></span> in each
            forked process. More observant readers may notice that the child
            process ID displayed is the same in the parent program and the
            launched <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>child.py</em></span> program; <code class="epub__literal">os.execlp</code> simply overlays a program in
            the same process:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e15771"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">[C:\...\PP4E\System\Processes]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python fork-exec.py</code></strong>
Child is 4556
Hello from child 4556 1

Child is 5920
Hello from child 5920 2

Child is 316
Hello from child 316 3
<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>q</code></strong></pre>
<p>There are other ways to start up programs in Python besides
            the fork/exec combination. For example, the <code class="epub__literal">os.system</code> and <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code> calls and <code class="epub__literal">subprocess</code> module which we explored in
            Chapters 2 and 3 allow us to spawn shell
            commands. And the <code class="epub__literal">os.spawnv</code>
            call and <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code>
            module, which we’ll meet later in this chapter, allow us to start
            independent programs and processes more portably. In fact, we’ll
            see later that <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code>’s process spawning model
            can be used as a sort of portable replacement for <code class="epub__literal">os.fork</code> in some contexts (albeit a less
            efficient one) and used in conjunction with the <code class="epub__literal">os.exec*</code> calls shown here to achieve a
            similar effect in standard Windows Python.</p>
<p>We’ll see more process fork examples later in this chapter,
            especially in the program exits and process communication
            sections, so we’ll forego additional examples here. We’ll also
            discuss additional process topics in later chapters of this book.
            For instance, forks are revisited in Chapter 12 to deal with servers and their
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>zombies</em></span>—dead processes lurking in system
            tables after their demise. For now, let’s move on to threads, a
            subject which at least some programmers find to be substantially
            less <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15816"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15818"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15820"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15822"></a>frightening…</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="more_on_cygwin_python_for_windows"></a>
<p class="epub__title">More on Cygwin Python for Windows</p>
<p>As mentioned, the <code class="epub__literal">os.fork</code> call is present in the
              <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15834"></a>Cygwin version of Python on Windows. Even though
              this call is missing in the standard version of Python for
              Windows, you can fork processes on Windows with Python if you
              install and use Cygwin. However, the Cygwin fork call is not as
              efficient and does not work exactly the same as a fork on true
              Unix systems.</p>
<p>Cygwin is a free, open source package which includes a
              library that attempts to provide a Unix-like API for use on
              Windows machines, along with a set of command-line tools that
              implement a Unix-like environment. It makes it easier to apply
              Unix skills and code on Windows computers.</p>
<p>According to its FAQ documentation, though, “Cygwin fork()
              essentially works like a noncopy on write version of fork()
              (like old Unix versions used to do). Because of this it can be a
              little slow. In most cases, you are better off using the spawn
              family of calls if possible.” Since this book’s fork examples
              don’t need to care about performance, Cygwin’s fork
              suffices.</p>
<p>In addition to the fork call, Cygwin provides other Unix
              tools that would otherwise not be available on all flavors of
              Windows, including <code class="epub__literal">os.mkfifo</code>
              (discussed later in this chapter). It also comes with a <code class="epub__literal">gcc</code> compiler environment for building
              C extensions for Python on Windows that will be familiar to Unix
              developers. As long as you’re willing to use Cygwin libraries to
              build your application and power your Python, it’s very close to
              Unix on Windows.</p>
<p>Like all third-party libraries, though, Cygwin adds an
              extra dependency to your systems. Perhaps more critically,
              Cygwin currently uses the GNU GPL license, which adds
              distribution requirements beyond those of standard Python.
              Unlike using Python itself, shipping a program that uses Cygwin
              libraries may require that your program’s source code be made
              freely available (though RedHat offers a “buy-out” option which
              can relieve you of this requirement). Note that this is a
              complex legal issue, and you should study Cygwin’s license on
              your own if this may impact your programs. Its license does,
              however, impose more constraints than Python’s (Python uses a
              “BSD”-style license, not the GPL).</p>
<p>Despite licensing issue, Cygwin still can be a great way
              to get Unix-like functionality on Windows without installing a
              completely different operating system such as <span>Linux—</span>a more complete but
              generally more complex option. For more details, see http://cygwin.com or run a search for Cygwin on
              the Web.</p>
<p>See also the standard library’s <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code> module and <code class="epub__literal">os.spawn</code> family of calls, covered
              later in this chapter, for alternative way to start parallel
              tasks and programs on Unix and Windows that do not require fork
              and exec calls. To run a simple function call in parallel on
              Windows (rather than on an external program), also see the
              section on standard library threads later in this chapter.
              Threads, <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code>, and
              <code class="epub__literal">os.spawn</code> calls work on
              Windows in standard Python.</p>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Fourth Edition
              Update</em></span>: As I was updating this chapter in February
              2010, Cygwin’s official Python was still Python 2.5.2. To get
              Python 3.1 under Cygwin, it had to be built from its source
              code. If this is still required when you read this, make sure
              you have <code class="epub__literal">gcc</code> and <code class="epub__literal">make</code> installed on your Cygwin, then
              fetch Python’s source code package from python.org, unpack it,
              and build Python with the usual commands:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e15886"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">    ./configure
    make
    make test
    sudo make install</pre>
<p>This will install Python as <code class="epub__literal">python3</code>. The same procedure works on
              all Unix-like platforms; on OS X and Cygwin, the executable is
              called <code class="epub__literal">python.exe</code>; elsewhere
              it’s named <code class="epub__literal">python</code>. You can
              generally skip the last two of the above steps if you’re willing
              to run Python 3.1 out of your own build directory. Be sure to
              also check if Python 3.X is a standard Cygwin package by the
              time you read this; when building from source you may have to
              tweak a few files (I had to comment-out a <code class="epub__literal">#define</code> in <code class="epub__literal">Modules/main.c</code>), but these are too
              specific and temporal to get into here.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[13] </sup>At least in the current Python implementation, calling
            <code class="epub__literal">os.fork</code> in a Python script
            actually copies the Python interpreter process (if you look at
            your process list, you’ll see two Python entries after a fork).
            But since the Python interpreter records everything about your
            running script, it’s OK to think of <code class="epub__literal">fork</code> as copying your program directly.
            It really will if Python scripts are ever compiled to binary
            machine code.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
