<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Threads</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Threads"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="threads"></a>Threads</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Threads are <a id="par5.3"></a>another way to start activities running at the same
        time. In short, they run a call to a function (or any other type of
        callable object) in parallel with the rest of the program. Threads are
        sometimes called “lightweight processes,” because they run in parallel
        like forked processes, but all of them run within the same single
        process. While processes are commonly used to start independent
        programs, threads are commonly used for tasks such as nonblocking
        input calls and long-running tasks in a GUI. They also provide a
        natural model for algorithms that can be expressed as independently
        running tasks. For applications that can benefit from parallel
        processing, some developers consider threads to offer a <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15916"></a>number of advantages:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Performance</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Because all threads <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15930"></a>run within the same process, they don’t generally
              incur a big startup cost to copy the process itself. The costs
              of both copying forked processes and running threads can vary
              per platform, but threads are usually considered less expensive
              in terms of performance overhead.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Simplicity</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>To many observers, threads can be noticeably simpler to
              program, too, especially when some of the more complex aspects
              of processes enter the picture (e.g., process exits,
              communication schemes, and zombie processes, covered in Chapter 12).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Shared global memory</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>On a related note, because threads run in a single
              process, every thread shares the same <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15952"></a>global memory space of the process. This provides
              a natural and easy way for threads to communicate—by fetching
              and setting names or objects accessible to all the threads. To
              the Python programmer, this means that things like global scope
              variables, passed objects and their attributes, and program-wide
              interpreter components such as imported modules are shared among
              all threads in a program; if one thread assigns a global
              variable, for instance, its new value will be seen by other
              threads. Some care must be taken to control access to shared
              items, but to some this seems generally simpler to use than the
              process communication tools necessary for forked processes,
              which we’ll meet later in this chapter and book (e.g., pipes,
              streams, signals, sockets, etc.). Like much in programming, this
              is not a universally shared view, however, so you’ll have to
              weigh the difference for your programs and platforms
              yourself.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Portability</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Perhaps most important is the fact that threads are more
              portable than forked processes. At this writing, <code class="epub__literal">os.fork</code> is not supported by the
              standard version of Python on Windows, but threads are. If you
              want to run parallel tasks portably in a Python script today and
              you are unwilling or unable to install a Unix-like library such
              as Cygwin on Windows, threads may be your best bet. Python’s
              thread tools automatically account for any platform-specific
              thread differences, and they provide a consistent interface
              across all operating systems. Having said that, the relatively
              new <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code> module
              described later in this chapter offers another answer to the
              process portability issue in some use cases.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>So what’s the catch? There are three potential <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15973"></a>downsides you should be aware of before you start
        spinning your threads:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Function calls versus programs</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>First of all, threads are not a way—<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15987"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15992"></a>at least, not a direct way—to start up another
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>program</em></span>. Rather, threads are designed to
              run a call to a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>function</em></span> (technically, any
              callable, including bound and unbound methods) in parallel with
              the rest of the program. As we saw in the prior section, by
              contrast, forked processes can either call a function or start a
              new program. Naturally, the threaded function can run scripts
              with the <code class="epub__literal">exec</code> built-in
              function and can start new programs with tools such as <code class="epub__literal">os.system</code>, <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code> and the <code class="epub__literal">subprocess</code> module, especially if doing
              so is itself a long-running task. But fundamentally, threads run
              in-program functions.</p>
<p>In practice, this is usually not a limitation. For many
              applications, parallel functions are sufficiently powerful. For
              instance, if you want to implement nonblocking input and output
              and avoid blocking a GUI or its users with long-running tasks,
              threads do the job; simply spawn a thread to run a function that
              performs the potentially long-running task. The rest of the
              program will continue independently.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Thread synchronization and
            queues</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Secondly, the <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16026"></a>fact that threads share objects and names in
              global process memory is both good news and bad news—it provides
              a communication mechanism, but we have to be careful to
              synchronize a variety of operations. As we’ll see, even
              operations such as printing are a potential conflict since there
              is only one <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code> per
              process, which is shared by all threads.</p>
<p>Luckily, the <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16037"></a>Python <code class="epub__literal">queue</code>
              module, described in this section, makes this simple: realistic
              threaded programs are usually structured as one or more
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>producer</em></span> (a.k.a.
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>worker</em></span>) threads that add data to a queue,
              along with one or more <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>consumer</em></span> threads
              that take the data off the queue and process it. In a typical
              threaded GUI, for example, producers may download or compute
              data and place it on the queue; the consumer—the main GUI
              thread—checks the queue for data periodically with a timer event
              and displays it in the GUI when it arrives. Because the shared
              queue is thread-safe, programs structured this way automatically
              synchronize much cross-thread data communication.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>The global interpreter lock
            (GIL)</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Finally, <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16062"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16067"></a>as we’ll learn in more detail later in this
              section, Python’s implementation of threads means that only one
              thread is ever really running its Python language code in the
              Python virtual machine at any point in time. Python threads are
              true operating system threads, but all threads must acquire a
              single shared lock when they are ready to run, and each thread
              may be swapped out after running for a short period of time
              (currently, after a set number of virtual machine instructions,
              though this implementation may change in Python 3.2).</p>
<p>Because of this structure, the Python language parts of
              Python threads cannot today be distributed across multiple CPUs
              on a multi-CPU computer. To leverage more than one CPU, you’ll
              simply need to use process forking, not threads (the amount and
              complexity of code required for both are roughly the same).
              Moreover, the parts of a thread that perform long-running tasks
              implemented as C extensions can run truly independently if they
              release the GIL to allow the Python code of other threads to run
              while their task is in progress. Python code, however, cannot
              truly overlap in time.</p>
<p>The advantage of Python’s implementation of threads is
              performance—when it was attempted, making the virtual machine
              truly thread-safe reportedly slowed all programs by a factor of
              two on Windows and by an even larger factor on Linux. Even
              nonthreaded programs ran at half speed.</p>
<p>Even though the GIL’s multiplexing of Python language code
              makes Python threads less useful for leveraging capacity on
              multiple CPU machines, threads are still useful as programming
              tools to implement nonblocking operations, especially in GUIs.
              Moreover, the newer <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code> module we’ll meet
              later offers another solution here, too—by providing a portable
              thread-like API that is implemented with processes, programs can
              both leverage the simplicity and <span>program</span><span>mability</span> of threads and benefit
              from the scalability of independent processes across
              CPUs.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Despite what you may think after reading the preceding overview,
        threads are remarkably easy to use in Python. In fact, when a program
        is started it is already running a thread, usually called the “main
        thread” of the process. To start new, independent threads of execution
        within a process, Python code uses either the low-level <code class="epub__literal">_thread</code> module to run a function call in a
        spawned thread, or the higher-level <code class="epub__literal">threading</code> module to manage threads with
        high-level class-based objects. Both modules also provide tools for
        synchronizing access to shared objects with locks.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note"><h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p>This book presents both the <code class="epub__literal">_thread</code> and <code class="epub__literal">threading</code> modules, and its examples use
          both interchangeably. Some Python users would recommend that you
          always use <code class="epub__literal">threading</code> rather than
          <code class="epub__literal">_thread</code> in general. In fact, the
          latter was renamed from <code class="epub__literal">thread</code> to
          <code class="epub__literal">_thread</code> in 3.X to suggest such a
          lesser status for it. Personally, I think that is too extreme (and
          this is one reason this book sometimes uses <code class="epub__literal">as thread</code> in imports to retain the
          original module name). Unless you need the more powerful tools in
          <code class="epub__literal">threading</code>, the choice is largely
          arbitrary, and the <code class="epub__literal">threading</code>
          module’s extra requirements may be unwarranted.</p>
<p>The basic <code class="epub__literal">thread</code> module
          does not impose OOP, and as you’ll see in the examples of this
          section, is very straightforward to use. The <code class="epub__literal">threading</code> module may be better for more
          complex tasks which require per-thread state retention or joins, but
          not all threaded programs require its extra tools, and many use
          threads in more limited scopes. In fact, this is roughly the same as
          comparing the <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code> call and
          visitor classes we’ll meet in Chapter 6—both have valid audiences and
          use cases. The most general Python rule of thumb applies here as
          always: <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>keep it simple, <span>unless</span> it has to be
          complex</em></span>.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The _thread Module"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_underscore_thread_module"></a>The _thread Module</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Since the basic <code class="epub__literal">_thread</code>
          module <a id="th5.3.1"></a>is a bit simpler than the more advanced <code class="epub__literal">threading</code> module covered later in this
          section, let’s look at some of its interfaces first. This module
          provides a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>portable</em></span> interface to whatever
          threading system is available in your platform: its interfaces work
          the same on Windows, Solaris, SGI, and any system with an installed
          <code class="epub__literal">pthreads</code> POSIX threads
          implementation (including Linux and others). Python scripts that use
          the Python <code class="epub__literal">_thread</code> module work on
          all of these platforms without changing their source code.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Basic usage"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="basic_usage"></a>Basic usage</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Let’s start off by <a id="thread5.3.1.1"></a>experimenting with a script that demonstrates the
            main thread interfaces. The script in Example 5-5 spawns threads until
            you reply with a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>q</em></span> at the console; it’s
            similar in spirit to (and a bit simpler than) the script in Example 5-1, but it goes
            parallel with threads instead of process forks.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id19"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 5-5. PP4E\System\Threads\thread1.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"spawn threads until you type 'q'"

import _thread

def child(tid):
    print('Hello from thread', tid)

def parent():
    i = 0
    while True:
        i += 1
        _thread.start_new_thread(child, (i,))
        if input() == 'q': break

parent()</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>This script really contains only two thread-specific lines:
            the import of the <code class="epub__literal">_thread</code>
            module and the thread creation call. To start a thread, we simply
            call <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16202"></a>the <code class="epub__literal">_thread.start_new_thread</code> function, no
            matter what platform we’re programming on.<sup>[14]</sup> This call takes a function (or other callable)
            object and an arguments tuple and starts a new thread to execute a
            call to the passed function with the passed arguments. It’s almost
            like Python’s <code class="epub__literal">function(*args)</code>
            call syntax, and similarly accepts an optional keyword arguments
            dictionary, too, but in this case the function call begins running
            in parallel with the rest of the program.</p>
<p>Operationally speaking, the <code class="epub__literal">_thread.start_new_thread</code> call itself
            returns immediately with no useful value, and the thread it spawns
            silently exits when the function being run returns (the return
            value of the threaded function call is simply ignored). Moreover,
            if a function run in a thread raises an uncaught exception, a
            stack trace is printed and the thread exits, but the rest of the
            program continues. With the <code class="epub__literal">_thread</code> module, the entire program exits
            silently on most platforms when the main thread does (though as
            we’ll see later, the <code class="epub__literal">threading</code>
            module may require special handling if child threads are still
            running).</p>
<p>In practice, though, it’s almost trivial to use threads in a
            Python script. Let’s run this program to launch a few threads; we
            can run it on both Unix-like platforms and Windows this time,
            because threads are more portable than process forks—here it is
            spawning threads on Windows:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e16246"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Threads&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python thread1.py</code></strong>
Hello from thread 1

Hello from thread 2

Hello from thread 3

Hello from thread 4
<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>q</code></strong></pre>
<p>Each message here is printed from a new thread, which exits
            almost as soon as it <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16255"></a>is started.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Other ways to code threads with _thread"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="other_ways_to_code_threads_with_undersco"></a>Other ways to code threads with _thread</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Although the <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16263"></a>preceding script runs a simple function<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>,
            any callable object</em></span> may be run in the thread, because
            all threads live in the same process. For instance, a thread can
            also run a lambda function or bound method of an object (the
            following code is part of file <em class="epub__filename">thread-alts.py</em> in the book examples
            package):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e16275"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import _thread                                       # all 3 print 4294967296

def action(i):                                       # function run in threads
    print(i ** 32)

class Power:
    def __init__(self, i):
        self.i = i
    def action(self):                                # bound method run in threads
        print(self.i ** 32)

_thread.start_new_thread(action, (2,))               # simple function

_thread.start_new_thread((lambda: action(2)), ())    # lambda function to defer

obj = Power(2)
_thread.start_new_thread(obj.action, ())             # bound method object</pre>
<p>As we’ll see in larger examples later in this book,
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>bound methods</em></span> are especially useful in this
            role—because they remember both the method function and instance
            object, they also give access to state information and class
            methods for use within and during the thread.</p>
<p>More fundamentally, because threads all run in the same
            process, bound methods run by threads reference the original
            in-process instance object, not a copy of it. Hence, any changes
            to its state made in a thread will be visible to all threads
            automatically. Moreover, since bound methods of a class instance
            pass for callables interchangeably with simple functions, using
            them in threads this way just works. And as we’ll see later, the
            fact that they are normal objects also allows them to be stored
            freely on shared queues.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Running multiple threads"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="running_multiple_threads"></a>Running multiple threads</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To really <a id="thread5.3.1.3"></a>understand the power of threads running in parallel,
            though, we have to do something more long-lived in our threads,
            just as we did earlier for processes. Let’s mutate the <code class="epub__literal">fork-count</code> program of the prior section
            to use threads. The script in Example 5-6 starts 5 copies of
            its <code class="epub__literal">counter</code> function running in
            parallel threads.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id20"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 5-6. PP4E\System\Threads\thread-count.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
thread basics: start 5 copies of a function running in parallel;
uses time.sleep so that the main thread doesn't die too early--
this kills all other threads on some platforms; stdout is shared:
thread outputs may be intermixed in this version arbitrarily.
"""

import _thread as thread, time

def counter(myId, count):                        # function run in threads
    for i in range(count):
        time.sleep(1)                            # simulate real work
        print('[%s] =&gt; %s' % (myId, i))

for i in range(5):                               # spawn 5 threads
    thread.start_new_thread(counter, (i, 5))     # each thread loops 5 times

time.sleep(6)
print('Main thread exiting.')                    # don't exit too early</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Each parallel copy of the <code class="epub__literal">counter</code> function simply counts from zero
            up to four here and prints a message to standard output for each
            count.</p>
<p>Notice how this script sleeps for 6 seconds at the end. On
            Windows and Linux machines this has been tested on, the main
            thread shouldn’t exit while any spawned threads are running if it
            cares about their work; if it does exit, all spawned threads are
            immediately terminated. This differs from processes, where spawned
            children live on when parents exit. Without the sleep here, the
            spawned threads would die almost immediately after they are
            started.</p>
<p>This may seem ad hoc, but it isn’t required on all
            platforms, and programs are usually structured such that the main
            thread naturally lives as long as the threads it starts. For
            instance, a user interface may start an FTP download running in a
            thread, but the download lives a much shorter life than the user
            interface itself. Later in this section, we’ll also see different
            ways to avoid this sleep using global locks and flags that let
            threads signal their completion.</p>
<p>Moreover, we’ll later find that the <code class="epub__literal">threading</code> module both provides a
            <code class="epub__literal">join</code> method that lets us wait
            for spawned threads to finish explicitly, and refuses to allow a
            program to exit at all if any of its normal threads are still
            running (which may be useful in this case, but can require extra
            work to shut down in others). The <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code> module we’ll meet later
            in this chapter also allows spawned children to outlive their
            parents, though this is largely an artifact of its process-based
            model.</p>
<p>Now, when Example 5-6 is run on Windows 7
            under Python 3.1, here is the output I get:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e16332"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Threads&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python thread-count.py</code></strong>
[1] =&gt; 0
[1] =&gt; 0
[0] =&gt; 0
[1] =&gt; 0
[0] =&gt; 0
[2] =&gt; 0
[3] =&gt; 0
[3] =&gt; 0

[1] =&gt; 1
[3] =&gt; 1
[3] =&gt; 1
[0] =&gt; 1[2] =&gt; 1
[3] =&gt; 1
[0] =&gt; 1[2] =&gt; 1
[4] =&gt; 1

[1] =&gt; 2
[3] =&gt; 2[4] =&gt; 2
[3] =&gt; 2[4] =&gt; 2
[0] =&gt; 2
[3] =&gt; 2[4] =&gt; 2
[0] =&gt; 2
[2] =&gt; 2
[3] =&gt; 2[4] =&gt; 2
[0] =&gt; 2
[2] =&gt; 2

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...more output omitted...</span></em>
Main thread exiting.</pre>
<p>If this looks odd, it’s because it should. In fact, this
            demonstrates probably the most unusual aspect of threads. What’s
            happening here is that the output of the 5 threads run in parallel
            is intermixed—because all the threaded function calls run in the
            same process, they all share the same standard output stream (in
            Python terms, there is just one <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code> file between them, which is
            where printed text is sent). The net effect is that their output
            can be combined and confused arbitrarily. In fact, this script’s
            output can differ on each run. This jumbling of output grew even
            more pronounced in Python 3, presumably due to its new file output
            implementation.</p>
<p>More fundamentally, when multiple threads can access a
            shared resource like this, their access must be synchronized to
            avoid overlap in time—as explained in the next <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16347"></a>section.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Synchronizing access to shared objects and names"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="synchronizing_access_to_shared_objects_a"></a>Synchronizing access to shared objects and names</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>One of the nice things <a id="thread5.3.1.4"></a><a id="syn5.3.1.4"></a>about threads is that they automatically come with a
            cross-task communications mechanism: objects and namespaces in a
            process that span the life of threads are shared by all spawned
            threads. For instance, because every thread runs in the same
            process, if one Python thread changes a global scope variable, the
            change can be seen by every other thread in the process, main or
            child. Similarly, threads can share and change mutable objects in
            the process’s memory as long as they hold a reference to them
            (e.g., passed-in arguments). This serves as a simple way for a
            program’s threads to pass information—exit flags, result objects,
            event indicators, and so on—back and forth to each other.</p>
<p>The downside to this scheme is that our threads must
            sometimes be careful to avoid changing global objects and names at
            the same time. If two threads may change a shared object at once,
            it’s not impossible that one of the two changes will be lost (or
            worse, will silently corrupt the state of the shared object
            completely): one thread may step on the work done so far by
            another whose operations are still in progress. The extent to
            which this becomes an issue varies per application, and sometimes
            it isn’t an issue at all.</p>
<p>But even things that aren’t obviously at risk may be at
            risk. Files and streams, for example, are shared by all threads in
            a program; if multiple threads write to one stream at the same
            time, the stream might wind up with interleaved, garbled data.
            Example 5-6 of the prior
            section was a simple demonstration of this phenomenon in action,
            but it’s indicative of the sorts of clashes in time that can occur
            when our programs go parallel. Even simple changes can go awry if
            they might happen concurrently. To be robust, threaded programs
            need to control access to shared global items like these so that
            only one thread uses them at once.</p>
<p>Luckily, Python’s <code class="epub__literal">_thread</code>
            module comes with its own easy-to-use tools for synchronizing
            access to objects shared among threads. These tools are based on
            the concept of a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>lock</em></span>—to change a shared
            object, threads <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>acquire</em></span> a lock, make their
            changes, and then <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>release</em></span> the lock for other
            threads to grab. Python ensures that only one thread can hold a
            lock at any point in time; if others request it while it’s held,
            they are blocked until the lock becomes available. Lock objects
            are allocated and processed with simple and portable calls in the
            <code class="epub__literal">_thread</code> module that are
            automatically mapped to thread locking mechanisms on the
            underlying platform.</p>
<p>For instance, in Example 5-7, a lock object
            created by<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16393"></a> <code class="epub__literal">_thread.allocate_lock</code> is acquired and
            released by each thread around the <code class="epub__literal">print</code> call that writes to the shared
            standard output stream.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id21"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 5-7. PP4E\System\Threads\thread-count-mutex.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
synchronize access to stdout: because it is shared global,
thread outputs may be intermixed if not synchronized
"""

import _thread as thread, time

def counter(myId, count):                        # function run in threads
    for i in range(count):
        time.sleep(1)                            # simulate real work
        mutex.acquire()
        print('[%s] =&gt; %s' % (myId, i))          # print isn't interrupted now
        mutex.release()

mutex = thread.allocate_lock()                   # make a global lock object
for i in range(5):                               # spawn 5 threads
    thread.start_new_thread(counter, (i, 5))     # each thread loops 5 times

time.sleep(6)
print('Main thread exiting.')                    # don't exit too early</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Really, this script simply augments Example 5-6 to synchronize
            prints with a thread lock. The net effect of the additional lock
            calls in this script is that no two threads will ever execute a
            <code class="epub__literal">print</code> call at the same point in
            time; the lock ensures mutually exclusive access to the <code class="epub__literal">stdout</code> stream. Hence, the output of this
            script is similar to that of the original version, except that
            standard output text is never mangled by overlapping
            prints:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e16420"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Threads&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>thread-count-mutex.py</code></strong>
[0] =&gt; 0
[1] =&gt; 0
[3] =&gt; 0
[2] =&gt; 0
[4] =&gt; 0
[0] =&gt; 1
[1] =&gt; 1
[3] =&gt; 1
[2] =&gt; 1
[4] =&gt; 1
[0] =&gt; 2
[1] =&gt; 2
[3] =&gt; 2
[4] =&gt; 2
[2] =&gt; 2
[0] =&gt; 3
[1] =&gt; 3
[3] =&gt; 3
[4] =&gt; 3
[2] =&gt; 3
[0] =&gt; 4
[1] =&gt; 4
[3] =&gt; 4
[4] =&gt; 4
[2] =&gt; 4
Main thread exiting.</pre>
<p>Though somewhat platform-specific, the order in which the
            threads check in with their prints may still be arbitrary from run
            to run because they execute in parallel (getting work done in
            parallel is the whole point of threads, after all); but they no
            longer collide in time while printing their text. We’ll see other
            cases where the lock idiom comes in to play later in this
            chapter—it’s a core component of the multithreading <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16427"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16429"></a>model.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Waiting for spawned thread exits"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="waiting_for_spawned_thread_exits"></a>Waiting for spawned thread exits</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Besides <a id="thread5.3.1.5"></a>avoiding print collisions, thread module locks are
            surprisingly useful. They can form the basis of higher-level
            synchronization paradigms (e.g., semaphores) and can be used as
            general thread communication devices.<sup>[15]</sup> For instance, Example 5-8 uses a global list
            of locks to know when all child threads have finished.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id22"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 5-8. PP4E\System\Threads\thread-count-wait1.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
uses mutexes to know when threads are done in parent/main thread,
instead of time.sleep; lock stdout to avoid comingled prints;
"""

import _thread as thread
stdoutmutex = thread.allocate_lock()
exitmutexes = [thread.allocate_lock() for i in range(10)]

def counter(myId, count):
    for i in range(count):
        stdoutmutex.acquire()
        print('[%s] =&gt; %s' % (myId, i))
        stdoutmutex.release()
    exitmutexes[myId].acquire()    # signal main thread

for i in range(10):
    thread.start_new_thread(counter, (i, 100))

for mutex in exitmutexes:
    while not mutex.locked(): pass
print('Main thread exiting.')</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>A lock’s <code class="epub__literal">locked</code> method
            can be used to check its state. To make this work, the main thread
            makes one lock per child and tacks them onto a global <code class="epub__literal">exitmutexes</code> list (remember, the threaded
            function shares global scope with the main thread). On exit, each
            thread acquires its lock on the list, and the main thread simply
            watches for all locks to be acquired. This is much more accurate
            than naïvely sleeping while child threads run in hopes that all
            will have exited after the sleep. Run this on your own to see its
            output—all 10 spawned threads count up to 100 (they run in
            arbitrarily interleaved order that can vary per run and platform,
            but their prints run atomically and do not comingle), before the
            main thread exits.</p>
<p>Depending on how your threads run, this could be even
            simpler: since threads share global memory anyhow, we can usually
            achieve the same effect with a simple global list of
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>integers</em></span> instead of locks. In Example 5-9, the module’s
            namespace (scope) is shared by top-level code and the threaded
            function, as before. <code class="epub__literal">exitmutexes</code> refers to the same list
            object in the main thread and all threads it spawns. Because of
            that, changes made in a thread are still noticed in the main
            thread without resorting to extra locks.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id23"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 5-9. PP4E\System\Threads\thread-count-wait2.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
uses simple shared global data (not mutexes) to know when threads
are done in parent/main thread; threads share list but not its items,
assumes list won't move in memory once it has been created initially
"""

import _thread as thread
stdoutmutex = thread.allocate_lock()
exitmutexes = [False] * 10

def counter(myId, count):
    for i in range(count):
        stdoutmutex.acquire()
        print('[%s] =&gt; %s' % (myId, i))
        stdoutmutex.release()
    exitmutexes[myId] = True  # signal main thread

for i in range(10):
    thread.start_new_thread(counter, (i, 100))

while False in exitmutexes: pass
print('Main thread exiting.')</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>The output of this script is similar to the prior—10 threads
            counting to 100 in parallel and synchronizing their prints along
            the way. In fact, both of the last two counting thread scripts
            produce roughly the same output as the original
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>thread_count.py</em></span>, albeit without <code class="epub__literal">stdout</code> corruption and with larger counts
            and different random ordering of output lines. The main difference
            is that the main thread exits immediately after (and no sooner
            than!) the spawned child <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16503"></a>threads:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e16506"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Threads&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python thread-count-wait2.py</code></strong>
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...more deleted...</span></em>
[4] =&gt; 98
[6] =&gt; 98
[8] =&gt; 98
[5] =&gt; 98
[0] =&gt; 99
[7] =&gt; 98
[9] =&gt; 98
[1] =&gt; 99
[3] =&gt; 99
[2] =&gt; 99
[4] =&gt; 99
[6] =&gt; 99
[8] =&gt; 99
[5] =&gt; 99
[7] =&gt; 99
[9] =&gt; 99
Main thread exiting.</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Coding alternatives: busy loops, arguments, and context managers"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="coding_alternatives_colon_busy_loops_com"></a>Coding alternatives: busy loops, arguments, and context
            managers</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Notice how the <a id="thread5.3.1.6"></a><a id="con5.3.1.6"></a><a id="arg5.3.1.6"></a><a id="loop5.3.1.6"></a>main threads of both of the last two scripts fall
            into busy-wait loops at the end, which might become significant
            performance drains in tight applications. If so, simply add a
            <code class="epub__literal">time.sleep</code> call in the wait
            loops to insert a pause between end tests and to free up the CPU
            for other tasks: this call pauses the calling thread only (in this
            case, the main one). You might also try experimenting with adding
            sleep calls to the thread function to simulate real work.</p>
<p>Passing in the lock to threaded functions as an
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>argument</em></span> instead of referencing it in the
            global scope might be more coherent, too. When passed in, all
            threads reference the same object, because they are all part of
            the same process. Really, the process’s object memory is shared
            memory for threads, regardless of how objects in that shared
            memory are referenced (whether through global scope variables,
            passed argument names, object attributes, or another way).</p>
<p>And while we’re at it, the <code class="epub__literal">with</code> statement can be used to ensure
            thread operations around a nested block of code, much like its use
            to ensure file closure in the prior chapter. The thread lock’s
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>context manager</em></span> acquires the lock on <code class="epub__literal">with</code> statement entry and releases it on
            statement exit regardless of exception outcomes. The net effect is
            to save one line of code, but also to guarantee lock release when
            exceptions are possible. Example 5-10 adds all these
            coding alternatives to our threaded counter script.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id24"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 5-10. PP4E\System\Threads\thread-count-wait3.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
passed in mutex object shared by all threads instead of globals;
use with context manager statement for auto acquire/release;
sleep calls added to avoid busy loops and simulate real work
"""

import _thread as thread, time
stdoutmutex = thread.allocate_lock()
numthreads  = 5
exitmutexes = [thread.allocate_lock() for i in range(numthreads)]

def counter(myId, count, mutex):                     # shared object passed in
    for i in range(count):
        time.sleep(1 / (myId+1))                     # diff fractions of second
        with mutex:                                  # auto acquire/release: with
            print('[%s] =&gt; %s' % (myId, i))
    exitmutexes[myId].acquire()                      # global: signal main thread

for i in range(numthreads):
    thread.start_new_thread(counter, (i, 5, stdoutmutex))

while not all(mutex.locked() for mutex in exitmutexes): time.sleep(0.25)
print('Main thread exiting.')</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>When run, the different sleep times per thread make them run
            more independently:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e16568"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Threads&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>thread-count-wait3.py</code></strong>
[4] =&gt; 0
[3] =&gt; 0
[2] =&gt; 0
[4] =&gt; 1
[1] =&gt; 0
[3] =&gt; 1
[4] =&gt; 2
[2] =&gt; 1
[3] =&gt; 2
[4] =&gt; 3
[4] =&gt; 4
[0] =&gt; 0
[1] =&gt; 1
[2] =&gt; 2
[3] =&gt; 3
[3] =&gt; 4
[2] =&gt; 3
[1] =&gt; 2
[2] =&gt; 4
[0] =&gt; 1
[1] =&gt; 3
[1] =&gt; 4
[0] =&gt; 2
[0] =&gt; 3
[0] =&gt; 4
Main thread exiting.</pre>
<p>Of course, threads are for much more than counting. We’ll
            put shared global data to more practical use in Adding a User Interface, where it will serve as
            completion signals from child processing threads transferring data
            over a network to a main thread controlling a tkinter GUI display,
            and again later in Chapter 10’s
            threadtools and Chapter 14’s
            PyMailGUI to post results of email operations to a GUI (watch for
            Preview: GUIs and Threads for more
            pointers on this topic). Global data shared among threads also
            turns out to be the basis of queues, which are discussed later in
            this chapter; each thread gets or puts data using the same shared
            queue <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16583"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16585"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16588"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16590"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16592"></a>object.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The threading Module"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_threading_module"></a>The threading Module</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The Python <a id="th5.3.2"></a><a id="thread5.3.2"></a>standard library comes with two thread modules:
          <code class="epub__literal">_thread</code>, the basic lower-level
          interface illustrated thus far, and <code class="epub__literal">threading</code>, a higher-level interface based
          on <span>objects</span> and classes. The
          <code class="epub__literal">threading</code> module internally uses
          the <code class="epub__literal">_thread</code> module to implement
          objects that represent threads and common synchronization tools. It
          is loosely based on a subset of the Java language’s threading model,
          but it differs in ways that only Java programmers <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16627"></a>would notice.<sup>[16]</sup> Example 5-11
          morphs our counting threads example again to demonstrate this new
          module’s interfaces.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id25"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 5-11. PP4E\System\Threads\thread-classes.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
thread class instances with state and run() for thread's action;
uses higher-level Java-like threading module object join method (not
mutexes or shared global vars) to know when threads are done in main
parent thread; see library manual for more details on threading;
"""

import threading

class Mythread(threading.Thread):              # subclass Thread object
    def __init__(self, myId, count, mutex):
        self.myId  = myId
        self.count = count                     # per-thread state information
        self.mutex = mutex                     # shared objects, not globals
        threading.Thread.__init__(self)

    def run(self):                             # run provides thread logic
        for i in range(self.count):            # still sync stdout access
            with self.mutex:
                print('[%s] =&gt; %s' % (self.myId, i))

stdoutmutex = threading.Lock()                 # same as thread.allocate_lock()
threads = []
for i in range(10):
    thread = Mythread(i, 100, stdoutmutex)     # make/start 10 threads
    thread.start()                             # starts run method in a thread
    threads.append(thread)

for thread in threads:
    thread.join()                              # wait for thread exits
print('Main thread exiting.')</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>The output of this script is the same as that shown for its
          ancestors earlier (again, threads may be randomly distributed in
          time, depending on your platform):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e16647"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Threads&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python thread-classes.py</code></strong>
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...more deleted...</span></em>
[4] =&gt; 98
[8] =&gt; 97
[9] =&gt; 97
[5] =&gt; 98
[3] =&gt; 99
[6] =&gt; 98
[7] =&gt; 98
[4] =&gt; 99
[8] =&gt; 98
[9] =&gt; 98
[5] =&gt; 99
[6] =&gt; 99
[7] =&gt; 99
[8] =&gt; 99
[9] =&gt; 99
Main thread exiting.</pre>
<p>Using the <code class="epub__literal">threading</code> module
          this way is largely a matter of specializing classes. Threads in
          this module are implemented with a <code class="epub__literal">Thread</code> object, a Python class which we may
          customize per application by providing a <code class="epub__literal">run</code> method that defines the thread’s
          action. For example, this script subclasses <code class="epub__literal">Thread</code> with its own <code class="epub__literal">Mythread</code> class; the <code class="epub__literal">run</code> method will be executed by the
          <code class="epub__literal">Thread</code> framework in a new thread
          when we make a <code class="epub__literal">Mythread</code> and call
          its <code class="epub__literal">start</code> method.</p>
<p>In other words, this script simply provides methods expected
          by the <code class="epub__literal">Thread</code> framework. The
          advantage of taking this more coding-intensive route is that we get
          both per-thread state information (the usual instance attribute
          namespace), and a set of additional thread-related tools from the
          framework “for free.” The <code class="epub__literal">Thread.join</code> method used near the end of
          this script, for instance, waits until the thread exits (by
          default); we can use this method to prevent the main thread from
          exiting before its children, rather than using the <code class="epub__literal">time.sleep</code> calls and global locks and
          variables we relied on in earlier threading examples.</p>
<p>The example script also uses <code class="epub__literal">threading.Lock</code> to synchronize stream
          access as before (though this name is really just a synonym for
          <code class="epub__literal">_thread.allocate_lock</code> in the
          current implementation). The threading module may provide the extra
          structure of classes, but it doesn’t remove the specter of
          concurrent updates in the multithreading model in <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16704"></a>general.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Other ways to code threads with threading"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="other_ways_to_code_threads_with_threadin"></a>Other ways to code threads with threading</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">Thread</code> class
            <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16715"></a>can also be used to start a simple function, or any
            other type of callable object, without coding subclasses at all—if
            not redefined, the <code class="epub__literal">Thread</code>
            class’s default <code class="epub__literal">run</code> method
            simply calls whatever you pass to its constructor’s <code class="epub__literal">target</code> argument, with any provided
            arguments passed to <code class="epub__literal">args</code> (which
            defaults to <code class="epub__literal">()</code> for none). This
            allows us to use <code class="epub__literal">Thread</code> to run
            simple functions, too, though this call form is not noticeably
            simpler than the basic <code class="epub__literal">_thread</code>
            module. For instance, the following code snippets sketch four
            different ways to spawn the same sort of thread (see <em class="epub__filename">four-threads*.py</em> in the examples tree;
            you can run all four in the same script, but would have to also
            synchronize prints to avoid overlap):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e16746"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import threading, _thread
def action(i):
    print(i ** 32)

<span class="epub__emphasis"><em># subclass with state</em></span>
class Mythread(threading.Thread):
    def __init__(self, i):
        self.i = i
        threading.Thread.__init__(self)
    def run(self):                                        # redefine run for action
        print(self.i ** 32)
Mythread(2).start()                                       # start invokes run()

<span class="epub__emphasis"><em># pass action in</em></span>
thread = threading.Thread(target=(lambda: action(2)))     # run invokes target
thread.start()

<span class="epub__emphasis"><em># same but no lambda wrapper for state</em></span>
threading.Thread(target=action, args=(2,)).start()        # callable plus its args

<span class="epub__emphasis"><em># basic thread module</em></span>
_thread.start_new_thread(action, (2,))                    # all-function interface</pre>
<p>As a rule of thumb, class-based threads may be better if
            your threads require per-thread state, or can leverage any of
            OOP’s many benefits in general. Your thread classes don’t
            necessarily have to subclass <code class="epub__literal">Thread</code>, though. In fact, just as in the
            <code class="epub__literal">_thread</code> module, the thread’s
            target in <code class="epub__literal">threading</code> may be
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>any type of callable object</em></span>. When combined
            with techniques such as bound methods and nested scope references,
            the choice between coding techniques becomes even less
            clear-cut:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e16774"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em># a non-thread class with state, OOP</em></span>
class Power:
    def __init__(self, i):
        self.i = i
    def action(self):
        print(self.i ** 32)

obj = Power(2)
threading.Thread(target=obj.action).start()        # thread runs bound method

<span class="epub__emphasis"><em># nested scope to retain state</em></span>
def action(i):
    def power():
        print(i ** 32)
    return power

threading.Thread(target=action(2)).start()         # thread runs returned function

<span class="epub__emphasis"><em># both with basic thread module</em></span>
_thread.start_new_thread(obj.action, ())           # thread runs a callable object
_thread.start_new_thread(action(2), ())</pre>
<p>As usual, the threading APIs are as flexible as the Python
            language itself.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Synchronizing access to shared objects and names revisited"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="synchronizing_access_to_shared_objec"></a>Synchronizing access to shared objects and names
            revisited</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Earlier, we saw <a id="thread5.3.2.2"></a><a id="syn5.3.2.2"></a>how print operations in threads need to be
            synchronized with locks to avoid overlap, because the output
            stream is shared by all threads. More formally, threads need to
            synchronize their changes to any item that may be shared across
            thread in a process—both objects and namespaces. Depending on a
            given program’s goals, this might include:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Mutable object in memory (passed or otherwise referenced
                objects whose lifetimes span threads)</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Names in global scopes (changeable variables outside
                thread functions and classes)</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The contents of modules (each has just one shared copy
                in the system’s module table)</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>For instance, even simple global variables can require
            coordination if concurrent updates are possible, as in Example 5-12.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id26"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 5-12. PP4E\System\Threads\thread-add-random.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"prints different results on different runs on Windows 7"

import threading, time
count = 0

def adder():
    global count
    count = count + 1             # update a shared name in global scope
    time.sleep(0.5)               # threads share object memory and global names
    count = count + 1

threads = []
for i in range(100):
    thread = threading.Thread(target=adder, args=())
    thread.start()
    threads.append(thread)

for thread in threads: thread.join()
print(count)</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Here, 100 threads are spawned to update the same global
            scope variable twice (with a sleep between updates to better
            interleave their operations). When run on Windows 7 with Python
            3.1, different runs produce different results:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e16823"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Threads&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>thread-add-random.py</code></strong>
189

C:\...\PP4E\System\Threads&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>thread-add-random.py</code></strong>
200

C:\...\PP4E\System\Threads&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>thread-add-random.py</code></strong>
194

C:\...\PP4E\System\Threads&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>thread-add-random.py</code></strong>
191</pre>
<p>This happens because threads overlap arbitrarily in time:
            statements, even the simple assignment statements like those here,
            are not guaranteed to run to completion by themselves (that is,
            they are not atomic). As one thread updates the global, it may be
            using the partial result of another thread’s work in progress. The
            net effect is this seemingly random behavior. To make this script
            work correctly, we need to again use thread locks to synchronize
            the updates—when Example 5-13 is run, it always
            prints 200 as expected.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id27"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 5-13. PP4E\System\Threads\thread-add-synch.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"prints 200 each time, because shared resource access synchronized"

import threading, time
count = 0

def adder(addlock):                 # shared lock object passed in
    global count
    with addlock:
        count = count + 1           # auto acquire/release around stmt
    time.sleep(0.5)
    with addlock:
        count = count + 1           # only 1 thread updating at once

addlock = threading.Lock()
threads = []
for i in range(100):
    thread = threading.Thread(target=adder, args=(addlock,))
    thread.start()
    threads.append(thread)

for thread in threads: thread.join()
print(count)</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Although some basic operations in the Python language are
            atomic and need not be synchronized, you’re probably better off
            doing so for every potential concurrent update. Not only might the
            set of atomic operations change over time, but the internal
            implementation of threads in general can as well (and in fact, it
            may in Python 3.2, as described ahead).</p>
<p>Of course, this is an artificial example (spawning 100
            threads to add twice isn’t exactly a real-world use case for
            threads!), but it illustrates the issues that threads must address
            for any sort of potentially concurrent updates to shared object or
            name. Luckily, for many or most realistic applications, the
            <code class="epub__literal">queue</code> module of the next
            section can make thread synchronization an automatic artifact of
            program structure.</p>
<p>Before we move ahead, I should point out that besides
            <code class="epub__literal">Thread</code> and <code class="epub__literal">Lock</code>, the <code class="epub__literal">threading</code> module also includes
            higher-level objects for synchronizing access to shared items
            (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">Semaphore</code>, <code class="epub__literal">Condition</code>, <code class="epub__literal">Event</code>)—many more, in fact, than we have
            space to cover here; see the library manual for details. For more
            examples of threads and forks in general, see the remainder this
            chapter as well as the examples in the GUI and network scripting
            parts of this book. We will thread GUIs, for instance, to avoid
            blocking them, and we will thread and fork network servers to
            avoid denying service to clients.</p>
<p>We’ll also explore the threading module’s approach to
            program exits in the absence of <code class="epub__literal">join</code> calls in conjunction with
            queues—our next <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16880"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16882"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16884"></a>topic.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The queue Module"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_queue_module"></a>The queue Module</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>You can <a id="th5.3.3"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16897"></a>synchronize your threads’ access to shared resources
          with locks, but you often don’t have to. As mentioned, realistically
          scaled threaded programs are often structured as a set of producer
          and consumer threads, which communicate by placing data on, and
          taking it off of, a shared queue. As long as the queue synchronizes
          access to itself, this automatically synchronizes the threads’
          interactions.</p>
<p>The Python <code class="epub__literal">queue</code> module
          implements this storage device. It provides a standard queue data
          structure—a first-in first-out (fifo) list of Python objects, in
          which items are added on one end and removed from the other. Like
          normal lists, the queues provided by this module may contain any
          type of Python object, including both simple types (strings, lists,
          dictionaries, and so on) and more exotic types (class instances,
          arbitrary callables like functions and bound methods, and
          more).</p>
<p>Unlike normal lists, though, the queue object is automatically
          controlled with thread lock acquire and release operations, such
          that only one thread can modify the queue at any given point in
          time. Because of this, programs that use a queue for their
          cross-thread communication will be thread-safe and can usually avoid
          dealing with locks of their own for data passed between
          threads.</p>
<p>Like the other tools in Python’s threading arsenal, queues are
          surprisingly simple to use. The script in Example 5-14, for instance, spawns
          two consumer threads that watch for data to appear on the shared
          queue and four producer threads that place data on the queue
          periodically after a sleep interval (each of their sleep durations
          differs to simulate a real, long-running task). In other words, this
          program runs 7 threads (including the main one), 6 of which access
          the shared queue in parallel.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id28"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 5-14. PP4E\System\Threads\queuetest.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"producer and consumer threads communicating with a shared queue"

numconsumers = 2                  # how many consumers to start
numproducers = 4                  # how many producers to start
nummessages  = 4                  # messages per producer to put

import _thread as thread, queue, time
safeprint = thread.allocate_lock()    # else prints may overlap
dataQueue = queue.Queue()             # shared global, infinite size

def producer(idnum):
    for msgnum in range(nummessages):
        time.sleep(idnum)
        dataQueue.put('[producer id=%d, count=%d]' % (idnum, msgnum))

def consumer(idnum):
    while True:
        time.sleep(0.1)
        try:
            data = dataQueue.get(block=False)
        except queue.Empty:
            pass
        else:
            with safeprint:
                print('consumer', idnum, 'got =&gt;', data)

if __name__ == '__main__':
    for i in range(numconsumers):
        thread.start_new_thread(consumer, (i,))
    for i in range(numproducers):
        thread.start_new_thread(producer, (i,))
    time.sleep(((numproducers-1) * nummessages) + 1)
    print('Main thread exit.')</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Before I show you this script’s output, I want to highlight a
          few points in its code.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Arguments versus globals"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="arguments_versus_globals"></a>Arguments versus globals</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Notice how the queue is <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16926"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16931"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16936"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16941"></a>assigned to a global variable; because of that, it
            is shared by all of the spawned threads (all of them run in the
            same process and in the same global scope). Since these threads
            change an object instead of a variable name, it would work just as
            well to pass the queue object in to the threaded functions as an
            argument—the queue is a shared object in memory, regardless of how
            it is referenced (see <em class="epub__filename">queuetest2.py</em> in the examples tree
            for a full version that does this):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e16950"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">dataQueue = queue.Queue()             # shared object, infinite size

def producer(idnum, dataqueue):
    for msgnum in range(nummessages):
        time.sleep(idnum)
        dataqueue.put('[producer id=%d, count=%d]' % (idnum, msgnum))

def consumer(idnum, dataqueue): ...

if __name__ == '__main__':
    for i in range(numproducers):
        thread.start_new_thread(producer, (i, dataQueue))
    for i in range(numproducers):
        thread.start_new_thread(producer, (i, dataQueue))</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Program exit with child threads"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="program_exit_with_child_threads"></a>Program exit with child threads</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Also notice how this <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16957"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16962"></a>script exits when the main thread does, even though
            consumer threads are still running in their infinite loops. This
            works fine on Windows (and most other platforms)—with the basic
            <code class="epub__literal">_thread</code> module, the program
            ends silently when the main thread does. This is why we’ve had to
            sleep in some examples to give threads time to do their work, but
            is also why we do not need to be concerned about exiting while
            consumer threads are still running here.</p>
<p>In the alternative <code class="epub__literal">threading</code> module, though, the program
            will not exit if any spawned threads are running, unless they are
            set to be <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>daemon</em></span> threads. Specifically, the
            entire program exits when only daemon threads are left. Threads
            inherit a default initial daemonic value from the thread that
            creates them. The initial thread of a Python program is considered
            not daemonic, though alien threads created outside this module’s
            control are considered daemonic (including some threads created in
            C code). To override inherited defaults, a thread object’s
            <code class="epub__literal">daemon</code> flag can be set
            manually. In other words, nondaemon threads prevent program exit,
            and programs by default do not exit until all <code class="epub__literal">threading</code>-managed threads finish.</p>
<p>This is either a feature or nonfeature, depending on your
            program—it allows spawned worker threads to finish their tasks in
            the absence of <code class="epub__literal">join</code> calls or
            sleeps, but it can prevent programs like the one in Example 5-14 from shutting down
            when they wish. To make this example work with <code class="epub__literal">threading</code>, use the following alternative
            code (see <em class="epub__filename">queuetest3.py</em> in the examples tree
            for a complete version of this, as well as <em class="epub__filename">thread-count-threading.py</em>, also in the
            tree, for a case where this refusal to exit can come in
            handy):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e17001"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import threading, queue, time

def producer(idnum, dataqueue): ...

def consumer(idnum, dataqueue): ...

if __name__ == '__main__':
    for i in range(numconsumers):
        thread = threading.Thread(target=consumer, args=(i, dataQueue))
        thread.daemon = True  # else cannot exit!
        thread.start()

    waitfor = []
    for i in range(numproducers):
        thread = threading.Thread(target=producer, args=(i, dataQueue))
        waitfor.append(thread)
        thread.start()

    for thread in waitfor: thread.join()    # or time.sleep() long enough here
    print('Main thread exit.')</pre>
<p>We’ll revisit the daemons and exits issue in Chapter 10 while studying GUIs; as we’ll
            see, it’s no different in that context, except that the main
            thread is usually the GUI itself.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Running the script"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="running_the_script"></a>Running the script</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Now, as coded in Example 5-14, the <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e17014"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e17019"></a>following is the output of this example when run on
            my Windows machine. Notice that even though the queue
            automatically coordinates the communication of data between the
            threads, this script still must use a lock to manually synchronize
            access to the standard output stream; queues synchronize data
            passing, but some programs may still need to use locks for other
            purposes. As in prior examples, if the <code class="epub__literal">safeprint</code> lock is not used, the printed
            lines from one consumer may be intermixed with those of another.
            It is not impossible that a consumer may be paused in the middle
            of a print operation:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e17028"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Threads&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>queuetest.py</code></strong>
consumer 1 got =&gt; [producer id=0, count=0]
consumer 0 got =&gt; [producer id=0, count=1]
consumer 1 got =&gt; [producer id=0, count=2]
consumer 0 got =&gt; [producer id=0, count=3]
consumer 1 got =&gt; [producer id=1, count=0]
consumer 1 got =&gt; [producer id=2, count=0]
consumer 0 got =&gt; [producer id=1, count=1]
consumer 1 got =&gt; [producer id=3, count=0]
consumer 0 got =&gt; [producer id=1, count=2]
consumer 1 got =&gt; [producer id=2, count=1]
consumer 1 got =&gt; [producer id=1, count=3]
consumer 1 got =&gt; [producer id=3, count=1]
consumer 0 got =&gt; [producer id=2, count=2]
consumer 1 got =&gt; [producer id=2, count=3]
consumer 1 got =&gt; [producer id=3, count=2]
consumer 1 got =&gt; [producer id=3, count=3]
Main thread exit.</pre>
<p>Try adjusting the parameters at the top of this script to
            experiment with different scenarios. A single consumer, for
            instance, would simulate a GUI’s main thread. Here is the output
            of a single-consumer run—producers still add to the queue in
            fairly random fashion, because threads run in parallel with each
            other and with the consumer:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e17035"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Threads&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>queuetest.py</code></strong>
consumer 0 got =&gt; [producer id=0, count=0]
consumer 0 got =&gt; [producer id=0, count=1]
consumer 0 got =&gt; [producer id=0, count=2]
consumer 0 got =&gt; [producer id=0, count=3]
consumer 0 got =&gt; [producer id=1, count=0]
consumer 0 got =&gt; [producer id=2, count=0]
consumer 0 got =&gt; [producer id=1, count=1]
consumer 0 got =&gt; [producer id=3, count=0]
consumer 0 got =&gt; [producer id=1, count=2]
consumer 0 got =&gt; [producer id=2, count=1]
consumer 0 got =&gt; [producer id=1, count=3]
consumer 0 got =&gt; [producer id=3, count=1]
consumer 0 got =&gt; [producer id=2, count=2]
consumer 0 got =&gt; [producer id=2, count=3]
consumer 0 got =&gt; [producer id=3, count=2]
consumer 0 got =&gt; [producer id=3, count=3]
Main thread exit.</pre>
<p>In addition to the basics used in our script, queues may be
            fixed or infinite in size, and get and put calls may or may not
            block; see the Python library manual for more details on queue
            interface options. Since we just simulated a typical GUI
            structure, though, let’s explore the notion a bit <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e17042"></a>further.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Preview: GUIs and Threads"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="preview_colon_guis_and_threads"></a>Preview: GUIs and Threads</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>We will return <a id="th5.3.4"></a><a id="gui5.3.4"></a>to threads and queues and see additional thread and
          queue examples when we study GUIs later in this book. The PyMailGUI
          example in Chapter 14, for instance,
          will make extensive use of thread and queue tools introduced here
          and developed further in Chapter 10,
          and Chapter 9 will discuss
          threading in the context of the tkinter GUI toolkit once we’ve had a
          chance to study it. Although we can’t get into code at this point,
          threads are usually an integral part of most nontrivial GUIs. In
          fact, the activity model of many GUIs is a combination of threads, a
          queue, and a timer-based loop.</p>
<p>Here’s why. In the context of a GUI, any operation that can
          block or take a long time to complete must be spawned off to run in
          parallel so that the GUI (the main thread) remains active and
          continues responding to its users. Although such tasks can be run as
          processes, the efficiency and shared-state model of threads make
          them ideal for this role. Moreover, since most GUI toolkits do not
          allow multiple threads to update the GUI in parallel, updates are
          best restricted to the main thread.</p>
<p>Because only the main thread should generally update the
          display, GUI programs typically take the form of a main GUI thread
          and one or more long-running producer threads—one for each
          long-running task being performed. To synchronize their points of
          interface, all of the threads share data on a global queue: non-GUI
          threads post results, and the GUI thread consumes them.</p>
<p>More specifically:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>main thread</em></span> handles all GUI
              updates and runs a timer-based loop that wakes up periodically
              to check for new data on the queue to be displayed on-screen. In
              Python’s tkinter toolkit, for instance, the widget <code class="epub__literal">after(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>msecs</code></em><code class="epub__literal">,</code>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>func</code></em><code class="epub__literal">,</code>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>*args</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code> method can be used to schedule
              queue-check events. Because such events are dispatched by the
              GUI’s event processor, all GUI updates occur only in this main
              thread (and often must, due to the lack of thread safety in GUI
              toolkits).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>child threads</em></span> don’t do anything
              GUI-related. They just produce data and put it on the queue to
              be picked up by the main thread. Alternatively, child threads
              can place a callback function on the queue, to be picked up and
              run by the main thread. It’s not generally sufficient to simply
              pass in a GUI update callback function from the main thread to
              the child thread and run it from there; the function in shared
              memory will still be executed in the child thread, and
              potentially in parallel with other threads.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Since threads are much more responsive than a timer event loop
          in the GUI, this scheme both avoids blocking the GUI (producer
          threads run in parallel with the GUI), and avoids missing incoming
          events (producer threads run independent of the GUI event loop and
          as fast as they can). The main GUI thread will display the queued
          results as quickly as it can, in the context of a slower GUI event
          loop.</p>
<p>Also keep in mind that regardless of the thread safety of a
          GUI toolkit, threaded GUI programs must still adhere to the
          principles of threaded programs in general—access to shared
          resources may still need to be synchronized if it falls outside the
          scope of the producer/consumer shared queue model. If spawned
          threads might also update another shared state that is used by the
          main GUI thread, thread locks may also be required to avoid
          operation overlap. For instance, spawned threads that download and
          cache email probably cannot overlap with others that use or update
          the same cache. That is, queues may not be enough; unless you can
          restrict threads’ work to queuing their results, threaded GUIs still
          must address concurrent updates.</p>
<p>We’ll see how the threaded GUI model can be realized in code
          later in this book. For more on this subject, see especially the
          discussion of threaded tkinter GUIs in <span>Chapter 9,</span> the thread queue
          tools implemented in Chapter 10, and
          the PyMailGUI example in Chapter 14.</p>
<p>Later in this chapter, we’ll also meet the <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code> module, whose process and
          queue support offers new options for implementing this GUI model
          using processes instead of threads; as such, they work around the
          limitations of the thread GIL, but may incur extra performance
          overheads that can vary per platform, and may not be directly usable
          at all in threading contexts (the direct shared and mutable object
          state of threads is not supported, though messaging is). For now,
          let’s cover a few final thread fine <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e17123"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e17125"></a>points.</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="thread_timers_versus_gui_timers"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Thread Timers versus GUI Timers</p>
<p>Interestingly, the <code class="epub__literal">threading</code> module <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e17136"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e17141"></a>exports a general timer function, which, like the
            tkinter widget <code class="epub__literal">after</code> method,
            can be used to run another function after a timer has
            expired:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e17150"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">Timer(N.M, somefunc).start()   # after N.M seconds run somefunc</pre>
<p>Timer <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e17154"></a>objects have a <code class="epub__literal">start()</code> method to set the timer as well
            as a <code class="epub__literal">cancel()</code> method to cancel
            the scheduled event, and they implement the wait state in a
            spawned thread. For example, the following prints a message after
            5.5 seconds:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e17164"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import sys</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from threading import Timer</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>t = Timer(5.5, lambda: print('Spam!'))</code></strong>    # spawned thread
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>t.start()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Spam!</code></strong></pre>
<p>This may be useful in a variety of contexts, but it doesn’t
            quite apply to GUIs: because the time-delayed function call is run
            in a spawned thread, not in the main GUI thread, it should not
            generally perform GUI updates. Because the tkinter <code class="epub__literal">after</code> method is run from the main
            thread’s event processing loop instead, it runs in the main GUI
            thread and can freely update the GUI.</p>
<p>As a preview, for instance, the following displays a pop-up
            message window in 5.5 seconds in the main thread of a tkinter GUI
            (you might also have to run <code class="epub__literal">win.mainloop()</code> in some
            interfaces):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e17190"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from tkinter import Tk</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from tkinter.messagebox import showinfo</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>win = Tk()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>win.after(5500, lambda: showinfo('Popup', 'Spam!'))</code></strong></pre>
<p>The last call here schedules the function to be run once in
            the main GUI thread, but it does not pause the caller during the
            wait, and so does not block the GUI. It’s equivalent to this
            simpler form:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e17205"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>win.after(5500, showinfo, 'Popup', 'Spam')</code></strong></pre>
<p>Stay tuned for much more on tkinter in the next part of this
            book, and watch for the full story on its <code class="epub__literal">after</code> timer events in Chapter 9 and the roles of threads
            in GUIs in Chapter 10.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="More on the Global Interpreter Lock"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="more_on_the_global_interpreter_lock"></a>More on the Global Interpreter Lock</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Although it’s a <a id="th5.3.5"></a><a id="gil5.3.5"></a>lower-level topic than you generally need to do useful
          thread work in Python, the implementation of Python’s threads can
          have impacts on both performance and coding. This section summarizes
          implementation details and <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e17235"></a>some of their <span>ramifications</span>.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note"><h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Threads implementation in the upcoming Python
            3.2</em></span>: This section describes the current implementation
            of threads up to and including Python 3.1. At this writing, Python
            3.2 is still in development, but one of its likely enhancements is
            a new version of the GIL that provides better performance,
            especially on some multicore CPUs. The new GIL implementation will
            still synchronize access to the PVM (Python language code is still
            multiplexed as before), but it will use a context switching scheme
            that is more efficient than the current N-bytecode-instruction
            approach.</p>
<p>Among other things, the current <code class="epub__literal">sys.setcheckinterval</code> call will likely be
            replaced with a timer duration call in the new scheme.
            Specifically, the concept of a check interval for thread switches
            will be abandoned and replaced by an absolute time duration
            expressed in seconds. It’s anticipated that this duration will
            default to 5 milliseconds, but it will be tunable through <code class="epub__literal">sys.setswitchinterval</code>.</p>
<p>Moreover, there have been a variety of plans made to remove
            the GIL altogether (including goals of the Unladen Swallow project
            being conducted by Google employees), though none have managed to
            produce any fruit thus far. Since I cannot predict the future,
            please see Python release documents to follow this (well…)
            thread.</p>
</div>
<p>Strictly speaking, Python currently uses the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>global
          interpreter lock</em></span> (GIL) mechanism introduced at the start
          of this section, which guarantees that one thread, at most, is
          running code within the Python interpreter at any given point in
          time. In addition, to make sure that each thread gets a chance to
          run, the interpreter automatically switches its attention between
          threads at regular intervals (in Python 3.1, by releasing and
          acquiring the lock after a number of bytecode instructions) as well
          as at the start of long-running operations (e.g., on some file
          input/output requests).</p>
<p>This scheme avoids problems that could arise if multiple
          threads were to update Python system data at the same time. For
          instance, if two threads were allowed to simultaneously change an
          object’s reference count, the result might be unpredictable. This
          scheme can also have subtle consequences. In this chapter’s
          threading examples, for instance, the <code class="epub__literal">stdout</code> stream can be corrupted unless each
          thread’s call to write text is synchronized with thread
          locks.</p>
<p>Moreover, even though the GIL prevents more than one Python
          thread from running at the same time, it is not enough to ensure
          thread safety in general, and it does not address higher-level
          synchronization issues at all. For example, as we saw, when more
          than one thread might attempt to <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>update</em></span> the
          same variable at the same time, the threads should generally be
          given exclusive access to the object with locks. Otherwise, it’s not
          impossible that thread switches will occur in the middle of an
          update statement’s <span>bytecode</span>.</p>
<p>Locks are not strictly required for all shared object access,
          especially if a single thread updates an object inspected by other
          threads. As a rule of thumb, though, you should generally use locks
          to synchronize threads whenever update rendezvous are possible
          instead of relying on artifacts of the current thread <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e17279"></a>implementation.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="The thread switch interval"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="the_thread_switch_interval"></a>The thread switch interval</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Some concurrent <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e17287"></a>updates might work without locks if the
            thread-switch interval is set high enough to allow each thread to
            finish without being swapped out. The <code class="epub__literal">sys.</code><code class="epub__literal">set</code><code class="epub__literal">check</code><code class="epub__literal">interval(N)</code> call sets the frequency
            with which the interpreter checks for things like thread switches
            and signal handlers.</p>
<p>This interval defines the number of bytecode instructions
            before a switch. It does not need to be reset for most programs,
            but it can be used to tune thread performance. Setting higher
            values means switches happen less often: threads incur less
            overhead but they are less responsive to events. Setting lower
            values makes threads more responsive to events but increases
            thread switch overhead.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Atomic operations"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="atomic_operations"></a>Atomic operations</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Because of the way <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e17309"></a>Python uses the GIL to synchronize threads’ access
            to the virtual machine, whole statements are not generally
            thread-safe, but each bytecode instruction is. Because of this
            bytecode indivisibility, some Python language operations are
            thread-safe—also called <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>atomic</em></span>, because they
            run without interruption—and do not require the use of locks or
            queues to avoid concurrent update issues. For instance, as of this
            writing, <code class="epub__literal">list.append</code>, fetches
            and some assignments for variables, list items, dictionary keys,
            and object attributes, and other operations were still atomic in
            standard C Python; others, such as <code class="epub__literal">x =
            x+1</code> (and any operation in general that reads data,
            modifies it, and writes it back) were not.</p>
<p>As mentioned earlier, though, relying on these rules is a
            bit of a gamble, because they require a deep understanding of
            Python internals and may vary per release. Indeed, the set of
            atomic operations may be radically changed if a new free-threaded
            implementation ever appears. As a rule of thumb, it may be easier
            to use locks for all access to global and shared objects than to
            try to remember which types of access may or may not be safe
            across multiple threads.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="C API thread considerations"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="c_api_thread_considerations"></a>C API thread considerations</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Finally, if you <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e17331"></a>plan to mix Python with C, also see the thread
            interfaces described in the Python/C API standard<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e17337"></a> manual. In threaded programs, C extensions must
            release and reacquire the GIL around long-running operations to
            let the Python language portions of other Python threads run
            during the wait. Specifically, the long-running C extension
            function should release the lock on entry and reacquire it on exit
            when resuming Python code.</p>
<p>Also note that even though the Python code in Python threads
            cannot truly overlap in time due to the GIL synchronization, the
            C-coded portions of threads can. Any number may be running in
            parallel, as long as they do work outside the scope of the Python
            virtual machine. In fact, C threads may overlap both with other C
            threads and with Python language threads run in the virtual
            machine. Because of this, splitting code off to C libraries is one
            way that Python applications can still take advantage of multi-CPU
            machines.</p>
<p>Still, it may often be easier to leverage such machines by
            simply writing Python programs that fork processes instead of
            starting threads. The complexity of process and thread code is
            similar. For more on C extensions and their threading
            requirements, see Chapter 20.
            In short, Python includes C language tools (including a pair of
            GIL management macros) that can be used to wrap long-running
            operations in C-coded extensions and that allow other Python
            language threads to run in parallel.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="A process-based alternative: multiprocessing (ahead)"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="a_process-based_alternative_colon_multip"></a>A process-based alternative: multiprocessing
            (ahead)</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>By now, you <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e17354"></a>should have a basic grasp of parallel processes and
            threads, and Python’s tools that support them. Later in this
            chapter, we’ll revisit both ideas to study the <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code> <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e17363"></a>module—a standard library tool that seeks to combine
            the simplicity and portability of threads with the benefits of
            processes, by implementing a <span>threading</span>-like API that runs
            processes instead of threads. It seeks to address the portability
            issue of processes, as well as the multiple-CPU limitations
            imposed in threads by the GIL, but it cannot be used as a
            replacement for forking in some contexts, and it imposes some
            constraints that threads do not, which stem from its process-based
            model (for instance, mutable object state is not directly shared
            because objects are copied across process boundaries, and
            unpickleable objects such as bound methods cannot be as freely
            used).</p>
<p>Because the <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code> module also implements
            tools to simplify tasks such as inter-process communication and
            exit status, though, let’s first get a handle on Python’s support
            in those domains as well, and explore some more process and thread
            examples along the <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e17377"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e17379"></a>way.</p>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[14] </sup>The <code class="epub__literal">_thread</code> examples
                in this book now all use <code class="epub__literal">start_new_thread</code>. This call is also
                available as <code class="epub__literal">thread.start_new</code> for historical
                reasons, but this synonym may be removed in a future Python
                release. As of Python 3.1, both names are still available, but
                the <code class="epub__literal">help</code> documentation for
                <code class="epub__literal">start_new</code> claims that it is
                obsolete; in other words, you should probably prefer the other
                if you care about the future (and this book must!).</p>
</div><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[15] </sup>They cannot, however, be used to directly synchronize
                <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>processes</em></span>. Since processes are more
                independent, they usually require locking mechanisms that are
                more long-lived and external to programs. Chapter 4’s <code class="epub__literal">os.open</code> call with an open flag of
                <code class="epub__literal">O_EXCL</code> allows scripts to
                lock and unlock files and so is ideal as a cross-process
                locking tool. See also the synchronization tools in the
                <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code> and
                <code class="epub__literal">threading</code> modules and the
                IPC section later in this chapter for other general
                synchronization ideas.</p>
</div><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[16] </sup>But in case this means you, Python’s lock and condition
              variables are distinct objects, not something inherent in all
              objects, and Python’s <code class="epub__literal">Thread</code>
              class doesn’t have all the features of Java’s. See Python’s
              library manual for further details.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
