<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Interprocess Communication</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Interprocess Communication"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="interprocess_communication"></a>Interprocess Communication</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As we saw <a id="par5.5"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18258"></a>earlier, when scripts spawn
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>threads</em></span>—tasks that run in parallel within the
        program—they can naturally communicate by changing and inspecting
        names and objects in shared global memory. This includes both
        accessible variables and attributes, as well as referenced mutable
        objects. As we also saw, some care must be taken to use locks to
        synchronize access to shared items that can be updated concurrently.
        Still, threads offer a fairly straightforward communication model, and
        the <code class="epub__literal">queue</code> module can make this
        nearly automatic for many programs.</p>
<p>Things aren’t quite as simple when scripts start child processes
        and independent programs that do not share memory in general. If we
        limit the kinds of communications that can happen between programs,
        many options are available, most of which we’ve already seen in this
        and the prior chapters. For example, the following simple mechanisms
        can all be interpreted as cross-program communication devices:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Simple files</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Command-line arguments</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Program exit status codes</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Shell environment variables</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Standard stream redirections</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Stream pipes managed by <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code> and <code class="epub__literal">subprocess</code></p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>For instance, sending command-line options and writing to input
        streams lets us pass in program execution parameters; reading program
        output streams and exit codes gives us a way to grab a result. Because
        shell environment variable settings are inherited by spawned programs,
        they provide another way to pass context in. And pipes made by
        <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code> or <code class="epub__literal">subprocess</code> allow even more dynamic
        communication. Data can be sent between programs at arbitrary times,
        not only at program start and exit.</p>
<p>Beyond this set, there are other tools in the Python library for
        performing Inter-Process Communication (IPC). This includes sockets,
        shared memory, signals, anonymous and named pipes, and more. Some vary
        in portability, and all vary in complexity and utility. For
        instance:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Signals</em></span> allow <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18312"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18317"></a>programs to send simple notification events to other
            programs.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Anonymous pipes</em></span> allow <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18328"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18333"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18338"></a>threads and related processes that share file
            descriptors to pass data, but generally rely on the Unix-like
            forking model for processes, which is not universally
            portable.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Named pipes</em></span> are <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18349"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18354"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18359"></a>mapped to the system’s filesystem—they allow
            completely unrelated programs to converse, but are not available
            in Python on all platforms.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Sockets</em></span> map to <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18370"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18375"></a>system-wide port numbers—they similarly let us
            transfer data between arbitrary programs running on the same
            computer, but also between programs located on remote networked
            machines, and offer a more portable option.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>While some of these can be used as communication devices by
        threads, too, their full power becomes more evident when leveraged by
        separate processes which do not share memory at large.</p>
<p>In this section, we explore directly managed pipes (both
        anonymous and named), as well as signals. We also take a first look at
        sockets here, but largely as a preview; sockets can be used for IPC on
        a single machine, but because the larger socket story also involves
        their role in networking, we’ll save most of their details until the
        Internet part of this book.</p>
<p>Other IPC tools are available to <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18387"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18392"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18397"></a>Python programmers (e.g., shared memory as provided by
        the <code class="epub__literal">mmap</code> module) but are not
        covered here for lack of space; search the Python manuals and website
        for more details on other IPC schemes if you’re looking for something
        more specific.</p>
<p>After this section, we’ll also study the<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18406"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18411"></a> <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code>
        module, which offers additional and portable IPC options as part of
        its general process-launching API, including shared memory, and pipes
        and queues of arbitrary pickled Python objects. For now, let’s study
        traditional approaches first.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Anonymous Pipes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="anonymous_pipes"></a>Anonymous Pipes</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Pipes, a cross-program <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18426"></a><a id="pipes5.5.1"></a><a id="ipc5.5.1"></a>communication device, are implemented by your
          operating system and made available in the Python standard library.
          Pipes are unidirectional channels that work something like a shared
          memory buffer, but with an interface resembling a simple file on
          each of two ends. In typical use, one program writes data on one end
          of the pipe, and another reads that data on the other end. Each
          program sees only its end of the pipes and processes it using normal
          Python file calls.</p>
<p>Pipes are much more within the operating system, though. For
          instance, calls to read a pipe will normally
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>block</em></span> the caller until data becomes available
          (i.e., is sent by the program on the other end) instead of returning
          an end-of-file indicator. Moreover, read calls on a pipe always
          return the oldest data written to the pipe, resulting in a
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>first-in-first-out</em></span> model—the first data written
          is the first to be read. Because of such properties, pipes are also
          a way to synchronize the execution of independent programs.</p>
<p>Pipes come in two flavors—<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>anonymous</em></span> and
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>named</em></span>. <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18458"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18463"></a>Named pipes (often called fifos) are represented by a
          file on your computer. Because named pipes are really external
          files, the communicating processes need not be related at all; in
          fact, they can be independently started programs.</p>
<p>By contrast, anonymous pipes exist only within processes and
          are typically used in conjunction with process
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>forks</em></span> as a way to link parent and spawned child
          processes within an application. Parent and child converse over
          shared pipe file descriptors, which are inherited by spawned
          processes. Because threads run in the same process and share all
          global memory in general, anonymous pipes apply to them as
          well.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Anonymous pipe basics"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="anonymous_pipe_basics"></a>Anonymous pipe basics</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Since they are more <a id="anon5.5.1.1"></a>traditional, let’s start with a look at anonymous
            pipes. To illustrate, the script in Example 5-19 uses the <code class="epub__literal">os.fork</code> call to make a copy of the
            calling process as usual (we met forks earlier in this chapter).
            After forking, the original parent process and its child copy
            speak through the two ends of a pipe created <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18490"></a>with <code class="epub__literal">os.pipe</code>
            prior to the fork. The <code class="epub__literal">os.pipe</code>
            call returns a tuple of two <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>file
            descriptors</em></span>—<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18508"></a>the low-level file identifiers we met in Chapter 4—representing the input and
            output sides of the pipe. Because forked child processes get
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>copies</em></span> of their parents’ file descriptors,
            writing to the pipe’s output descriptor in the child sends data
            back to the parent on the pipe created before the child was
            spawned.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id33"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 5-19. PP4E\System\Processes\pipe1.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import os, time

def child(pipeout):
    zzz = 0
    while True:
        time.sleep(zzz)                          # make parent wait
        msg = ('Spam %03d' % zzz).encode()       # pipes are binary bytes
        os.write(pipeout, msg)                   # send to parent
        zzz = (zzz+1) % 5                        # goto 0 after 4

def parent():
    pipein, pipeout = os.pipe()                  # make 2-ended pipe
    if os.fork() == 0:                           # copy this process
        child(pipeout)                           # in copy, run child
    else:                                        # in parent, listen to pipe
        while True:
            line = os.read(pipein, 32)           # blocks until data sent
            print('Parent %d got [%s] at %s' % (os.getpid(), line, time.time()))

parent()</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>If you run this program on Linux, Cygwin, or another
            Unix-like platform (<code class="epub__literal">pipe</code> is
            available on standard Windows Python, but <code class="epub__literal">fork</code> is not), the parent process waits
            for the child to send data on the pipe each time it calls <code class="epub__literal">os.read</code>. It’s almost as if the child and
            parent act as client and server here—the <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18535"></a>parent starts the child and waits for it to initiate
            communication.<sup>[17]</sup> To simulate differing task durations, the child
            keeps the parent waiting one second longer between messages with
            <code class="epub__literal">time.sleep</code> calls, until the
            delay has reached four seconds. When the <code class="epub__literal">zzz</code> delay counter hits 005, it rolls
            back down to 000 and starts again:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e18552"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">[C:\...\PP4E\System\Processes]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python pipe1.py</code></strong>
Parent 6716 got [b'Spam 000'] at 1267996104.53
Parent 6716 got [b'Spam 001'] at 1267996105.54
Parent 6716 got [b'Spam 002'] at 1267996107.55
Parent 6716 got [b'Spam 003'] at 1267996110.56
Parent 6716 got [b'Spam 004'] at 1267996114.57
Parent 6716 got [b'Spam 000'] at 1267996114.57
Parent 6716 got [b'Spam 001'] at 1267996115.59
Parent 6716 got [b'Spam 002'] at 1267996117.6
Parent 6716 got [b'Spam 003'] at 1267996120.61
Parent 6716 got [b'Spam 004'] at 1267996124.62
Parent 6716 got [b'Spam 000'] at 1267996124.62
Parent 6716 got [b'Spam 001'] at 1267996125.63
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...etc.: Ctrl-C to exit...</span></em></pre>
<p>Notice how the parent received a <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> string through the pipe. Raw pipes
            normally deal in binary byte strings when their descriptors are
            used directly this way with the descriptor-based file tools we met
            in Chapter 4 (as we saw there,
            descriptor read and write tools in <code class="epub__literal">os</code> always return and expect byte
            strings). That’s why we also have to manually encode to <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> when writing in the child—the
            string formatting operation is not available on <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>. As the next section shows, it’s
            also possible to wrap a pipe descriptor in a text-mode file
            object, much as we did in the file examples in Chapter 4, but that object simply
            performs encoding and decoding automatically on transfers; it’s
            <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18578"></a>still bytes in the pipe.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Wrapping pipe descriptors in file objects"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="wrapping_pipe_descriptors_in_file_object"></a>Wrapping pipe descriptors in file objects</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>If you look closely <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18586"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18591"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18596"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18601"></a>at the preceding output, you’ll see that when the
            child’s delay counter hits 004, the parent ends up reading two
            messages from the pipe at the same time; the child wrote two
            distinct messages, but on some platforms or configurations (other
            than that used here) they might be interleaved or processed close
            enough in time to be fetched as a single unit by the parent.
            Really, the parent blindly asks to read, at most, 32 bytes each
            time, but it gets back whatever text is available in the pipe,
            when it becomes available.</p>
<p>To distinguish messages better, we can mandate a separator
            character in the pipe. An end-of-line makes this easy, because we
            can wrap the pipe descriptor in a file object with<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18609"></a> <code class="epub__literal">os.fdopen</code> and
            rely on the file object’s <code class="epub__literal">readline</code> method to scan up through the
            next <code class="epub__literal">\n</code> separator in the pipe.
            This also lets us leverage the more powerful tools of the
            text-mode file object we met in Chapter 4. Example 5-20 implements this
            scheme for the parent’s end of the pipe.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id34"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 5-20. PP4E\System\Processes\pipe2.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting"># same as pipe1.py, but wrap pipe input in stdio file object
# to read by line, and close unused pipe fds in both processes

import os, time

def child(pipeout):
    zzz = 0
    while True:
        time.sleep(zzz)                          # make parent wait
        msg = ('Spam %03d\n' % zzz).encode()     # pipes are binary in 3.X
        os.write(pipeout, msg)                   # send to parent
        zzz = (zzz+1) % 5                        # roll to 0 at 5

def parent():
    pipein, pipeout = os.pipe()                  # make 2-ended pipe
    if os.fork() == 0:                           # in child, write to pipe
        os.close(pipein)                         # close input side here
        child(pipeout)
    else:                                        # in parent, listen to pipe
        os.close(pipeout)                        # close output side here
        pipein = os.fdopen(pipein)               # make text mode input file object
        while True:
            line = pipein.readline()[:-1]        # blocks until data sent
            print('Parent %d got [%s] at %s' % (os.getpid(), line, time.time()))

parent()</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>This version has also been augmented to
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>close</em></span> the unused end of the pipe in each
            process (e.g., after the fork, the parent process closes its copy
            of the output side of the pipe written by the child); programs
            should close unused pipe ends in general. Running with this new
            version reliably returns a single child message to the parent each
            time it reads from the pipe, because they are separated with
            markers when written:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e18639"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">[C:\...\PP4E\System\Processes]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python pipe2.py</code></strong>
Parent 8204 got [Spam 000] at 1267997789.33
Parent 8204 got [Spam 001] at 1267997790.03
Parent 8204 got [Spam 002] at 1267997792.05
Parent 8204 got [Spam 003] at 1267997795.06
Parent 8204 got [Spam 004] at 1267997799.07
Parent 8204 got [Spam 000] at 1267997799.07
Parent 8204 got [Spam 001] at 1267997800.08
Parent 8204 got [Spam 002] at 1267997802.09
Parent 8204 got [Spam 003] at 1267997805.1
Parent 8204 got [Spam 004] at 1267997809.11
Parent 8204 got [Spam 000] at 1267997809.11
Parent 8204 got [Spam 001] at 1267997810.13
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...etc.: Ctrl-C to exit...</span></em></pre>
<p>Notice that this version’s reads also return a text data
            <code class="epub__literal">str</code> object now, per the default
            <code class="epub__literal">r</code> text mode for <code class="epub__literal">os.fdopen</code>. As mentioned, pipes normally
            deal in binary byte strings when their descriptors are used
            directly with <code class="epub__literal">os</code> file tools,
            but wrapping in text-mode files allows us to use <code class="epub__literal">str</code> strings to represent text data
            instead of <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>. In this
            example, bytes are decoded to <code class="epub__literal">str</code> when read by the parent; using
            <code class="epub__literal">os.fdopen</code> and text mode in the
            child would allow us to avoid its manual encoding call, but the
            file object would encode the <code class="epub__literal">str</code> data anyhow (though the encoding is
            trivial for ASCII bytes like those used here). As for simple
            files, the best mode for processing pipe data in is determined by
            its nature.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Anonymous pipes and threads"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="anonymous_pipes_and_threads"></a>Anonymous pipes and threads</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Although the <code class="epub__literal">os.fork</code> call
            <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18684"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18689"></a>required by the prior section’s examples isn’t
            available on standard Windows Python, <code class="epub__literal">os.pipe</code> is. Because threads all run in
            the same process and share file descriptors (and global memory in
            general), this makes anonymous pipes usable as a communication and
            synchronization device for threads, too. This is an arguably
            lower-level mechanism than queues or shared names and objects, but
            it provides an additional IPC option for threads. Example 5-21, for instance,
            demonstrates the same type of pipe-based communication occurring
            between threads instead of <span>processes</span>.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id35"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 5-21. PP4E\System\Processes\pipe-thread.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting"># anonymous pipes and threads, not processes; this version works on Windows

import os, time, threading

def child(pipeout):
    zzz = 0
    while True:
        time.sleep(zzz)                              # make parent wait
        msg = ('Spam %03d' % zzz).encode()           # pipes are binary bytes
        os.write(pipeout, msg)                       # send to parent
        zzz = (zzz+1) % 5                            # goto 0 after 4

def parent(pipein):
    while True:
        line = os.read(pipein, 32)                   # blocks until data sent
        print('Parent %d got [%s] at %s' % (os.getpid(), line, time.time()))

pipein, pipeout = os.pipe()
threading.Thread(target=child, args=(pipeout,)).start()
parent(pipein)</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Since threads work on standard Windows Python, this script
            does too. The output is similar here, but the speakers are
            in-process threads, not processes (note that because of its
            simple-minded infinite loops, at least one of its threads may not
            die on a <span>Ctrl-C—</span>on Windows
            you may need to use Task Manager to kill the <em class="epub__filename">python.exe</em> process running this script
            or close its window to exit):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e18716"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Processes&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pipe-thread.py</code></strong>
Parent 8876 got [b'Spam 000'] at 1268579215.71
Parent 8876 got [b'Spam 001'] at 1268579216.73
Parent 8876 got [b'Spam 002'] at 1268579218.74
Parent 8876 got [b'Spam 003'] at 1268579221.75
Parent 8876 got [b'Spam 004'] at 1268579225.76
Parent 8876 got [b'Spam 000'] at 1268579225.76
Parent 8876 got [b'Spam 001'] at 1268579226.77
Parent 8876 got [b'Spam 002'] at 1268579228.79
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...etc.: Ctrl-C or Task Manager to exit...</span></em></pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Bidirectional IPC with anonymous pipes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="bidirectional_ipc_with_anonymous_pipes"></a>Bidirectional IPC with anonymous pipes</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Pipes <a id="ipc5.5.1.4"></a><a id="anon5.5.1.4"></a>normally let data flow in only one direction—one
            side is input, one is output. What if you need your programs to
            talk back and forth, though? For example, one program might send
            another a request for information and then wait for that
            information to be sent back. A single pipe can’t generally handle
            such bidirectional conversations, but two pipes can. One pipe can
            be used to pass requests to a program and another can be used to
            ship replies back to the requestor.</p>
<p>This really does have real-world applications. For instance,
            I once added a GUI interface to a command-line debugger for a
            C-like programming language by connecting two processes with pipes
            this way. The GUI ran as a separate process that constructed and
            sent commands to the non-GUI debugger’s input stream pipe and
            parsed the results that showed up in the debugger’s output stream
            pipe. In effect, the GUI acted like a programmer typing commands
            at a keyboard and a client to the debugger server. More generally,
            by spawning command-line programs with streams attached by pipes,
            systems can add new interfaces to legacy programs. In fact, we’ll
            see a simple example of this sort of GUI program structure in
            Chapter 10.</p>
<p>The module in Example 5-22 demonstrates one way
            to apply this idea to link the input and output streams of two
            programs. Its <code class="epub__literal">spawn</code> function
            forks a new child program and connects the input and output
            streams of the parent to the output and input streams of the
            child. That is:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>When the parent reads from its standard input, it is
                reading text sent to the child’s standard output.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>When the parent writes to its standard output, it is
                sending data to the child’s standard input.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>The net effect is that the two independent programs
            communicate by speaking over their standard streams.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id36"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 5-22. PP4E\System\Processes\pipes.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
spawn a child process/program, connect my stdin/stdout to child process's
stdout/stdin--my reads and writes map to output and input streams of the
spawned program; much like tying together streams with subprocess module;
"""

import os, sys

def spawn(prog, *args):                       # pass progname, cmdline args
    stdinFd  = sys.stdin.fileno()             # get descriptors for streams
    stdoutFd = sys.stdout.fileno()            # normally stdin=0, stdout=1

    parentStdin, childStdout  = os.pipe()     # make two IPC pipe channels
    childStdin,  parentStdout = os.pipe()     # pipe returns (inputfd, outoutfd)
    pid = os.fork()                           # make a copy of this process
    if pid:
        os.close(childStdout)                 # in parent process after fork:
        os.close(childStdin)                  # close child ends in parent
        os.dup2(parentStdin,  stdinFd)        # my sys.stdin copy  = pipe1[0]
        os.dup2(parentStdout, stdoutFd)       # my sys.stdout copy = pipe2[1]
    else:
        os.close(parentStdin)                 # in child process after fork:
        os.close(parentStdout)                # close parent ends in child
        os.dup2(childStdin,  stdinFd)         # my sys.stdin copy  = pipe2[0]
        os.dup2(childStdout, stdoutFd)        # my sys.stdout copy = pipe1[1]
        args = (prog,) + args
        os.execvp(prog, args)                 # new program in this process
        assert False, 'execvp failed!'        # os.exec call never returns here

if __name__ == '__main__':
    mypid = os.getpid()
    spawn('python', 'pipes-testchild.py', 'spam')     # fork child program

    print('Hello 1 from parent', mypid)               # to child's stdin
    sys.stdout.flush()                                # subvert stdio buffering
    reply = input()                                   # from child's stdout
    sys.stderr.write('Parent got: "%s"\n' % reply)    # stderr not tied to pipe!

    print('Hello 2 from parent', mypid)
    sys.stdout.flush()
    reply = sys.stdin.readline()
    sys.stderr.write('Parent got: "%s"\n' % reply[:-1])</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">spawn</code> function in
            this module does not work on standard Windows Python (remember
            that <code class="epub__literal">fork</code> isn’t yet available
            there today). In fact, most of the calls in this module map
            straight to Unix system calls (and may be arbitrarily terrifying
            at first glance to non-Unix developers!). We’ve already met some
            of these (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">os.fork</code>), but
            much of this code depends on Unix concepts we don’t have time to
            address well in this text. But in simple terms, here is a brief
            summary of the system calls demonstrated in this code:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">os.fork</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Copies the <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18783"></a>calling process as usual and returns the
                  child’s process ID in the parent process only.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">os.execvp</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Overlays a <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18798"></a>new program in the calling process; it’s just
                  like the <code class="epub__literal">os.execlp</code> used
                  earlier but takes a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>tuple</em></span> or
                  <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>list</em></span> of command-line argument strings
                  (collected with the <code class="epub__literal">*args</code>
                  form in the function header).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">os.pipe</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Returns a <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18823"></a>tuple of file descriptors representing the
                  input and output ends of a pipe, as in earlier
                  examples.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">os.close(fd)</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Closes the <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18838"></a>descriptor-based file <code class="epub__literal">fd</code>.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">os.dup2(fd1,fd2)</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Copies all system <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18854"></a>information associated with the file named by
                  the file descriptor <code class="epub__literal">fd1</code>
                  to the file named by <code class="epub__literal">fd2</code>.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>In terms of connecting standard streams, <code class="epub__literal">os.dup2</code> is the real nitty-gritty here.
            For example, the call <code class="epub__literal">os.dup2(parentStdin,stdinFd)</code> essentially
            assigns the parent process’s <code class="epub__literal">stdin</code> file to the input end of one of
            the two pipes created; all <code class="epub__literal">stdin</code> reads will henceforth come from
            the pipe. By connecting the other end of this pipe to the child
            process’s copy of the <code class="epub__literal">stdout</code>
            stream file with <code class="epub__literal">os.dup2(childStdout,stdoutFd)</code>, text
            written by the child to its <code class="epub__literal">sdtdout</code> winds up being routed through
            the pipe to the parent’s <code class="epub__literal">stdin</code>
            stream. The effect is reminiscent of the way we tied together
            streams with the <code class="epub__literal">subprocess</code>
            module in Chapter 3, but this
            script is more low-level and less portable.</p>
<p>To test this utility, the self-test code at the end of the
            file spawns the program shown in Example 5-23 in a child process
            and reads and writes standard streams to converse with it over two
            pipes.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id37"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 5-23. PP4E\System\Processes\pipes-testchild.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import os, time, sys
mypid     = os.getpid()
parentpid = os.getppid()
sys.stderr.write('Child %d of %d got arg: "%s"\n' %
                                (mypid, parentpid, sys.argv[1]))
for i in range(2):
    time.sleep(3)              # make parent process wait by sleeping here
    recv = input()             # stdin tied to pipe: comes from parent's stdout
    time.sleep(3)
    send = 'Child %d got: [%s]' % (mypid, recv)
    print(send)                # stdout tied to pipe: goes to parent's stdin
    sys.stdout.flush()         # make sure it's sent now or else process blocks</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>The following is our test in action on Cygwin (it’s similar
            other Unix-like platforms like Linux); its output is not
            incredibly impressive to read, but it represents two programs
            running independently and shipping data back and forth through a
            pipe device managed by the operating system. This is even more
            like a client/server model (if you imagine the child as the
            server, responding to requests sent from the parent). The text in
            square brackets in this output went from the parent process to the
            child and back to the parent again, all through pipes connected to
            standard <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18910"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18912"></a>streams:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e18915"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">[C:\...\PP4E\System\Processes]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python pipes.py</code></strong>
Child 9228 of 9096 got arg: "spam"
Parent got: "Child 9228 got: [Hello 1 from parent 9096]"
Parent got: "Child 9228 got: [Hello 2 from parent 9096]"</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Output stream buffering revisited: Deadlocks and flushes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="output_stream_buffering_revisited_colon"></a>Output stream buffering revisited: Deadlocks and
            flushes</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The two processes of <a id="out5.5.1.5"></a><a id="in5.5.1.5"></a><a id="anon5.5.1.5"></a><a id="dead5.5.1.5"></a><a id="flush5.5.1.5"></a>the prior section’s example engage in a simple
            dialog, but it’s already enough to illustrate some of the dangers
            lurking in cross-program communications. First of all, notice that
            both programs need to write to <code class="epub__literal">stderr</code> to display a message; their
            <code class="epub__literal">stdout</code> streams are tied to the
            other program’s input stream. Because processes share file
            descriptors, <code class="epub__literal">stderr</code> is
            <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18959"></a>the same in both parent and child, so status
            messages show up in the same place.</p>
<p>More subtly, note that both parent and child call <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout.flush</code> after they print text
            to the output stream. Input requests on pipes normally block the
            caller if no data is available, but it seems that this shouldn’t
            be a problem in our example because there are as many writes as
            there are reads on the other side of the pipe. By default, though,
            <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code> <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18973"></a>is <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>buffered</em></span> in this context, so
            the printed text may not actually be transmitted until some time
            in the future (when the output buffers fill up). In fact, if the
            flush calls are not made, both processes may get stuck on some
            platforms waiting for input from the other—input that is sitting
            in a buffer and is never flushed out over the pipe. They wind up
            in a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>deadlock</em></span> state, both blocked on <code class="epub__literal">input</code> calls waiting for events that
            never occur.</p>
<p>Technically, by default <code class="epub__literal">stdout</code> is just
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>line-buffered</em></span> when connected to a terminal,
            but it is <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>fully buffered</em></span> when connected to
            other devices such as files, sockets, and the pipes used here.
            This is why you see a script’s printed text in a shell window
            immediately as it is produced, but not until the process exits or
            its buffer fills when its output stream is connected to something
            else.</p>
<p>This output buffering is really a function of the system
            libraries used to access pipes, not of the pipes themselves (pipes
            do queue up output data, but they never hide it from readers!). In
            fact, it appears to occur in this example only because we copy the
            pipe’s information over to <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code>, a built-in file object that
            uses stream buffering by default. However, such anomalies can also
            occur when using other cross-process tools.</p>
<p>In general terms, if your programs engage in a two-way
            dialog like this, there are a variety of ways to avoid
            buffering-related deadlock problems:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Flushes</em></span>: As <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19013"></a>demonstrated in Examples 5-22 and 5-23, manually flushing output
                pipe streams by calling the file object <code class="epub__literal">flush</code> method is an easy way to force
                buffers to be cleared. Use <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout.flush</code> for the output
                stream used by <code class="epub__literal">print</code>.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Arguments</em></span>: As introduced earlier in
                this chapter, the <code class="epub__literal">-u</code> Python
                command-line flag turns off full buffering for the <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code> stream in Python
                programs. Setting your <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONUNBUFFERED</code> environment
                variable to a nonempty value is equivalent to passing this
                flag but applies to every program run.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Open modes</em></span>: It’s possible to
                <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19052"></a>use pipes themselves in unbuffered mode. Either
                use low-level <code class="epub__literal">os</code> module
                calls to read and write pipe descriptors directly, or pass a
                buffer size argument of <code class="epub__literal">0</code>
                (for <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>unbuffered</em></span>) or <code class="epub__literal">1</code> (for
                <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>line-buffered</em></span>) to <code class="epub__literal">os.fdopen</code> to disable buffering in
                the file object used to wrap the descriptor. You can use
                <code class="epub__literal">open</code> arguments the same way
                to control buffering for output to <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>fifo
                files</em></span> (described in the next section). Note that in
                Python 3.X, fully unbuffered mode is allowed only for binary
                mode files, not text.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Command pipes</em></span>: As <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19088"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19093"></a>mentioned earlier in this chapter, you can
                similarly specify buffering mode arguments for command-line
                pipes when they are created by <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code> and <code class="epub__literal">subprocess.Popen</code>, but this pertains
                to the caller’s end of the pipe, not those of the spawned
                program. Hence it cannot prevent delayed outputs from the
                latter, but can be used for text sent to another program’s
                input pipe.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Sockets</em></span>: As we’ll see <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19110"></a>later, the<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19116"></a> <code class="epub__literal">socket.makefile</code> call accepts a
                similar buffering mode argument for sockets (described later
                in this chapter and book), but in Python 3.X this call
                requires buffering for text-mode access and appears to not
                support line-buffered mode (more on this on Chapter 12).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Tools</em></span>: For more complex tasks, we
                can also use higher-level tools that essentially fool a
                program into believing it is connected to a terminal. These
                address programs not written in Python, for which neither
                manual flush calls nor <code class="epub__literal">-u</code>
                are an option. See More on Stream Buffering: pty and Pexpect.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Thread can avoid blocking a main GUI, too, but really just
            delegate the problem (the spawned thread will still be
            deadlocked). Of the options listed, the first two—manual flushes
            and command-line arguments—are often the simplest solutions. In
            fact, because it is so useful, the second technique listed above
            merits a few more words. Try this: comment-out all the <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout.flush</code> calls in Examples 5-22 and 5-23 (the files
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>pipes.py</em></span> and
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>pipes-testchild.py</em></span>) and change the parent’s
            spawn call in <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>pipes.py</em></span> to this (i.e., add a
            <code class="epub__literal">-u</code> command-line
            argument):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e19159"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">spawn('python', '-u', 'pipes-testchild.py', 'spam')</pre>
<p>Then start the program with a command line like this:
            <code class="epub__literal">python -u pipes.py</code>. It will
            work as it did with the manual <code class="epub__literal">stdout</code> flush calls, because <code class="epub__literal">stdout</code> will be operating in unbuffered
            mode in both parent and child.</p>
<p>We’ll revisit the effects of unbuffered output streams in
            Chapter 10, where we’ll code a
            simple GUI that displays the output of a non-GUI program by
            reading it over both a nonblocking socket and a pipe in a thread.
            We’ll explore the topic again in more depth in Chapter 12, where we will redirect standard
            streams to sockets in more general ways. Deadlock in general,
            though, is a bigger problem than we have space to address fully
            here. On the other hand, if you know enough that you want to do
            IPC in Python, you’re probably already a veteran of the deadlock
            wars.</p>
<p>Anonymous pipes allow related tasks to communicate but are
            not directly suited for independently launched programs. To allow
            the latter group to converse, we need to move on to the next
            section and explore devices that have broader <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19181"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19183"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19185"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19187"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19189"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19191"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19193"></a>visibility.</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="more_on_stream_buffering_colon_pty_and_p"></a>
<p class="epub__title">More on Stream Buffering: pty and Pexpect</p>
<p>On Unix-like platforms, you <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19201"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19204"></a>may also be able to use the Python <code class="epub__literal">pty</code> standard library module to force
              another program’s standard output to be unbuffered, especially
              if it’s not a Python program and you cannot change its
              code.</p>
<p>Technically, default buffering for <code class="epub__literal">stdout</code> in other programs is determined
              outside Python by whether the underlying file descriptor refers
              to a terminal. This occurs in the <code class="epub__literal">stdio</code> file system library and cannot
              be controlled by the spawning program. In general, output to
              terminals is line buffered, and output to nonterminals
              (including files, pipes, and sockets) is fully buffered. This
              policy is used for efficiency. Files and streams created within
              a Python script follow the same defaults, but you can specify
              buffering policies in Python’s file creation tools.</p>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">pty</code> module
              essentially fools the spawned program into thinking it is
              connected to a terminal so that only one line is buffered for
              <code class="epub__literal">stdout</code>. The net effect is
              that each newline flushes the prior line—typical of interactive
              programs, and what you need if you wish to grab each piece of
              the printed output as it is produced.</p>
<p>Note, however, that the <code class="epub__literal">pty</code> module is not required for this
              role when spawning Python scripts with pipes: simply use the
              <code class="epub__literal">-u</code> Python command-line flag,
              pass line-buffered mode arguments to file creation tools, or
              manually call <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout.flush()</code> in the spawned
              program. The <code class="epub__literal">pty</code> module is
              also not available on all Python platforms today (most notably,
              it runs on Cygwin but not the standard Windows Python).</p>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">Pexpect</code> package,
              <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19248"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19253"></a>a pure-Python equivalent of the Unix <code class="epub__literal">expect</code> program, uses <code class="epub__literal">pty</code> to provide additional
              functionality and to handle interactions that bypass standard
              streams (e.g., password inputs). See the Python library manual
              for more on <code class="epub__literal">pty</code>, and search
              the Web for <code class="epub__literal">Pexpect</code>.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Named Pipes (Fifos)"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="named_pipes_open_parenthesis_fifos_close"></a>Named Pipes (Fifos)</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>On some platforms, <a id="pipes5.5.2"></a><a id="ipc5.5.2"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19287"></a>it is also possible to create a long-lived pipe that
          exists as a real named file in the filesystem. Such files are called
          named pipes (or, sometimes, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>fifos</em></span>) because they
          behave just like the pipes created by the previous section’s
          programs. Because fifos are associated with a real file on your
          computer, though, they are external to any particular program—they
          do not rely on memory shared between tasks, and so they can be used
          as an IPC mechanism for threads, processes, and independently
          launched programs.</p>
<p>Once a named pipe file is created, clients open it by name and
          read and write data using normal file operations. Fifos are
          unidirectional streams. In typical operation, a server program reads
          data from the fifo, and one or more client programs write data to
          it. In addition, a set of two fifos can be used to implement
          bidirectional communication just as we did for anonymous pipes in
          the prior section.</p>
<p>Because fifos reside in the filesystem, they are longer-lived
          than in-process anonymous pipes and can be accessed by programs
          started independently. The unnamed, in-<span>process</span> pipe examples thus far depend
          on the fact that file descriptors (including pipes) are copied to
          child processes’ memory. That makes it difficult to use anonymous
          pipes to connect programs started independently. With fifos, pipes
          are accessed instead by a filename visible to all programs running
          on the computer, regardless of any parent/child process
          relationships. In fact, like normal files, fifos typically outlive
          the programs that access them. Unlike normal files, though, the
          operating system synchronizes fifo access, making them ideal for
          IPC.</p>
<p>Because of their distinctions, fifo pipes are better suited as
          general IPC mechanisms for independent client and server programs.
          For instance, a perpetually running server program may create and
          listen for requests on a fifo that can be accessed later by
          arbitrary clients not forked by the server. In a sense, fifos are an
          alternative to the socket port interface we’ll meet in the next
          section. Unlike sockets, though, fifos do not directly support
          remote network connections, are not available in standard Windows
          Python today, and are accessed using the standard file interface
          instead of the more unique socket port numbers and calls we’ll study
          later.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Named pipe basics"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="named_pipe_basics"></a>Named pipe basics</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In Python, named <a id="named5.5.2.1"></a>pipe files are created with the<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19316"></a> <code class="epub__literal">os.mkfifo</code> call,
            which is available today on Unix-like platforms, including
            Cygwin’s Python on Windows, but is not currently available in
            standard Windows Python. This call creates only the external file,
            though; to send and receive data through a fifo, it must be opened
            and processed as if it were a standard file.</p>
<p>To illustrate, Example 5-24 is a derivation of
            the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>pipe2.py</em></span> script listed in Example 5-20, but rewritten here
            to use fifos rather than anonymous pipes. Much like <em class="epub__filename">pipe2.py</em>, this script opens the fifo
            using <code class="epub__literal">os.open</code> in the child for
            low-level byte string access, but with the <code class="epub__literal">open</code> built-in in the parent to treat the
            pipe as text; in general, either end may use either technique to
            treat the pipe’s data as bytes or text.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id38"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 5-24. PP4E\System\Processes\pipefifo.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
named pipes; os.mkfifo is not available on Windows (without Cygwin);
there is no reason to fork here, since fifo file pipes are external
to processes--shared fds in parent/child processes are irrelevent;
"""

import os, time, sys
fifoname = '/tmp/pipefifo'                       # must open same name

def child():
    pipeout = os.open(fifoname, os.O_WRONLY)     # open fifo pipe file as fd
    zzz = 0
    while True:
        time.sleep(zzz)
        msg = ('Spam %03d\n' % zzz).encode()     # binary as opened here
        os.write(pipeout, msg)
        zzz = (zzz+1) % 5

def parent():
    pipein = open(fifoname, 'r')                 # open fifo as text file object
    while True:
        line = pipein.readline()[:-1]            # blocks until data sent
        print('Parent %d got "%s" at %s' % (os.getpid(), line, time.time()))

if __name__ == '__main__':
    if not os.path.exists(fifoname):
        os.mkfifo(fifoname)                      # create a named pipe file
    if len(sys.argv) == 1:
        parent()                                 # run as parent if no args
    else:                                        # else run as child process
        child()</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Because the fifo exists independently of both parent and
            child, there’s no reason to fork here. The child may be started
            independently of the parent as long as it opens a fifo file by the
            same name. Here, for instance, on Cygwin the parent is started in
            one shell window and then the child is started in another.
            Messages start appearing in the parent window only after the child
            is started and begins writing messages onto the <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19351"></a>fifo file:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e19354"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">[C:\...\PP4E\System\Processes] $ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python pipefifo.py</code></strong>           # parent window
Parent 8324 got "Spam 000" at 1268003696.07
Parent 8324 got "Spam 001" at 1268003697.06
Parent 8324 got "Spam 002" at 1268003699.07
Parent 8324 got "Spam 003" at 1268003702.08
Parent 8324 got "Spam 004" at 1268003706.09
Parent 8324 got "Spam 000" at 1268003706.09
Parent 8324 got "Spam 001" at 1268003707.11
Parent 8324 got "Spam 002" at 1268003709.12
Parent 8324 got "Spam 003" at 1268003712.13
Parent 8324 got "Spam 004" at 1268003716.14
Parent 8324 got "Spam 000" at 1268003716.14
Parent 8324 got "Spam 001" at 1268003717.15
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...etc: Ctrl-C to exit...</span></em>

[C:\...\PP4E\System\Processes]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file /tmp/pipefifo</code></strong>            # child window
/tmp/pipefifo: fifo (named pipe)

[C:\...\PP4E\System\Processes]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python pipefifo.py -child</code></strong>
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...Ctrl-C to exit...</span></em></pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Named pipe use cases"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="named_pipe_use_cases"></a>Named pipe use cases</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>By mapping <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19375"></a>communication points to a file system entity
            accessible to all programs run on a machine, fifos can address a
            broad range of IPC goals on platforms where they are supported.
            For instance, although this section’s example runs independent
            programs, named pipes can also be used as an IPC device by both
            in-process threads and directly forked related processes, much as
            we saw for anonymous pipes earlier.</p>
<p>By also supporting unrelated programs, though, fifo files
            are more widely applicable to general client/server models. For
            example, named pipes can make the GUI and <span>command</span>-line debugger integration I
            described earlier for anonymous pipes even more flexible—by using
            fifo files to connect the GUI to the non-GUI debugger’s streams,
            the GUI could be started independently when needed.</p>
<p>Sockets provide similar functionality but also buy us both
            inherent network awareness and broader portability to Windows—as
            the next section <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19388"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19390"></a>explains.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Sockets: A First Look"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="sockets_colon_a_first_look"></a>Sockets: A First Look</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Sockets, implemented <a id="ipc5.5.3"></a><a id="soc5.5.3"></a>by the Python <code class="epub__literal">socket</code> module, are a more general IPC
          device than the pipes we’ve seen so far. Sockets let us transfer
          data between programs running on the same computer, as well as
          programs located on remote networked machines. When used as an IPC
          mechanism on the same machine, programs connect to sockets by a
          machine-global port number and transfer data. When used as a
          networking connection, programs provide both a machine name and port
          number to transfer data to a remotely-running program.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Socket basics"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="socket_basics"></a>Socket basics</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Although sockets are <a id="soc5.5.3.1"></a>one of the most commonly used IPC tools, it’s
            impossible to fully grasp their API without also seeing its role
            in networking. Because of that, we’ll defer most of our socket
            coverage until we can explore their use in network scripting in
            Chapter 12. This section provides a
            brief introduction and preview, so you can compare with the prior
            section’s named pipes (a.k.a. fifos). In short:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Like fifos, sockets are global across a machine; they do
                not require shared memory among threads or processes, and are
                thus applicable to independent programs.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Unlike fifos, sockets are identified by port number, not
                filesystem path name; they employ a very different nonfile
                API, though they can be wrapped in a file-like object; and
                they are more portable: they work on nearly every Python
                platform, including standard Windows Python.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>In addition, sockets support networking roles that go beyond
            both IPC and this chapter’s scope. To illustrate the basics,
            though, Example 5-25
            launches a server and 5 clients in threads running in parallel on
            the same machine, to communicate over a socket—because all threads
            connect to the same port, the server consumes the data added by
            each of the clients.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id39"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 5-25. PP4E\System\Processes\socket_preview.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
sockets for cross-task communication: start threads to communicate over sockets;
independent programs can too, because sockets are system-wide, much like fifos;
see the GUI and Internet parts of the book for more realistic socket use cases;
some socket servers may also need to talk to clients in threads or processes;
sockets pass byte strings, but can be pickled objects or encoded Unicode text;
caveat: prints in threads may need to be synchronized if their output overlaps;
"""

from socket import socket, AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM     # portable socket api

port = 50008                 # port number identifies socket on machine
host = 'localhost'           # server and client run on same local machine here

def server():
    sock = socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM)         # ip addresses tcp connection
    sock.bind(('', port))                       # bind to port on this machine
    sock.listen(5)                              # allow up to 5 pending clients
    while True:
        conn, addr = sock.accept()              # wait for client to connect
        data = conn.recv(1024)                  # read bytes data from this client
        reply = 'server got: [%s]' % data       # conn is a new connected socket
        conn.send(reply.encode())               # send bytes reply back to client

def client(name):
    sock = socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM)
    sock.connect((host, port))                  # connect to a socket port
    sock.send(name.encode())                    # send bytes data to listener
    reply = sock.recv(1024)                     # receive bytes data from listener
    sock.close()                                # up to 1024 bytes in message
    print('client got: [%s]' % reply)

if __name__ == '__main__':
    from threading import Thread
    sthread = Thread(target=server)
    sthread.daemon = True                       # don't wait for server thread
    sthread.start()                             # do wait for children to exit
    for i in range(5):
         Thread(target=client, args=('client%s' % i,)).start()</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Study this script’s code and comments to see how the socket
            objects’ methods are used to transfer data. In a nutshell, with
            this type of socket the server accepts a client connection, which
            by default blocks until a client requests service, and returns a
            new socket connected to the client. Once connected, the client and
            server transfer byte strings by using send and receive calls
            instead of writes and reads, though as we’ll see later in the
            book, sockets can be wrapped in file objects much as we did
            earlier for pipe descriptors. Also like pipe descriptors,
            unwrapped sockets deal in binary <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> strings, not text <code class="epub__literal">str</code>; that’s why string formatting
            results are manually encoded again here.</p>
<p>Here is this script’s output on Windows:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e19451"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Processes&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>socket_preview.py</code></strong>
client got: [b"server got: [b'client1']"]
client got: [b"server got: [b'client3']"]
client got: [b"server got: [b'client4']"]
client got: [b"server got: [b'client2']"]
client got: [b"server got: [b'client0']"]</pre>
<p>This output isn’t much to look at, but each line reflects
            data sent from client to server, and then back again: the server
            receives a bytes string from a connected client and echoes it back
            in a larger reply string. Because all threads run in parallel, the
            order in which the clients are served is random on this <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19458"></a>machine.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Sockets and independent programs"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="sockets_and_independent_programs"></a>Sockets and independent programs</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Although sockets <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19466"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19471"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19476"></a>work for threads, the shared memory model of threads
            often allows them to employ simpler communication devices such as
            shared names and objects and queues. Sockets tend to shine
            brighter when used for IPC by separate processes and independently
            launched programs. Example 5-26, for instance,
            reuses the server <span>and client</span>
            functions of the prior example, but runs them in both processes
            and threads of independently launched programs.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id40"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 5-26. PP4E\System\Processes\socket-preview-progs.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
same socket, but talk between independent programs too, not just threads;
server here runs in a process and serves both process and thread clients;
sockets are machine-global, much like fifos: don't require shared memory
"""

from socket_preview import server, client         # both use same port number
import sys, os
from threading import Thread

mode = int(sys.argv[1])
if mode == 1:                                     # run server in this process
    server()
elif mode == 2:                                   # run client in this process
    client('client:process=%s' % os.getpid())
else:                                             # run 5 client threads in process
    for i in range(5):
        Thread(target=client, args=('client:thread=%s' % i,)).start()</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Let’s run this script on Windows, too (again, this
            portability is a major advantage of sockets). First, start the
            server in a process as an independently launched program in its
            own window; this process runs perpetually waiting for clients to
            request connections (and as for our prior pipe example you may
            need to use Task Manager or a window close to kill the server
            process eventually):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e19494"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Processes&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>socket-preview-progs.py 1</code></strong></pre>
<p>Now, in another window, run a few clients in both processes
            and thread, by launching them as independent programs—using 2 as
            the command-line argument runs a single client process, but 3
            spawns five threads to converse with the server on
            parallel:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e19500"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Processes&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>socket-preview-progs.py 2</code></strong>
client got: [b"server got: [b'client:process=7384']"]

C:\...\PP4E\System\Processes&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>socket-preview-progs.py 2</code></strong>
client got: [b"server got: [b'client:process=7604']"]

C:\...\PP4E\System\Processes&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>socket-preview-progs.py 3</code></strong>
client got: [b"server got: [b'client:thread=1']"]
client got: [b"server got: [b'client:thread=2']"]
client got: [b"server got: [b'client:thread=0']"]
client got: [b"server got: [b'client:thread=3']"]
client got: [b"server got: [b'client:thread=4']"]

C:\..\PP4E\System\Processes&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>socket-preview-progs.py 3</code></strong>
client got: [b"server got: [b'client:thread=3']"]
client got: [b"server got: [b'client:thread=1']"]
client got: [b"server got: [b'client:thread=2']"]
client got: [b"server got: [b'client:thread=4']"]
client got: [b"server got: [b'client:thread=0']"]

C:\...\PP4E\System\Processes&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>socket-preview-progs.py 2</code></strong>
client got: [b"server got: [b'client:process=6428']"]</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Socket use cases"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="socket_use_cases"></a>Socket use cases</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>This section’s <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19522"></a>examples illustrate the basic IPC role of sockets,
            but this only hints at their full utility. Despite their seemingly
            limited byte string nature, higher-order use cases for sockets are
            not difficult to imagine. With a little extra work, for
            instance:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Arbitrary Python <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>objects</em></span> like lists
                and dictionaries (or at least copies of them) can be
                transferred over sockets, too, by shipping the serialized byte
                strings produced by Python’s <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> module introduced in Chapter 1 and covered in full in <span>Chapter 17.</span></p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>As we’ll see in Chapter 10, the printed output of a
                simple script can be <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>redirected</em></span> to a GUI
                window, by connecting the script’s output stream to a socket
                on which a GUI is listening in nonblocking mode.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Programs that fetch arbitrary <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>text</em></span>
                off the Web might read it as byte strings over sockets, but
                manually decode it using encoding names embedded in
                content-type headers or tags in the data itself.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In fact, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>the entire Internet</em></span> can be
                seen as a socket use case—as we’ll see in Chapter 12, at the bottom, email, FTP, and
                web pages are largely just formatted byte string messages
                shipped over sockets.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Plus any other context in which programs exchange
            data—sockets are a general, portable, and flexible tool. For
            instance, they would provide the same utility as fifos for the
            GUI/debugger example used earlier, but would also work in Python
            on Windows and would even allow the GUI to connect to a debugger
            running on a different computer altogether. As such, they are seen
            by many as a more powerful IPC tool.</p>
<p>Again, you should consider this section just a preview;
            because the grander socket story also entails networking concepts,
            we’ll defer a more in-depth look at the socket API until Chapter 12. We’ll also see sockets again
            briefly in Chapter 10 in the GUI
            stream redirection use case listed above, and we’ll explore a
            variety of additional socket use cases in the Internet part of
            this book. In Part IV, for
            instance, we’ll use sockets to transfer entire files and write
            more robust socket servers that spawn threads or processes to
            converse with clients to avoid denying connections. For the
            purposes of this chapter, let’s move on to one last traditional
            IPC tool—<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19575"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19577"></a>the signal.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Signals"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="signals"></a>Signals</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>For lack of a <a id="ipc5.5.4"></a><a id="sig5.5.4"></a>better analogy, signals are a way to poke a stick at a
          process. Programs generate signals to trigger a handler for that
          signal in another process. The operating system pokes, too—some
          signals are generated on unusual system events and may kill the
          program if not handled. If this sounds a little like raising
          exceptions in Python, it should; signals are software-generated
          events and the cross-process analog of exceptions. Unlike
          exceptions, though, signals are identified by number, are not
          stacked, and are really an asynchronous event mechanism outside the
          scope of the Python interpreter controlled by the operating
          system.</p>
<p>In order to make signals available to scripts, Python provides
          <a id="sigm5.5.4"></a>a <code class="epub__literal">signal</code> module
          that allows Python programs to register Python functions as handlers
          for signal events. This module is available on both Unix-like
          platforms and Windows (though the Windows version may define fewer
          kinds of signals to be caught). To illustrate the basic signal
          interface, the script in Example 5-27 installs a Python
          handler function for the signal number passed in as a command-line
          argument.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id41"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 5-27. PP4E\System\Processes\signal1.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
catch signals in Python; pass signal number N as a command-line arg,
use a "kill -N pid" shell command to send this process a signal;  most
signal handlers restored by Python after caught (see network scripting
chapter for SIGCHLD details); on Windows, signal module is available,
but it defines only a few signal types there, and os.kill is missing;
"""

import sys, signal, time
def now(): return time.ctime(time.time())        # current time string

def onSignal(signum, stackframe):                # python signal handler
    print('Got signal', signum, 'at', now())     # most handlers stay in effect

signum = int(sys.argv[1])
signal.signal(signum, onSignal)                  # install signal handler
while True: signal.pause()                       # wait for signals (or: pass)</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>There are only two <code class="epub__literal">signal</code>
          module calls at work here:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">signal.signal</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Takes a <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19627"></a>signal number and function object and installs
                that function to handle that signal number when it is raised.
                Python automatically restores most signal handlers when
                signals occur, so there is no need to recall this function
                within the signal handler itself to reregister the handler.
                That is, except for <code class="epub__literal">SIGCHLD</code>, a signal handler remains
                installed until explicitly reset (e.g., by setting the handler
                to <code class="epub__literal">SIG_DFL</code> to restore
                default behavior or to <code class="epub__literal">SIG_IGN</code> to ignore the signal).
                <code class="epub__literal">SIGCHLD</code> behavior is
                platform specific.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">signal.pause</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Makes the <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19652"></a>process sleep until the next signal is caught. A
                <code class="epub__literal">time.sleep</code> call is similar
                but doesn’t work with signals on my Linux box; it generates an
                interrupted system call error. A busy <code class="epub__literal">while True: pass</code> loop here would
                pause the script, too, but may squander CPU resources.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Here is what this script looks like running on Cygwin on
          Windows (it works the same on other Unix-like platforms like Linux):
          a signal number to watch for (12) is passed in on the command line,
          and the program is made to run in the background with an <code class="epub__literal">&amp;</code> shell operator (available in most
          Unix-like shells):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e19669"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">[C:\...\PP4E\System\Processes]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python signal1.py 12 &amp;</code></strong>
[1] 8224

$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>ps</code></strong>
      PID    PPID    PGID     WINPID  TTY  UID    STIME COMMAND
I    8944       1    8944       8944  con 1004 18:09:54 /usr/bin/bash
     8224    7336    8224      10020  con 1004 18:26:47 /usr/local/bin/python
     8380    7336    8380        428  con 1004 18:26:50 /usr/bin/ps

$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>kill −12 8224</code></strong>
Got signal 12 at Sun Mar  7 18:27:28 2010

$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>kill −12 8224</code></strong>
Got signal 12 at Sun Mar  7 18:27:30 2010

$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>kill −9 8224</code></strong>
[1]+  Killed                  python signal1.py 12</pre>
<p>Inputs and outputs can be a bit jumbled here because the
          process prints to the same screen used to type new shell commands.
          To send the program a signal, the <code class="epub__literal">kill</code> shell command takes a signal number
          and a process ID to be signaled (8224); every time a new <code class="epub__literal">kill</code> command sends a signal, the process
          replies with a message generated by a Python signal handler
          function. Signal 9 always kills the process altogether.</p>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">signal</code> module also
          exports a<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19699"></a> <code class="epub__literal">signal.alarm</code>
          function for scheduling a <code class="epub__literal">SIGALRM</code><a name="seconds in"></a>
          signal to occur at some number of seconds in the future. To trigger
          and catch timeouts, set the alarm and install a <code class="epub__literal">SIGALRM</code> handler as shown in Example 5-28.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id42"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 5-28. PP4E\System\Processes\signal2.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
set and catch alarm timeout signals in Python; time.sleep doesn't play
well with alarm (or signal in general in my Linux PC), so we call
signal.pause here to do nothing until a signal is received;
"""

import sys, signal, time
def now(): return time.asctime()

def onSignal(signum, stackframe):                 # python signal handler
    print('Got alarm', signum, 'at', now())       # most handlers stay in effect

while True:
    print('Setting at', now())
    signal.signal(signal.SIGALRM, onSignal)       # install signal handler
    signal.alarm(5)                               # do signal in 5 seconds
    signal.pause()                                # wait for signals</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Running this script on Cygwin on Windows causes its<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19725"></a> <code class="epub__literal">onSignal</code> handler
          function to be invoked every five seconds:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e19732"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">[C:\...\PP4E\System\Processes]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python signal2.py</code></strong>
Setting at Sun Mar  7 18:37:10 2010
Got alarm 14 at Sun Mar  7 18:37:15 2010
Setting at Sun Mar  7 18:37:15 2010
Got alarm 14 at Sun Mar  7 18:37:20 2010
Setting at Sun Mar  7 18:37:20 2010
Got alarm 14 at Sun Mar  7 18:37:25 2010
Setting at Sun Mar  7 18:37:25 2010
Got alarm 14 at Sun Mar  7 18:37:30 2010
Setting at Sun Mar  7 18:37:30 2010
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...Ctrl-C to exit...</span></em></pre>
<p>Generally speaking, signals must be used with cautions not
          made obvious by the examples we’ve just seen. For instance, some
          system calls don’t react well to being interrupted by signals, and
          only the main thread can install signal handlers and respond to
          signals in a multithreaded program.</p>
<p>When used well, though, signals provide an event-based
          communication mechanism. They are less powerful than data streams
          such as pipes, but are sufficient in situations in which you just
          need to tell a program that something important has occurred and
          don’t need to pass along any details about the event itself. Signals
          are sometimes also combined with other IPC tools. For example, an
          initial signal may inform a program that a client wishes to
          communicate over a named pipe—the equivalent of tapping someone’s
          shoulder to get their attention before speaking. Most platforms
          reserve one or more <code class="epub__literal">SIGUSR</code> signal
          numbers for user-defined events of this sort. Such an integration
          structure is sometimes an alternative to running a blocking input
          call in a spawned thread.</p>
<p>See also the<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19748"></a> <code class="epub__literal">os.kill(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>pid</code></em><code class="epub__literal">,</code> <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>sig</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code> call for sending signals to known
          processes from within a Python script on Unix-like platforms, much
          like the<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19766"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19772"></a> <code class="epub__literal">kill</code> shell command
          used earlier; the required process ID can be obtained from the
          <code class="epub__literal">os.fork</code> call’s child process ID
          return value or from other interfaces. Like <code class="epub__literal">os.fork</code>, this call is also available in
          Cygwin Python, but not in standard Windows Python. Also watch for
          the discussion about using signal handlers to clean up “zombie”
          processes in Chapter 12<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19786"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19788"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19791"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19793"></a>.</p>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[17] </sup>We will clarify the notions of “client” and “server” in
                the Internet programming part of this book. There, we’ll
                communicate with sockets (which we’ll see later in this
                chapter are roughly like bidirectional pipes for programs
                running both across networks and on the same machine), but the
                overall conversation model is similar. Named pipes (fifos),
                described ahead, are also a better match to the client/server
                model because they can be accessed by arbitrary, unrelated
                processes (no forks are required). But as we’ll see, the
                socket port model is generally used by most Internet scripting
                protocols—email, for instance, is mostly just formatted
                strings shipped over sockets between programs on standard port
                numbers reserved for the email protocol.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
