<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>The multiprocessing Module</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="The multiprocessing Module"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="the_multiprocessing_module"></a>The multiprocessing Module</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Now that you <a id="par5.6"></a>know about IPC alternatives and have had a chance to
        explore processes, threads, and both process nonportability and thread
        GIL limitations, it turns out that there is another alternative, which
        aims to provide just the best of both worlds. As mentioned earlier,
        Python’s standard library <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code> module <a id="multi5.6"></a>package allows scripts to spawn processes using an API
        very similar to the <code class="epub__literal">threading</code>
        module.</p>
<p>This relatively new package works on both Unix and Windows,
        unlike low-level process forks. It supports a process spawning model
        which is largely platform-neutral, and provides tools for related
        goals, such as IPC, including locks, pipes, and queues. In addition,
        because it uses processes instead of threads to run code in parallel,
        it effectively works around the limitations of the thread GIL. Hence,
        <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code> allows the
        programmer to leverage the capacity of multiple processors for
        parallel tasks, while retaining much of the simplicity and portability
        of the threading model.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Why multiprocessing?"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="why_multiprocessing_question"></a>Why multiprocessing?</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>So why learn yet another parallel processing paradigm and
          toolkit, when we already have the threads, processes, and IPC tools
          like sockets, pipes, and thread queues that we’ve already studied?
          Before we get into the details, I want to begin with a few words
          about why you may (or may not) care about this package. In more
          specific terms, although this module’s performance may not compete
          with that of pure threads or process forks for some applications,
          this module offers a compelling solution for many:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Compared to raw process forks, you gain cross-platform
              portability and powerful IPC tools.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Compared to threads, you essentially trade some potential
              and <span>platform</span>-<span>dependent</span> extra task start-up time
              for the ability to run tasks in truly parallel fashion on
              multi-core or multi-CPU machines.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>On the other hand, this module imposes some constraints and
          tradeoffs that threads do not:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Since objects are copied across process boundaries, shared
              mutable state does not work as it does for threads—changes in
              one process are not generally noticed in the other. Really,
              freely shared state may be the most compelling reason to use
              threads; its absence in this module may prove limiting in some
              threading contexts.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Because this module requires pickleability for both its
              processes on Windows, as well as some of its IPC tools in
              general, some coding paradigms are difficult or
              nonportable—especially if they use bound methods or pass
              unpickleable objects such as sockets to spawned
              processes.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>For instance, common coding patterns with lambda that work for
          the <code class="epub__literal">threading</code> module cannot be
          used as process target callables in this module on Windows, because
          they cannot be pickled. Similarly, because bound object methods are
          also not pickleable, a threaded program may require a more indirect
          design if it either runs bound methods in its threads or implements
          thread exit actions by posting arbitrary callables (possibly
          including bound methods) on shared queues. The in-process model of
          threads supports such direct lambda and bound method use, but the
          separate processes of <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code> do not.</p>
<p>In fact we’ll write a thread manager for GUIs in Chapter 10 that relies on queueing <span>in-process</span> callables this way to
          implement thread exit actions—the callables are queued by worker
          threads, and fetched and dispatched by the main thread. Because the
          <span>threaded</span> PyMailGUI program
          we’ll code in Chapter 14 both uses this
          manager to queue bound methods for thread exit actions and runs
          bound methods as the main action of a thread itself, it could not be
          directly translated to the separate process model implied by
          <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code>.</p>
<p>Without getting into too many details here, to use <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code>, PyMailGUI’s actions might
          have to be coded as simple functions or complete process subclasses
          for pickleability. Worse, they may have to be implemented as simpler
          action identifiers dispatched in the main process, if they update
          either the GUI itself or object state in general —pickling results
          in an object copy in the receiving process, not a reference to the
          original, and forks on Unix essentially copy an entire process.
          Updating the state of a mutable message cache copied by pickling it
          to pass to a new process, for example, has no effect on the
          original.</p>
<p>The pickleability constraints for process arguments on Windows
          can limit <code class="epub__literal">multi</code><code class="epub__literal">processing</code>’s scope in other contexts
          as well. For instance, in Chapter 12,
          we’ll find that this module doesn’t directly solve the lack of
          portability for the <code class="epub__literal">os.fork</code> call
          for traditionally coded <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>socket servers</em></span> on
          Windows, because connected sockets are not pickled correctly when
          passed into a new process created by this module to converse with a
          client. In this context, threads provide a more portable and likely
          more efficient solution.</p>
<p>Applications that pass simpler types of messages, of course,
          may fare better. Message constraints are easier to accommodate when
          they are part of an initial process-based design. Moreover, other
          tools in this module, such as its managers and shared memory API,
          while narrowly focused and not as general as shared thread state,
          offer additional mutable state options for some programs.</p>
<p>Fundamentally, though, because <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code> is based on separate
          processes, it may be best geared for tasks which are relatively
          independent, do not share mutable object state freely, and can make
          do with the message passing and shared memory tools provided by this
          module. This includes many applications, but this module is not
          necessarily a direct replacement for every threaded program, and it
          is not an alternative to process forks in all contexts.</p>
<p>To truly understand both this module package’s benefits, as
          well as its tradeoffs, let’s turn to a first example and explore
          this package’s implementation along the <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19905"></a>way.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The Basics: Processes and Locks"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_basics_colon_processes_and_locks"></a>The Basics: Processes and Locks</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>We don’t have <a id="multi5.6.2"></a>space to do full justice to this sophisticated module
          in this book; see its coverage in the Python library manual for the
          full story. But as a brief introduction, by design most of this
          module’s interfaces mirror the <code class="epub__literal">threading</code> and <code class="epub__literal">queue</code> modules we’ve already met, so they
          should already seem familiar. For example, the <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code> module’s<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19928"></a> <code class="epub__literal">Process</code> class is
          intended to mimic the <code class="epub__literal">threading</code>
          module’s <code class="epub__literal">Thread</code> class we met
          earlier—it allows us to launch a function call in parallel with the
          calling script; with this module, though, the function runs in a
          process instead of a thread. Example 5-29 illustrates these
          basics in action:</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id43"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 5-29. PP4E\System\Processes\multi1.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
multiprocess basics: Process works like threading.Thread, but
runs function call in parallel in a process instead of a thread;
locks can be used to synchronize, e.g. prints on some platforms;
starts new interpreter on windows, forks a new process on unix;
"""

import os
from multiprocessing import Process, Lock

def whoami(label, lock):
    msg = '%s: name:%s, pid:%s'
    with lock:
        print(msg % (label, __name__, os.getpid()))

if __name__ == '__main__':
    lock = Lock()
    whoami('function call', lock)

    p = Process(target=whoami, args=('spawned child', lock))
    p.start()
    p.join()

    for i in range(5):
        Process(target=whoami, args=(('run process %s' % i), lock)).start()

    with lock:
        print('Main process exit.')</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>When run, this script first calls a function directly and
          in-process; then launches a call to that function in a new process
          and waits for it to exit; and finally spawns five function call
          processes in parallel in a loop—all using an API identical to that
          of the <code class="epub__literal">threading.</code><code class="epub__literal">Thread</code> model we studied earlier in
          this chapter. Here’s this script’s output on Windows; notice how the
          five child processes spawned at the end of this script outlive their
          parent, as is the usual case for processes:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e19956"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Processes&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>multi1.py</code></strong>
function call: name:__main__, pid:8752
spawned child: name:__main__, pid:9268
Main process exit.
run process 3: name:__main__, pid:9296
run process 1: name:__main__, pid:8792
run process 4: name:__main__, pid:2224
run process 2: name:__main__, pid:8716
run process 0: name:__main__, pid:6936</pre>
<p>Just like the <code class="epub__literal">threading.Thread</code> class we met earlier, the
          <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing.Process</code> object
          can either be passed a <code class="epub__literal">target</code>
          with arguments (as done here) or subclassed to redefine its <code class="epub__literal">run</code> action method. Its <code class="epub__literal">start</code> method invokes its <code class="epub__literal">run</code> method in a new process, and the
          default <code class="epub__literal">run</code> simply calls the
          passed-in target. Also like <code class="epub__literal">threading</code>, a <code class="epub__literal">join</code> method waits for child process exit,
          and a <code class="epub__literal">Lock</code> object is provided as
          one of a handful of process synchronization tools; it’s used here to
          ensure that prints don’t overlap among processes on platforms where
          this might matter (it may not on Windows).</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Implementation and usage rules"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="implementation_and_usage_rules"></a>Implementation and usage rules</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Technically, to achieve <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19999"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e20004"></a>its portability, this module currently works by
            selecting from platform-specific alternatives:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>On Unix, it forks a new child process and invokes the
                <code class="epub__literal">Process</code> object’s <code class="epub__literal">run</code> method in the new child.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>On Windows, it spawns a new interpreter by using
                Windows-specific process creation tools, passing the pickled
                <code class="epub__literal">Process</code> object in to the
                new process over a pipe, and starting a “python -c” command
                line in the new process, which runs a special Python-coded
                function in this package that reads and unpickles the <code class="epub__literal">Process</code> and invokes its <code class="epub__literal">run</code> method.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>We met pickling briefly in Chapter 1, and we will study it further later
            in this book. The implementation is a bit more complex than this,
            and is prone to change over time, of course, but it’s really quite
            an amazing trick. While the portable API generally hides these
            details from your code, its basic structure can still have subtle
            impacts on the way you’re allowed to use it. For instance:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>On Windows, the main process’s logic should generally be
                nested under a <code class="epub__literal">__name__ ==
                __main__</code> test as done here when using this module,
                so it can be imported freely by a new interpreter without side
                effects. As we’ll learn in more detail in Chapter 17, unpickling classes and
                functions requires an import of their enclosing module, and
                this is the root of this requirement.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Moreover, when globals are accessed in child processes
                on Windows, their values may not be the same as that in the
                parent at <code class="epub__literal">start</code> time,
                because their module will be imported into a new
                process.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Also on Windows, all arguments to <code class="epub__literal">Process</code> must be pickleable. Because
                this includes <code class="epub__literal">target</code>,
                targets should be simple functions so they can be pickled;
                they cannot be bound or unbound object
                <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>methods</em></span> and cannot be functions created
                with a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>lambda</em></span>. See <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> in Python’s library manual
                for more on pickleability rules; nearly every object type
                works, but callables like functions and classes must be
                importable—they are pickled by name only, and later imported
                to recreate bytecode. On Windows, objects with system state,
                such as connected sockets, won’t generally work as arguments
                to a process target either, because they are not <span>pickleable</span>.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Similarly, instances of custom <code class="epub__literal">Process</code> subclasses must be
                pickleable on Windows as well. This includes all their
                attribute values. Objects available in this package (e.g.,
                <code class="epub__literal">Lock</code> in Example 5-29) are pickleable,
                and so may be used as both <code class="epub__literal">Process</code> constructor arguments and
                subclass attributes.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>IPC objects in this package that appear in later
                examples like <code class="epub__literal">Pipe</code> and
                <code class="epub__literal">Queue</code> accept only
                pickleable objects, because of their implementation (more on
                this in the next section).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>On Unix, although a child process can make use of a
                shared global item created in the parent, it’s better to pass
                the object as an argument to the child process’s constructor,
                both for portability to Windows and to avoid potential
                problems if such objects were garbage collected in the
                parent.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>There are additional rules documented in the library manual.
            In general, though, if you stick to passing in shared objects to
            processes and using the synchronization and <span>communication</span> tools provided by this
            package, your code will usually be portable and correct. Let’s
            look next at a few of those tools in <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e20104"></a>action.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="IPC Tools: Pipes, Shared Memory, and Queues"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="ipc_tools_colon_pipes_comma_shared_memor"></a>IPC Tools: Pipes, Shared Memory, and Queues</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>While the processes <a id="multi5.6.3"></a><a id="ipc5.6.3"></a>created by this package can always communicate using
          general system-wide tools like the sockets and fifo files we met
          earlier, the <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code>
          module also provides portable message passing tools specifically
          geared to this purpose for the processes it spawns:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Its <code class="epub__literal">Pipe</code> object
              <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e20133"></a>provides an anonymous pipe, which serves as a
              connection between two processes. When called, <code class="epub__literal">Pipe</code> returns <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e20140"></a>two <code class="epub__literal">Connection</code>
              objects that represent the ends of the pipe. Pipes are
              bidirectional by default, and allow arbitrary pickleable Python
              objects to be sent and received. On Unix they are implemented
              internally today with either a connected socket pair or the
              <code class="epub__literal">os.pipe</code> call we met earlier,
              and on Windows with named pipes specific to that platform. Much
              like the <code class="epub__literal">Process</code> object
              described earlier, though, the <code class="epub__literal">Pipe</code> object’s portable API spares
              callers from such things.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Its <code class="epub__literal">Value</code> and <code class="epub__literal">Array</code> objects <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e20168"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e20171"></a>implement shared process/thread-safe memory for
              communication between processes. These calls return scalar and
              array objects based in the<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e20175"></a> <code class="epub__literal">ctypes</code> module
              and created in shared memory, with access synchronized by
              default.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Its <code class="epub__literal">Queue</code> object
              <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e20190"></a>serves as a FIFO list of Python objects, which
              allows multiple producers and consumers. A queue is essentially
              a pipe with extra locking mechanisms to coordinate more
              arbitrary accesses, and inherits the pickleability constraints
              of <code class="epub__literal">Pipe</code>.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Because these devices are safe to use across multiple
          processes, they can often serve to synchronize points of
          communication and obviate lower-level tools like locks, much the
          same as the thread queues we met earlier. As usual, a pipe (or a
          pair of them) may be used to implement a request/reply model. Queues
          support more flexible models; in fact, a GUI that wishes to avoid
          the limitations of the GIL might use the <code class="epub__literal">multi</code><code class="epub__literal">processing</code> module’s <code class="epub__literal">Process</code> and <code class="epub__literal">Queue</code> to spawn long-running tasks that
          post results, rather than threads. As mentioned, although this may
          incur extra start-up overhead on some platforms, unlike threads
          today, tasks coded this way can be as truly parallel as the
          underlying platform allows.</p>
<p>One constraint worth noting here: this package’s pipes (and by
          proxy, queues) <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>pickle</em></span> the objects passed
          through them, so that they can be reconstructed in the receiving
          process (as we’ve seen, on Windows the receiver process may be a
          fully independent Python interpreter). Because of that, they do not
          support unpickleable objects; as suggested earlier, this includes
          some callables like bound methods and lambda functions (see file
          <em class="epub__filename">multi-badq.py</em> in the book
          examples package for a demonstration of code that violates this
          constraint). Objects with system state, such as sockets, may fail as
          well. Most other Python object types, including classes and simple
          functions, work fine on pipes and queues.</p>
<p>Also keep in mind that because they are pickled, objects
          transferred this way are effectively <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>copied</em></span> in
          the receiving process; direct in-place changes to mutable objects’
          state won’t be noticed in the sender. This makes sense if you
          remember that this package runs independent processes with their own
          memory spaces; state cannot be as freely shared as in threading,
          regardless of which IPC tools you use.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="multiprocessing pipes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="multiprocessing_pipes"></a>multiprocessing pipes</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To demonstrate <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e20228"></a>the IPC tools listed above, the next three examples
            implement three flavors of communication between parent and child
            processes. Example 5-30
            uses a simple shared pipe object to send and receive data between
            parent and child processes.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id44"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 5-30. PP4E\System\Processes\multi2.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
Use multiprocess anonymous pipes to communicate. Returns 2 connection
object representing ends of the pipe: objects are sent on one end and
received on the other, though pipes are bidirectional by default
"""

import os
from multiprocessing import Process, Pipe

def sender(pipe):
    """
    send object to parent on anonymous pipe
    """
    pipe.send(['spam'] +  [42, 'eggs'])
    pipe.close()

def talker(pipe):
    """
    send and receive objects on a pipe
    """
    pipe.send(dict(name='Bob', spam=42))
    reply = pipe.recv()
    print('talker got:', reply)

if __name__ == '__main__':
    (parentEnd, childEnd) = Pipe()
    Process(target=sender, args=(childEnd,)).start()        # spawn child with pipe
    print('parent got:', parentEnd.recv())                  # receive from child
    parentEnd.close()                                       # or auto-closed on gc

    (parentEnd, childEnd) = Pipe()
    child = Process(target=talker, args=(childEnd,))
    child.start()
    print('parent got:', parentEnd.recv())                  # receieve from child
    parentEnd.send({x * 2 for x in 'spam'})                 # send to child
    child.join()                                            # wait for child exit
    print('parent exit')</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>When run on Windows, here’s this script’s output—one child
            passes an object to the parent, and the other both sends and
            receives on the same pipe:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e20243"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Processes&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>multi2.py</code></strong>
parent got: ['spam', 42, 'eggs']
parent got: {'name': 'Bob', 'spam': 42}
talker got: {'ss', 'aa', 'pp', 'mm'}
parent exit</pre>
<p>This module’s pipe objects make communication between two
            processes portable (and nearly trivial).</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Shared memory and globals"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="shared_memory_and_globals"></a>Shared memory and globals</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Example 5-31 uses
            shared <a id="shared5.6.3.2"></a><a id="global5.6.3.2"></a><a id="var5.6.3.2"></a>memory to serve as both inputs and outputs of
            spawned processes. To make this work portably, we must create
            objects defined by the package and pass them to <code class="epub__literal">Process</code> constructors. The last test in
            this demo (“loop4”) probably represents the most common use case
            for shared memory—that of distributing computation work to
            multiple parallel processes.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id45"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 5-31. PP4E\System\Processes\multi3.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
Use multiprocess shared memory objects to communicate.
Passed objects are shared, but globals are not on Windows.
Last test here reflects common use case: distributing work.
"""

import os
from multiprocessing import Process, Value, Array

procs = 3
count = 0    # per-process globals, not shared

def showdata(label, val, arr):
    """
    print data values in this process
    """
    msg = '%-12s: pid:%4s, global:%s, value:%s, array:%s'
    print(msg % (label, os.getpid(), count, val.value, list(arr)))

def updater(val, arr):
    """
    communicate via shared memory
    """
    global count
    count += 1                         # global count not shared
    val.value += 1                     # passed in objects are
    for i in range(3): arr[i] += 1

if __name__ == '__main__':
    scalar = Value('i', 0)             # shared memory: process/thread safe
    vector = Array('d', procs)         # type codes from ctypes: int, double

    # show start value in parent process
    showdata('parent start', scalar, vector)

    # spawn child, pass in shared memory
    p = Process(target=showdata, args=('child ', scalar, vector))
    p.start(); p.join()

    # pass in shared memory updated in parent, wait for each to finish
    # each child sees updates in parent so far for args (but not global)

    print('\nloop1 (updates in parent, serial children)...')
    for i in range(procs):
        count += 1
        scalar.value += 1
        vector[i] += 1
        p = Process(target=showdata, args=(('process %s' % i), scalar, vector))
        p.start(); p.join()

    # same as prior, but allow children to run in parallel
    # all see the last iteration's result because all share objects

    print('\nloop2 (updates in parent, parallel children)...')
    ps = []
    for i in range(procs):
        count += 1
        scalar.value += 1
        vector[i] += 1
        p = Process(target=showdata, args=(('process %s' % i), scalar, vector))
        p.start()
        ps.append(p)
    for p in ps: p.join()

    # shared memory updated in spawned children, wait for each

    print('\nloop3 (updates in serial children)...')
    for i in range(procs):
        p = Process(target=updater, args=(scalar, vector))
        p.start()
        p.join()
    showdata('parent temp', scalar, vector)

    # same, but allow children to update in parallel

    ps = []
    print('\nloop4 (updates in parallel children)...')
    for i in range(procs):
        p = Process(target=updater, args=(scalar, vector))
        p.start()
        ps.append(p)
    for p in ps: p.join()
                                           # global count=6 in parent only
    # show final results here              # scalar=12:  +6 parent, +6 in 6 children
    showdata('parent end', scalar, vector) # array[i]=8: +2 parent, +6 in 6 children</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>The following is this script’s output on Windows. Trace
            through this and the code to see how it runs; notice how the
            changed value of the global variable is not shared by the spawned
            processes on Windows, but passed-in <code class="epub__literal">Value</code> and <code class="epub__literal">Array</code> objects are. The final output line
            reflects changes made to shared memory in both the parent and
            spawned children—the array’s final values are all 8.0, because
            they were incremented twice in the parent, and once in each of six
            spawned children; the scalar value similarly reflects changes made
            by both parent and child; but unlike for threads, the global is
            per-process data on Windows:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e20288"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Processes&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>multi3.py</code></strong>
parent start: pid:6204, global:0, value:0, array:[0.0, 0.0, 0.0]
child       : pid:9660, global:0, value:0, array:[0.0, 0.0, 0.0]

loop1 (updates in parent, serial children)...
process 0   : pid:3900, global:0, value:1, array:[1.0, 0.0, 0.0]
process 1   : pid:5072, global:0, value:2, array:[1.0, 1.0, 0.0]
process 2   : pid:9472, global:0, value:3, array:[1.0, 1.0, 1.0]

loop2 (updates in parent, parallel children)...
process 1   : pid:9468, global:0, value:6, array:[2.0, 2.0, 2.0]
process 2   : pid:9036, global:0, value:6, array:[2.0, 2.0, 2.0]
process 0   : pid:9548, global:0, value:6, array:[2.0, 2.0, 2.0]

loop3 (updates in serial children)...
parent temp : pid:6204, global:6, value:9, array:[5.0, 5.0, 5.0]

loop4 (updates in parallel children)...
parent end  : pid:6204, global:6, value:12, array:[8.0, 8.0, 8.0]</pre>
<p>If you imagine the last test here run with a much larger
            array and many more parallel children, you might begin to sense
            some of the power of this package for <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e20295"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e20297"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e20299"></a>distributing work.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Queues and subclassing"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="queues_and_subclassing"></a>Queues and subclassing</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Finally, besides <a id="queue5.6.3.3"></a><a id="sub5.6.3.3"></a>basic spawning and IPC tools, the <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code> module also:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Allows its <code class="epub__literal">Process</code>
                class to be subclassed to provide structure and state
                retention (much like <code class="epub__literal">threading.Thread</code>, but for
                processes).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Implements a process-safe <code class="epub__literal">Queue</code> object which may be shared by
                any number of processes for more general communication needs
                (much like <code class="epub__literal">queue.Queue</code>, but
                for processes).</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Queues support a more flexible multiple client/server model.
            Example 5-32, for instance,
            spawns three producer threads to post to a shared queue and
            repeatedly polls for results to appear—in much the same fashion
            that a GUI might collect results in parallel with the display
            itself, though here the concurrency is achieved with processes
            instead of threads.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id46"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 5-32. PP4E\System\Processes\multi4.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
Process class can also be subclassed just like threading.Thread;
Queue works like queue.Queue but for cross-process, not cross-thread
"""

import os, time, queue
from multiprocessing import Process, Queue           # process-safe shared queue
                                                     # queue is a pipe + locks/semas
class Counter(Process):
    label = '  @'
    def __init__(self, start, queue):                # retain state for use in run
        self.state = start
        self.post  = queue
        Process.__init__(self)

    def run(self):                                   # run in newprocess on start()
        for i in range(3):
            time.sleep(1)
            self.state += 1
            print(self.label ,self.pid, self.state)  # self.pid is this child's pid
            self.post.put([self.pid, self.state])    # stdout file is shared by all
        print(self.label, self.pid, '-')

if __name__ == '__main__':
    print('start', os.getpid())
    expected = 9

    post = Queue()
    p = Counter(0, post)                        # start 3 processes sharing queue
    q = Counter(100, post)                      # children are producers
    r = Counter(1000, post)
    p.start(); q.start(); r.start()

    while expected:                             # parent consumes data on queue
        time.sleep(0.5)                         # this is essentially like a GUI,
        try:                                    # though GUIs often use threads
            data = post.get(block=False)
        except queue.Empty:
            print('no data...')
        else:
            print('posted:', data)
            expected -= 1

    p.join(); q.join(); r.join()                # must get before join putter
    print('finish', os.getpid(), r.exitcode)    # exitcode is child exit status</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Notice in this code how:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">time.sleep</code> calls
                in this code’s producer simulate long-running tasks.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>All four processes share the same output stream;
                <code class="epub__literal">print</code> calls go the same
                place and don’t overlap badly on Windows (as we saw earlier,
                the <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code> module
                also has a shareable <code class="epub__literal">Lock</code>
                object to synchronize access if required).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The exit status of child process is available after they
                finish in their <code class="epub__literal">exitcode</code>
<span>attribute</span>.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>When run, the output of the main consumer process traces its
            queue fetches, and the (indented) output of spawned child producer
            processes gives process IDs and state.</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e20379"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Processes&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>multi4.py</code></strong>
start 6296
no data...
no data...
  @ 8008 101
posted: [8008, 101]
  @ 6068 1
  @ 3760 1001
posted: [6068, 1]
  @ 8008 102
posted: [3760, 1001]
  @ 6068 2
  @ 3760 1002
posted: [8008, 102]
  @ 8008 103
  @ 8008 -
posted: [6068, 2]
  @ 6068 3
  @ 6068 -
  @ 3760 1003
  @ 3760 -
posted: [3760, 1002]
posted: [8008, 103]
posted: [6068, 3]
posted: [3760, 1003]
finish 6296 0</pre>
<p>If you imagine the “@” lines here as results of long-running
            operations and the others as a main GUI thread, the wide relevance
            of this package may become more <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e20386"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e20388"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e20390"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e20392"></a>apparent.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Starting Independent Programs"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="starting_independent_programs"></a>Starting Independent Programs</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As we learned earlier, <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e20400"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e20405"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e20410"></a>independent programs generally communicate with
          system-global tools such as sockets and the fifo files we studied
          earlier. Although processes spawned by <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code> can leverage these tools,
          too, their closer relationship affords them the host of additional
          IPC communication devices provided by this <span>module</span>.</p>
<p>Like threads, <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code> is designed to run
          function calls in parallel, not to start entirely separate programs
          directly. Spawned functions might use tools like <code class="epub__literal">os.system</code>, <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">subprocess</code> to start a program if such an
          operation might block the caller, but there’s otherwise often no
          point in starting a process that just starts a program (<span>you might as well</span> start the program
          and skip a step). In fact, on Windows, <code class="epub__literal">multi</code><code class="epub__literal">processing</code> today uses the same
          process creation call as <code class="epub__literal">subprocess</code>, so there’s little point in
          starting two processes to run one.</p>
<p>It is, however, possible to start new programs in the child
          processes spawned, using tools like the <code class="epub__literal">os.exec*</code> calls we met earlier—by spawning
          a process portably with <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code> and overlaying it with a
          new program this way, we start a new independent program, and
          effectively work around the lack of the <code class="epub__literal">os.fork</code> call in standard Windows
          Python.</p>
<p>This generally assumes that the new program doesn’t require
          any resources passed in by the <code class="epub__literal">Process</code> API, of course (once a new program
          starts, it erases that which was running), but it offers a portable
          equivalent to the fork/exec combination on Unix. Furthermore,
          programs started this way can still make use of more traditional IPC
          tools, such as sockets and fifos, we met earlier in this chapter.
          Example 5-33 illustrates the
          technique.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id47"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 5-33. PP4E\System\Processes\multi5.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"Use multiprocessing to start independent programs, os.fork or not"

import os
from multiprocessing import Process

def runprogram(arg):
    os.execlp('python', 'python', 'child.py', str(arg))

if __name__ == '__main__':
    for i in range(5):
        Process(target=runprogram, args=(i,)).start()
    print('parent exit')</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>This script starts 5 instances of the <em class="epub__filename">child.py</em> script we wrote in Example 5-4 as independent
          processes, without waiting for them to finish. Here’s this script at
          work on Windows, after deleting a superfluous system prompt that
          shows up arbitrarily in the middle of its output (it runs the same
          on Cygwin, but the output is not interleaved there):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e20478"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Processes&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type child.py</code></strong>
import os, sys
print('Hello from child', os.getpid(), sys.argv[1])

C:\...\PP4E\System\Processes&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>multi5.py</code></strong>
parent exit
Hello from child 9844 2
Hello from child 8696 4
Hello from child 1840 0
Hello from child 6724 1
Hello from child 9368 3</pre>
<p>This technique isn’t possible with threads, because all
          threads run in the same process; overlaying it with a new program
          would kill all its threads. Though this is unlikely to be as fast as
          a fork/exec combination on Unix, it at least provides similar and
          portable functionality on Windows when required.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="And Much More"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="and_much_more"></a>And Much More</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Finally, <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code>
          provides <a id="multi5.6.5"></a>many more tools than these examples deploy, including
          condition, event, and semaphore synchronization tools, and local and
          remote managers that implement servers for shared object. For
          instance, Example 5-34
          demonstrates its support for <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>pools</em></span>—spawned
          children that work in concert on a given task.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id48"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 5-34. PP4E\System\Processes\multi6.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"Plus much more: process pools, managers, locks, condition,..."

import os
from multiprocessing import Pool

def powers(x):
    #print(os.getpid())                  # enable to watch children
    return 2 ** x

if __name__ == '__main__':
    workers = Pool(processes=5)

    results = workers.map(powers, [2]*100)
    print(results[:16])
    print(results[-2:])

    results = workers.map(powers, range(100))
    print(results[:16])
    print(results[-2:])</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>When run, Python arranges to delegate portions of the task to
          workers run in parallel:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e20515"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Processes&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>multi6.py</code></strong>
[4, 4, 4, 4, 4, 4, 4, 4, 4, 4, 4, 4, 4, 4, 4, 4]
[4, 4]
[1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512, 1024, 2048, 4096, 8192, 16384, 32768]
[316912650057057350374175801344, 633825300114114700748351602688]</pre>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="And a little less…"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="and_a_little_less"></a>And a little less…</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To be fair, besides such additional features and tools,
            <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code> also comes with
            additional constraints beyond those we’ve already covered
            (pickleability, mutable state, and so on). For example, consider
            the <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e20528"></a>following sort of code:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e20534"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def action(arg1, arg2):
    print(arg1, arg2)

if __name__ == '__main__':
    Process(target=action, args=('spam', 'eggs')).start()    # shell waits for child</pre>
<p>This works as expected, but if we change the last line to
            the following it fails on Windows because
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>lambdas</em></span> are not pickleable (really, not
            importable):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e20541"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">Process(target=(lambda: action('spam', 'eggs'))).start()  # fails!-not pickleable</pre>
<p>This precludes a common coding pattern that uses lambda to
            add data to calls, which we’ll use often for callbacks in the GUI
            part of this book. Moreover, this differs from the <code class="epub__literal">threading</code> module that is the model for
            this package—calls like the following which work for threads must
            be translated to a callable and arguments:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e20548"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">threading.Thread(target=(lambda: action(2, 4))).start()   # but lambdas work here</pre>
<p>Conversely, some behavior of the <code class="epub__literal">threading</code> module is mimicked by <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code>, whether you wish it did
            or not. Because programs using this package wait for child
            processes to end by default, we must mark processes as <code class="epub__literal">daemon</code> if we don’t want to block the
            shell where the following sort of code is run (technically,
            parents attempt to terminate daemonic children on exit, which
            means that the program can exit when only daemonic children
            remain, much like <code class="epub__literal">threading</code>):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e20564"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def action(arg1, arg2):
   print(arg1, arg2)
   time.sleep(5)          # normally prevents the parent from exiting

if __name__ == '__main__':
    p = Process(target=action, args=('spam', 'eggs'))
    p.daemon = True                                        # don't wait for it
    p.start()</pre>
<p>There’s more on some of these issues in the Python library
            manual; they are not show-stoppers by any stretch, but special
            cases and potential pitfalls to some. We’ll revisit the lambda and
            daemon issues in a more realistic context in Chapter 8, where we’ll use <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code> to launch GUI demos
            <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e20573"></a>independently.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Why multiprocessing? The Conclusion"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="why_multiprocessing_question_mthe_conclu"></a>Why multiprocessing? The Conclusion</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As this section’s examples suggest, <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code> provides a powerful
          alternative which aims to combine the portability and much of the
          utility of threads with the fully parallel potential of processes
          and offers additional solutions to IPC, exit status, and other
          parallel processing goals.</p>
<p>Hopefully, this section has also given you a better
          understanding of this module’s tradeoffs discussed at its beginning.
          In particular, its separate process model precludes the freely
          shared mutable state of threads, and bound methods and lambdas are
          prohibited by both the pickleability requirements of its IPC pipes
          and queues, as well as its process action implementation on Windows.
          Moreover, its requirement of pickleability for process arguments on
          Windows also precludes it as an option for conversing with clients
          in socket servers portably.</p>
<p>While not a replacement for threading in all applications,
          though, <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code> offers
          compelling solutions for many. Especially for parallel-programming
          tasks which can be designed to avoid its limitations, this module
          can offer both performance and portability that Python’s more direct
          multitasking tools cannot.</p>
<p>Unfortunately, beyond this brief introduction, we don’t have
          space for a more complete treatment of this module in this book. For
          more details, refer to the Python library manual. Here, we turn next
          to a handful of additional program launching tools and a wrap up of
          this <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e20593"></a>chapter.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
