<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Other Ways to Start Programs</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Other Ways to Start Programs"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="other_ways_to_start_programs"></a>Other Ways to Start Programs</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>We’ve seen a <a id="par5.7"></a><a id="pro5.7"></a>variety of ways to launch programs in this book so
        far—from the <code class="epub__literal">os.fork</code>/<code class="epub__literal">exec</code> combination on Unix, to portable shell
        command-line launchers like <code class="epub__literal">os.system</code>, <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">subprocess</code>, to the portable <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code> module options of the last
        section. There are still other ways to start programs in the Python
        standard library, some of which are more platform neutral or obscure
        than others. This section wraps up this chapter with a quick tour
        through this set.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The os.spawn Calls"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_os.spawn_calls"></a>The os.spawn Calls</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">os.spawnv</code> and <code class="epub__literal">os.spawnve</code> calls <a id="os5.7.1a"></a><a id="os5.7.1b"></a>were originally introduced to launch programs on
          Windows, much like a <code class="epub__literal">fork</code>/<code class="epub__literal">exec</code> call combination on Unix-like
          platforms. Today, these calls work on both Windows and Unix-like
          systems, and additional variants have been added to parrot <code class="epub__literal">os.exec</code>.</p>
<p>In recent versions of Python, the portable <code class="epub__literal">subprocess</code> module has started to supersede
          these calls. In fact, Python’s library manual includes a note
          stating that this module has more powerful and equivalent tools and
          should be preferred to <code class="epub__literal">os.spawn</code>
          calls. Moreover, the newer <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code> module can achieve
          similarly portable results today when combined with <code class="epub__literal">os.exec</code> calls, as we saw earlier. Still,
          the <code class="epub__literal">os.spawn</code> calls continue to
          work as advertised and may appear in Python code you
          encounter.</p>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">os.spawn</code> family of
          calls execute a program named by a command line in a new process, on
          both Windows and Unix-like systems. In basic operation, they are
          similar to the <code class="epub__literal">fork</code>/<code class="epub__literal">exec</code> call combination on Unix and can be
          used as alternatives to the <code class="epub__literal">system</code> and <code class="epub__literal">popen</code> calls we’ve already learned. In the
          following interaction, for instance, we start a Python program with
          a command line in two traditional ways (the second also reads its
          output):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e20697"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Processes&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(open('makewords.py').read())</code></strong>
print('spam')
print('eggs')
print('ham')

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import os</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>os.system('python makewords.py')</code></strong>
spam
eggs
ham
0

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>result = os.popen('python makewords.py').read()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(result)</code></strong>
spam
eggs
ham</pre>
<p>The equivalent <code class="epub__literal">os.spawn</code>
          calls achieve the same effect, with a slightly more complex call
          signature that provides more control over the way the program is
          launched:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e20723"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>os.spawnv(os.P_WAIT, r'C:\Python31\python', ('python', 'makewords.py'))</code></strong>
spam
eggs
ham
0
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>os.spawnl(os.P_NOWAIT, r'C:\Python31\python', 'python', 'makewords.py')</code></strong>
1820
&gt;&gt;&gt; spam
eggs
ham</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">spawn</code> calls are also
          much like forking programs in Unix. They don’t actually copy the
          calling process (so shared descriptor operations won’t work), but
          they can be used to start a program running completely independent
          of the calling program, even on Windows. The script in Example 5-35 makes the similarity
          to Unix programming patterns more obvious. It launches a program
          with a <code class="epub__literal">fork</code>/<code class="epub__literal">exec</code> combination on Unix-like platforms
          (including Cygwin), or an <code class="epub__literal">os.spawnv</code> call on Windows.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id49"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 5-35. PP4E\System\Processes\spawnv.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
start up 10 copies of child.py running in parallel;
use spawnv to launch a program on Windows (like fork+exec);
P_OVERLAY replaces, P_DETACH makes child stdout go nowhere;
or use portable subprocess or multiprocessing options today!
"""

import os, sys

for i in range(10):
    if sys.platform[:3] == 'win':
        pypath = sys.executable
        os.spawnv(os.P_NOWAIT, pypath, ('python', 'child.py', str(i)))
    else:
        pid = os.fork()
        if pid != 0:
            print('Process %d spawned' % pid)
        else:
            os.execlp('python', 'python', 'child.py', str(i))
print('Main process exiting.')</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>To make sense of these examples, you have to understand the
          arguments being passed to the spawn calls. In this script, we call
          <code class="epub__literal">os.spawnv</code> with a process mode
          flag, the full directory path to the Python interpreter, and a tuple
          of strings representing the shell command line with which to start a
          new program. The path to the Python interpreter executable program
          running a script is available as <code class="epub__literal">sys.executable</code>. In general, the
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>process mode</em></span> flag is taken from these
          predefined values:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">os.P_NOWAIT</code>
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>and</em></span> <code class="epub__literal">os.P_NOWAITO</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">spawn</code> functions
                will return as soon as the new process has been created, with
                the process ID as the return value. Available on Unix and
                Windows.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">os.P_WAIT</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">spawn</code> functions
                will not return until the new process has run to completion
                and will return the exit code of the process if the run is
                successful or “-signal” if a signal kills the process.
                Available on Unix and Windows.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">os.P_DETACH</code>
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>and</em></span> <code class="epub__literal">os.P_OVERLAY</code></span></dt><dd>
<p><code class="epub__literal">P_DETACH</code> is similar
                to <code class="epub__literal">P_NOWAIT</code>, but the new
                process is detached from the console of the calling process.
                If <code class="epub__literal">P_OVERLAY</code> is used, the
                current program will be replaced (much like <code class="epub__literal">os.exec</code>). Available on
                Windows.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>In fact, there are eight different calls in the spawn family,
          which all start a program but vary slightly in their call
          signatures. In their names, an “l” means you list arguments
          individually, “p” means the executable file is looked up on the
          system path, and “e” means a dictionary is passed in to provide the
          shelled environment of the spawned program: the <code class="epub__literal">os.spawnve</code> call, for example, works the
          same way as <code class="epub__literal">os.spawnv</code> but accepts
          an extra fourth dictionary argument to specify a different shell
          environment for the spawned program (which, by default, inherits all
          of the parent’s settings):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e20823"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">os.spawnl(mode, path, ...)
os.spawnle(mode, path, ..., env)
os.spawnlp(mode, file, ...)                 # Unix only
os.spawnlpe(mode, file, ..., env)           # Unix only
os.spawnv(mode, path, args)
os.spawnve(mode, path, args, env)
os.spawnvp(mode, file, args)                # Unix only
os.spawnvpe(mode, file, args, env)          # Unix only</pre>
<p>Because these calls mimic the names and call signatures of the
          <code class="epub__literal">os.exec</code> variants, see earlier in
          this chapter for more details on the differences between these call
          forms. Unlike the <code class="epub__literal">os.exec</code> calls,
          only half of the <code class="epub__literal">os.spawn</code>
          forms—those without system path checking (and hence without a “p” in
          their names)—are currently implemented on Windows. All the process
          mode flags are supported on Windows, but detach and overlay modes
          are not available on Unix. Because this sort of detail may be prone
          to change, to verify which are present, be sure to see the library
          manual or run a <code class="epub__literal">dir</code> built-in
          function call on the <code class="epub__literal">os</code> module
          after an import.</p>
<p>Here is the script in Example 5-35 at work on Windows,
          spawning 10 independent copies of the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>child.py</em></span>
          Python program we met earlier in this chapter:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e20849"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Processes&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type child.py</code></strong>
import os, sys
print('Hello from child', os.getpid(), sys.argv[1])

C:\...\PP4E\System\Processes&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python spawnv.py</code></strong>
Hello from child −583587 0
Hello from child −558199 2
Hello from child −586755 1
Hello from child −562171 3
Main process exiting.
Hello from child −581867 6
Hello from child −588651 5
Hello from child −568247 4
Hello from child −563527 7
Hello from child −543163 9
Hello from child −587083 8</pre>
<p>Notice that the copies print their output in random order, and
          the parent program exits before all children do; all of these
          programs are really running in parallel on Windows. Also observe
          that the child program’s output shows up in the console box where
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>spawnv.py</em></span> was run; when using <code class="epub__literal">P_NOWAIT</code>, standard output comes to the
          parent’s console, but it seems to go nowhere when using <code class="epub__literal">P_DETACH</code> (which is most likely a feature
          when spawning GUI programs).</p>
<p>But having shown you this call, I need to again point out that
          both the <code class="epub__literal">subprocess</code> and <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code> modules offer more
          portable alternatives for spawning programs with command lines
          today. In fact, unless <code class="epub__literal">os.spawn</code>
          calls provide unique behavior you can’t live without (e.g., control
          of shell window pop ups on Windows), the platform-specific
          alternatives code of Example 5-35 can be replaced
          altogether with the <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e20881"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e20883"></a>portable <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code> code in Example 5-33.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The os.startfile call on Windows"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_os.startfile_call_on_windows"></a>The os.startfile call on Windows</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Although <code class="epub__literal">os.spawn</code> calls may
          be largely superfluous today, there are other tools that can still
          make a strong case for themselves. For instance, the <code class="epub__literal">os.system</code> call can be used on Windows to
          launch a DOS <code class="epub__literal">start</code> command, which
          opens (i.e., runs) a file independently based on its Windows
          filename associations, as though it were clicked. <code class="epub__literal">os.startfile</code> makes this even simpler in
          recent Python releases, and it can avoid blocking its caller, unlike
          some other tools.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Using the DOS start command"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="using_the_dos_start_command"></a>Using the DOS start command</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To understand why, <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e20914"></a>first you need to know how the DOS start command
            works in general. Roughly, a DOS command line of the form <code class="epub__literal">start</code> <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>command</code></em>
            works as if <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>command</code></em> were typed in the
            Windows Run dialog box available in the Start button menu. If
            <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>command</code></em> is a filename, it is opened
            exactly as if its name was double-clicked in the Windows Explorer
            file selector GUI.</p>
<p>For instance, the following three DOS commands automatically
            start Internet Explorer, my registered image viewer program, and
            my sound media player program on the files named in the commands.
            Windows simply opens the file with whatever program is associated
            to handle filenames of that form. Moreover, all three of these
            programs run independently of the DOS console box where the
            command is typed:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e20932"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Media&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>start lp4e-preface-preview.html</code></strong>
C:\...\PP4E\System\Media&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>start ora-lp4e.jpg</code></strong>
C:\...\PP4E\System\Media&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>start sousa.au</code></strong></pre>
<p>Because the <code class="epub__literal">start</code> command
            can run any file and command line, there is no reason it cannot
            also be used to start an independently running Python
            program:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e20947"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Processes&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>start child.py 1</code></strong></pre>
<p>This works because Python is registered to open names ending
            in <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>.py</em></span> when it is installed. The script
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>child.py</em></span> is launched independently of the DOS
            console window even though we didn’t provide the name or path of
            the Python interpreter program. Because
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>child.py</em></span> simply prints a message and exits,
            though, the result isn’t exactly satisfying: a new DOS window pops
            up to serve as the script’s standard output, and it immediately
            goes away when the child exits. To do better, add an <code class="epub__literal">input</code> call at the bottom of the program
            file to wait for a key press before exiting:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e20965"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Processes&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type child-wait.py</code></strong>
import os, sys
print('Hello from child', os.getpid(), sys.argv[1])
input("Press &lt;Enter&gt;")       # don't flash on Windows

C:\...\PP4E\System\Processes&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>start child-wait.py 2</code></strong></pre>
<p>Now the child’s DOS window pops up and stays up after the
            <code class="epub__literal">start</code> command has returned.
            Pressing the Enter key in the pop-up DOS window makes it go
            away.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Using start in Python scripts"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="using_start_in_python_scripts"></a>Using start in Python scripts</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Since we know that <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e20982"></a>Python’s <code class="epub__literal">os.system</code> and <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code> can be called by a script to
            run <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>any</em></span> command line that can be typed at a
            DOS shell prompt, we can also start independently running programs
            from a Python script by simply running a DOS <code class="epub__literal">start</code> command line. For instance:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e21000"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Media&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import os</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>cmd = 'start lp4e-preface-preview.html'</code></strong>            # start IE browser
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>os.system(cmd)</code></strong>                                     # runs independent
0</pre>
<p>The Python <code class="epub__literal">os.system</code>
            calls here start whatever web page browser is registered on your
            machine to open <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>.html</em></span> files (unless these
            programs are already running). The launched programs run
            completely independent of the Python session—when running a DOS
            start command, <code class="epub__literal">os.system</code> does
            not wait for the spawned program to exit.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="The os.startfile call"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="the_os.startfile_call"></a>The os.startfile call</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In fact, <code class="epub__literal">start</code> is
            <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e21034"></a>so useful that recent Python releases also include
            an <code class="epub__literal">os.startfile</code> call, which is
            essentially the same as spawning a DOS start command with <code class="epub__literal">os.system</code> and works as though the named
            file were double-clicked. The following calls, for instance, have
            a similar effect:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e21046"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>os.startfile('lp-code-readme.txt')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>os.system('start lp-code-readme.txt')</code></strong></pre>
<p>Both pop up the text file in Notepad on my Windows computer.
            Unlike the second of these calls, though, <code class="epub__literal">os.startfile</code> provides no option to wait
            for the application to close (the DOS <code class="epub__literal">start</code> command’s <code class="epub__literal">/WAIT</code> option does) and no way to
            retrieve the application’s exit status (returned from <code class="epub__literal">os.system</code>).</p>
<p>On recent versions of Windows, the following has a similar
            effect, too, because the registry is used at the command line
            (though this form pauses until the file’s viewer is closed—like
            using <code class="epub__literal">start /WAIT</code>):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e21072"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>os.system('lp-code-readme.txt')</code></strong>       # 'start' is optional today</pre>
<p>This is a convenient way to open arbitrary document and
            media files, but keep in mind that the <code class="epub__literal">os.startfile</code> call works only on Windows,
            because it uses the Windows registry to know how to open a file.
            In fact, there are even more obscure and nonportable ways to
            launch programs, including Windows-specific options in the PyWin32
            package, which we’ll finesse here. If you want to be more platform
            neutral, consider using one of the other many program launcher
            tools we’ve seen, such as <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code> or <code class="epub__literal">os.spawnv</code>. Or better yet, write a module
            to hide the details—as the next and final <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e21088"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e21090"></a>section demonstrates.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
