<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Other System Tools Coverage</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Other System Tools Coverage"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="other_system_tools_coverage"></a>Other System Tools Coverage</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>That concludes our <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e21284"></a>tour of Python system tools. In this and the prior three
        chapters, we’ve met most of the commonly used system tools in the
        Python library. Along the way, we’ve also learned how to use them to
        do useful things such as start programs, process directories, and so
        on. The next chapter wraps up this domain by using the tools we’ve
        just met to implement scripts that do useful and more realistic
        system-level work.</p>
<p>Still other system-related tools in Python appear later in this
        text. For instance:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Sockets, used to communicate with other programs and
            networks and introduced briefly here, show up again in Chapter 10 in a common GUI use case and
            are covered in full in Chapter 12.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Select calls, used to multiplex among tasks, are also
            introduced in Chapter 12 as a way to
            implement servers.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>File locking with <code class="epub__literal">os.open</code>, introduced in Chapter 4, is discussed again in
            conjunction with later examples.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Regular expressions, string pattern matching used by many
            text processing tools in the system administration domain, don’t
            appear until Chapter 19.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Moreover, things like forks and threads are used extensively in
        the Internet scripting chapters: see the discussion of threaded GUIs
        in Chapters 9 and 10;
        the server implementations in Chapter 12;
        the FTP client GUI in Chapter 13; and
        the PyMailGUI program in Chapter 14.
        Along the way, we’ll also meet higher-level Python modules, such as
        <code class="epub__literal">socketserver</code>, which implement fork
        and thread-based socket server code for us. In fact, many of the last
        four chapters’ tools will pop up constantly in later examples in this
        book—about what one would expect of general-purpose portable
        libraries.</p>
<p>Last, but not necessarily least, I’d like to point out one more
        time that many additional tools in the Python library don’t appear in
        this book at all. With hundreds of library modules, more appearing all
        the time, and even more in the third-party domain, Python book authors
        have to pick and choose their topics frugally! As always, be sure to
        browse the Python library manuals and Web early and often in your
        Python career.</p>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
