<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 6. Complete System Programs</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 6. Complete System Programs"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="complete_system_programs"></a>Chapter 6. Complete System Programs</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="“The Greps of Wrath”"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="quotation_mark_the_greps_of_wrath_quotat"></a>“The Greps of Wrath”</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>This chapter wraps up our look at the system interfaces domain
        in Python by presenting a collection of larger Python scripts that do
        real systems work—comparing and copying directory trees, splitting
        files, searching files and directories, testing other programs,
        configuring launched programs’ shell environments, and so on. The
        examples here are Python system utility programs that illustrate
        typical tasks and techniques in this domain and focus on applying
        built-in tools, such as file and directory tree processing.</p>
<p>Although the main point of this case-study chapter is to give
        you a feel for realistic scripts in action, the size of these examples
        also gives us an opportunity to see Python’s support for development
        paradigms like object-oriented programming (OOP) and reuse at work.
        It’s really only in the context of nontrivial programs such as the
        ones we’ll meet here that such tools begin to bear tangible fruit.
        This chapter also emphasizes the “why” of system tools, not just the
        “how”; along the way, I’ll point out real-world needs met by the
        examples we’ll study, to help you put the details in context.</p>
<p>One note up front: this chapter moves quickly, and a few of its
        examples are largely listed just for independent study. Because all
        the scripts here are heavily documented and use Python system tools
        described in the preceding chapters, I won’t go through all the code
        in exhaustive detail. You should read the source code listings and
        experiment with these programs on your own computer to get a better
        feel for how to combine system interfaces to accomplish realistic
        tasks. All are available in source code form in the book’s examples
        distribution and most work on all major platforms.</p>
<p>I should also mention that most of these are programs I have
        really used, not examples written just for this book. They were coded
        over a period of years and perform widely differing tasks, so there is
        no obvious common thread to connect the dots here other than need. On
        the other hand, they help explain why system tools are useful in the
        first place, demonstrate larger development concepts that simpler
        examples cannot, and bear collective witness to the simplicity and
        portability of automating system tasks with Python. Once you’ve
        mastered the basics, you’ll wish you had done so sooner.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
