<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>A Quick Game of “Find the Biggest Python File”</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="A Quick Game of “Find the Biggest Python File”"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="a_quick_game_of_quotation_mark_find_the"></a>A Quick Game of “Find the Biggest Python File”</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Quick: what’s the biggest Python source file on your computer?
        This was the query innocently posed by a student in one of my Python
        classes. Because I didn’t know either, it became an official exercise
        in subsequent classes, and it provides a good example of ways to apply
        Python system tools for a realistic purpose in this book. Really, the
        query is a bit vague, because its scope is unclear. Do we mean the
        largest Python file in a directory, in a full directory tree, in the
        standard library, on the module import search path, or on your entire
        hard drive? Different scopes imply different solutions.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Scanning the Standard Library Directory"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="scanning_the_standard_library_directory"></a>Scanning the Standard Library Directory</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>For instance, Example 6-1 is a first-cut
          <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21363"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21368"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21373"></a>solution that looks for the biggest Python file in one
          directory—a limited scope, but enough to get started.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id50"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 6-1. PP4E\System\Filetools\bigpy-dir.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
Find the largest Python source file in a single directory.
Search Windows Python source lib, unless dir command-line arg.
"""

import os, glob, sys
dirname = r'C:\Python31\Lib' if len(sys.argv) == 1 else sys.argv[1]

allsizes = []
allpy = glob.glob(dirname + os.sep + '*.py')
for filename in allpy:
    filesize = os.path.getsize(filename)
    allsizes.append((filesize, filename))

allsizes.sort()
print(allsizes[:2])
print(allsizes[-2:])</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>This script uses the <code class="epub__literal">glob</code>
<a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21389"></a>module to run through a directory’s files and detects
          the largest by storing sizes and names on a list that is sorted at
          the end—because size appears first in the list’s tuples, it will
          dominate the ascending value sort, and the largest percolates to the
          end of the list. We could instead keep track of the currently
          largest as we go, but the list scheme is more flexible. When run,
          this script scans the Python standard library’s source directory on
          Windows, unless you pass a different directory on the command line,
          and it prints both the two smallest and largest files it
          finds:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e21395"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bigpy-dir.py</code></strong>
[(0, 'C:\\Python31\\Lib\\build_class.py'), (56, 'C:\\Python31\\Lib\\struct.py')]
[(147086, 'C:\\Python31\\Lib\\turtle.py'), (211238, 'C:\\Python31\\Lib\\decimal.
py')]

C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bigpy-dir.py .</code></strong>
[(21, '.\\__init__.py'), (461, '.\\bigpy-dir.py')]
[(1940, '.\\bigext-tree.py'), (2547, '.\\split.py')]

C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bigpy-dir.py ..</code></strong>
[(21, '..\\__init__.py'), (29, '..\\testargv.py')]
[(541, '..\\testargv2.py'), (549, '..\\more.py')]</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Scanning the Standard Library Tree"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="scanning_the_standard_library_tree"></a>Scanning the Standard Library Tree</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The prior section’s <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21411"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21416"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21421"></a>solution works, but it’s obviously a partial
          answer—Python files are usually located in more than one directory.
          Even within the standard library, there are many subdirectories for
          module packages, and they may be arbitrarily nested. We really need
          to traverse an entire directory tree. Moreover, the first output
          above is difficult to read; Python’s<a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21427"></a> <code class="epub__literal">pprint</code> (for
          “pretty print”) module can help here. Example 6-2 puts these extensions
          into code.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id51"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 6-2. PP4E\System\Filetools\bigpy-tree.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
Find the largest Python source file in an entire directory tree.
Search the Python source lib, use pprint to display results nicely.
"""

import sys, os, pprint
trace = False
if sys.platform.startswith('win'):
    dirname = r'C:\Python31\Lib'                 # Windows
else:
    dirname = '/usr/lib/python'                  # Unix, Linux, Cygwin

allsizes = []
for (thisDir, subsHere, filesHere) in os.walk(dirname):
    if trace: print(thisDir)
    for filename in filesHere:
        if filename.endswith('.py'):
            if trace: print('...', filename)
            fullname = os.path.join(thisDir, filename)
            fullsize = os.path.getsize(fullname)
            allsizes.append((fullsize, fullname))

allsizes.sort()
pprint.pprint(allsizes[:2])
pprint.pprint(allsizes[-2:])</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>When run, this new version uses<a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21445"></a> <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code> to search
          an entire tree of directories for the largest Python source file.
          Change this script’s <code class="epub__literal">trace</code>
          variable if you want to track its progress through the tree. As
          coded, it searches the Python standard library’s source tree,
          tailored for Windows and Unix-like locations:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e21459"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bigpy-tree.py</code></strong>
[(0, 'C:\\Python31\\Lib\\build_class.py'),
 (0, 'C:\\Python31\\Lib\\email\\mime\\__init__.py')]
[(211238, 'C:\\Python31\\Lib\\decimal.py'),
 (380582, 'C:\\Python31\\Lib\\pydoc_data\\topics.py')]</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Scanning the Module Search Path"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="scanning_the_module_search_path"></a>Scanning the Module Search Path</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Sure enough—<a id="scan6.2.3"></a><a id="sys6.2.3"></a><a id="dir6.2.3"></a>the prior section’s script found smallest and largest
          files in subdirectories. While searching Python’s entire standard
          library tree this way is more inclusive, it’s still incomplete:
          there may be additional modules installed elsewhere on your
          computer, which are accessible from the module import search path
          but outside Python’s source tree. To be more exhaustive, we could
          instead essentially perform the same tree search, but for every
          directory on the module import search path. Example 6-3 adds this extension to
          include every importable Python-coded module on your
          computer—located both on the path directly and nested in package
          directory trees.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id52"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 6-3. PP4E\System\Filetools\bigpy-path.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
Find the largest Python source file on the module import search path.
Skip already-visited directories, normalize path and case so they will
match properly, and include line counts in pprinted result. It's not
enough to use os.environ['PYTHONPATH']: this is a subset of sys.path.
"""

import sys, os, pprint
trace = 0  # 1=dirs, 2=+files

visited  = {}
allsizes = []
for srcdir in sys.path:
    for (thisDir, subsHere, filesHere) in os.walk(srcdir):
        if trace &gt; 0: print(thisDir)
        thisDir = os.path.normpath(thisDir)
        fixcase = os.path.normcase(thisDir)
        if fixcase in visited:
            continue
        else:
            visited[fixcase] = True
        for filename in filesHere:
            if filename.endswith('.py'):
                if trace &gt; 1: print('...', filename)
                pypath = os.path.join(thisDir, filename)
                try:
                    pysize = os.path.getsize(pypath)
                except os.error:
                    print('skipping', pypath, sys.exc_info()[0])
                else:
                    pylines = len(open(pypath, 'rb').readlines())
                    allsizes.append((pysize, pylines, pypath))

print('By size...')
allsizes.sort()
pprint.pprint(allsizes[:3])
pprint.pprint(allsizes[-3:])

print('By lines...')
allsizes.sort(key=lambda x: x[1])
pprint.pprint(allsizes[:3])
pprint.pprint(allsizes[-3:])</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>When run, this script marches down the module import path and,
          for each valid directory it contains, attempts to search the entire
          tree rooted there. In fact, it nests loops three deep—for items on
          the path, directories in the item’s tree, and files in the
          directory. Because the module path may contain directories named in
          arbitrary ways, along the way this script must take care to:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Normalize directory paths—fixing up slashes and dots to
              map directories to a common form.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Normalize directory name case—converting to lowercase on
              case-insensitive Windows, so that same names match by string
              equality, but leaving case unchanged on Unix, where it
              matters.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Detect <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21504"></a>repeats to avoid visiting the same directory twice
              (the same directory might be reached from more than one entry on
              <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code>).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Skip any file-like item in the tree for which <code class="epub__literal">os.path.getsize</code> fails (by default
              <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code> itself silently
              ignores things it cannot treat as directories, both at the top
              of and within the tree).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Avoid potential <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Unicode decoding
              errors</em></span> in file content by opening files in binary
              mode in order to count their lines. Text mode requires decodable
              content, and some files in Python 3.1’s library tree cannot be
              decoded properly on Windows. Catching Unicode exceptions with a
              <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement would avoid
              program exits, too, but might skip candidate files.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>This version also adds line counts; this might add significant
          run time to this script too, but it’s a useful metric to report. In
          fact, this version uses this value as a sort key to report the three
          largest and smallest files by line counts too—this may differ from
          results based upon raw file size. Here’s the script in action in
          Python 3.1 on my Windows 7 machine; since these results depend on
          platform, installed extensions, and path settings, your <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code> and largest and smallest files
          may vary:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e21536"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bigpy-path.py</code></strong>
By size...
[(0, 0, 'C:\\Python31\\lib\\build_class.py'),
 (0, 0, 'C:\\Python31\\lib\\email\\mime\\__init__.py'),
 (0, 0, 'C:\\Python31\\lib\\email\\test\\__init__.py')]
[(161613, 3754, 'C:\\Python31\\lib\\tkinter\\__init__.py'),
 (211238, 5768, 'C:\\Python31\\lib\\decimal.py'),
 (380582, 78, 'C:\\Python31\\lib\\pydoc_data\\topics.py')]
By lines...
[(0, 0, 'C:\\Python31\\lib\\build_class.py'),
 (0, 0, 'C:\\Python31\\lib\\email\\mime\\__init__.py'),
 (0, 0, 'C:\\Python31\\lib\\email\\test\\__init__.py')]
[(147086, 4132, 'C:\\Python31\\lib\\turtle.py'),
 (150069, 4268, 'C:\\Python31\\lib\\test\\test_descr.py'),
 (211238, 5768, 'C:\\Python31\\lib\\decimal.py')]</pre>
<p>Again, change this script’s <code class="epub__literal">trace</code> variable if you want to track its
          progress through the tree. As you can see, the results for largest
          files differ when viewed by size and lines—a disparity which we’ll
          probably have to hash out in our next requirements <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21546"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21548"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21550"></a>meeting.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Scanning the Entire Machine"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="scanning_the_entire_machine"></a>Scanning the Entire Machine</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Finally, <a id="sys6.2.4"></a><a id="scan6.2.4"></a>although searching trees rooted in the module import
          path normally includes every Python source file you can import on
          your computer, it’s still not complete. Technically, this approach
          checks only modules; Python source files which are top-level scripts
          run directly do not need to be included in the module path.
          Moreover, the module search path may be manually changed by some
          scripts dynamically at runtime (for example, by direct <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code> updates in scripts that run on
          web servers) to include additional directories that Example 6-3 won’t catch.</p>
<p>Ultimately, finding the largest source file on your computer
          requires searching your entire drive—a feat which our tree searcher
          in Example 6-2
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>almost</em></span> supports, if we generalize it to accept
          the root directory name as an argument and add some of the bells and
          whistles of the path searcher version (we really want to avoid
          visiting the same directory twice if we’re scanning an entire
          machine, and we might as well skip errors and check line-based sizes
          if we’re investing the time). Example 6-4 implements such
          general tree scans, outfitted for the heavier lifting required for
          scanning drives.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id53"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 6-4. PP4E\System\Filetools\bigext-tree.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
Find the largest file of a given type in an arbitrary directory tree.
Avoid repeat paths, catch errors, add tracing and line count size.
Also uses sets, file iterators and generator to avoid loading entire
file, and attempts to work around undecodable dir/file name prints.
"""

import os, pprint
from sys import argv, exc_info

trace = 1                                    # 0=off, 1=dirs, 2=+files
dirname, extname = os.curdir, '.py'          # default is .py files in cwd
if len(argv) &gt; 1: dirname = argv[1]          # ex: C:\, C:\Python31\Lib
if len(argv) &gt; 2: extname = argv[2]          # ex: .pyw, .txt
if len(argv) &gt; 3: trace   = int(argv[3])     # ex: ". .py 2"

def tryprint(arg):
    try:
        print(arg)                           # unprintable filename?
    except UnicodeEncodeError:
        print(arg.encode())                  # try raw byte string

visited  = set()
allsizes = []
for (thisDir, subsHere, filesHere) in os.walk(dirname):
    if trace: tryprint(thisDir)
    thisDir = os.path.normpath(thisDir)
    fixname = os.path.normcase(thisDir)
    if fixname in visited:
        if trace: tryprint('skipping ' + thisDir)
    else:
        visited.add(fixname)
        for filename in filesHere:
            if filename.endswith(extname):
                if trace &gt; 1: tryprint('+++' + filename)
                fullname = os.path.join(thisDir, filename)
                try:
                    bytesize = os.path.getsize(fullname)
                    linesize = sum(+1 for line in open(fullname, 'rb'))
                except Exception:
                    print('error', exc_info()[0])
                else:
                    allsizes.append((bytesize, linesize, fullname))

for (title, key) in [('bytes', 0), ('lines', 1)]:
    print('\nBy %s...' % title)
    allsizes.sort(key=lambda x: x[key])
    pprint.pprint(allsizes[:3])
    pprint.pprint(allsizes[-3:])</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Unlike the prior tree version, this one allows us to search in
          specific directories, and for specific extensions. The default is to
          simply search the current working directory for Python files:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e21590"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bigext-tree.py</code></strong>
.

By bytes...
[(21, 1, '.\\__init__.py'),
 (461, 17, '.\\bigpy-dir.py'),
 (818, 25, '.\\bigpy-tree.py')]
[(1696, 48, '.\\join.py'),
 (1940, 49, '.\\bigext-tree.py'),
 (2547, 57, '.\\split.py')]

By lines...
[(21, 1, '.\\__init__.py'),
 (461, 17, '.\\bigpy-dir.py'),
 (818, 25, '.\\bigpy-tree.py')]
[(1696, 48, '.\\join.py'),
 (1940, 49, '.\\bigext-tree.py'),
 (2547, 57, '.\\split.py')]</pre>
<p>For more custom work, we can pass in a directory name,
          extension type, and trace level on the command-line now (trace level
          0 disables tracing, and 1, the default, shows directories visited
          along the way):</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e21597"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bigext-tree.py .. .py 0</code></strong>

By bytes...
[(21, 1, '..\\__init__.py'),
 (21, 1, '..\\Filetools\\__init__.py'),
 (28, 1, '..\\Streams\\hello-out.py')]
[(2278, 67, '..\\Processes\\multi2.py'),
 (2547, 57, '..\\Filetools\\split.py'),
 (4361, 105, '..\\Tester\\tester.py')]

By lines...
[(21, 1, '..\\__init__.py'),
 (21, 1, '..\\Filetools\\__init__.py'),
 (28, 1, '..\\Streams\\hello-out.py')]
[(2547, 57, '..\\Filetools\\split.py'),
 (2278, 67, '..\\Processes\\multi2.py'),
 (4361, 105, '..\\Tester\\tester.py')]</pre>
<p>This script also lets us scan for different file types; here
          it is picking out the smallest and largest text file from one level
          up (at the time I ran this script, at least):</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e21604"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bigext-tree.py .. .txt 1</code></strong>
..
..\Environment
..\Filetools
..\Processes
..\Streams
..\Tester
..\Tester\Args
..\Tester\Errors
..\Tester\Inputs
..\Tester\Outputs
..\Tester\Scripts
..\Tester\xxold
..\Threads

By bytes...
[(4, 2, '..\\Streams\\input.txt'),
 (13, 1, '..\\Streams\\hello-in.txt'),
 (20, 4, '..\\Streams\\data.txt')]
[(104, 4, '..\\Streams\\output.txt'),
 (172, 3, '..\\Tester\\xxold\\README.txt.txt'),
 (435, 4, '..\\Filetools\\temp.txt')]

By lines...
[(13, 1, '..\\Streams\\hello-in.txt'),
 (22, 1, '..\\spam.txt'),
 (4, 2, '..\\Streams\\input.txt')]
[(20, 4, '..\\Streams\\data.txt'),
 (104, 4, '..\\Streams\\output.txt'),
 (435, 4, '..\\Filetools\\temp.txt')]</pre>
<p>And now, to search your entire system, simply pass in your
          machine’s root directory name (use <code class="epub__literal">/</code> instead of <code class="epub__literal">C:\</code> on Unix-like machines), along with an
          optional file extension type (<em class="epub__filename">.py</em> is just the default now). The winner
          is…(please, no wagering):</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e21621"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\dev\Examples\PP4E\System\Filetools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bigext-tree.py C:\</code></strong>
C:\
C:\$Recycle.Bin
C:\$Recycle.Bin\S-1-5-21-3951091421-2436271001-910485044-1004
C:\cygwin
C:\cygwin\bin
C:\cygwin\cygdrive
C:\cygwin\dev
C:\cygwin\dev\mqueue
C:\cygwin\dev\shm
C:\cygwin\etc
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...MANY more lines omitted...</span></em>

By bytes...
[(0, 0, 'C:\\cygwin\\...\\python31\\Python-3.1.1\\Lib\\build_class.py'),
 (0, 0, 'C:\\cygwin\\...\\python31\\Python-3.1.1\\Lib\\email\\mime\\__init__.py'),
 (0, 0, 'C:\\cygwin\\...\\python31\\Python-3.1.1\\Lib\\email\\test\\__init__.py')]
[(380582, 78, 'C:\\Python31\\Lib\\pydoc_data\\topics.py'),
 (398157, 83, 'C:\\...\\Install\\Source\\Python-2.6\\Lib\\pydoc_topics.py'),
 (412434, 83, 'C:\\Python26\\Lib\\pydoc_topics.py')]

By lines...
[(0, 0, 'C:\\cygwin\\...\\python31\\Python-3.1.1\\Lib\\build_class.py'),
 (0, 0, 'C:\\cygwin\\...\\python31\\Python-3.1.1\\Lib\\email\\mime\\__init__.py'),
 (0, 0, 'C:\\cygwin\\...\\python31\\Python-3.1.1\\Lib\\email\\test\\__init__.py')]
[(204107, 5589, 'C:\\...\Install\\Source\\Python-3.0\\Lib\\decimal.py'),
 (205470, 5768, 'C:\\cygwin\\...\\python31\\Python-3.1.1\\Lib\\decimal.py'),
 (211238, 5768, 'C:\\Python31\\Lib\\decimal.py')]</pre>
<p>The script’s trace logic is preset to allow you to monitor its
          directory progress. I’ve shortened some directory names to protect
          the innocent here (and to fit on this page). This command may take a
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>long time</em></span> to finish on your computer—on my
          sadly underpowered Windows 7 netbook, it took 11 minutes to scan a
          solid state drive with some 59G of data, 200K files, and 25K
          directories when the system was lightly loaded (8 minutes when not
          tracing directory names, but half an hour when many other
          applications were running). Nevertheless, it provides the most
          exhaustive solution to the original query of all our
          attempts.</p>
<p>This is also as complete a solution as we have space for in
          this book. For more fun, consider that you may need to scan more
          than one drive, and some Python source files may also appear in zip
          archives, both on the module path or not (<code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code> silently ignores zip files in
          Example 6-3). They might
          also be named in other ways—with <em class="epub__filename">.pyw</em> extensions to suppress shell pop ups
          on Windows, and with arbitrary extensions for some top-level
          scripts. In fact, top-level scripts might have no filename extension
          at all, even though they are Python source files. And while they’re
          generally not Python files, some importable modules may also appear
          in frozen binaries or be statically linked into the Python
          executable. In the interest of space, we’ll leave such higher
          resolution (and potentially intractable!) search extensions as
          suggested <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21644"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21646"></a>exercises.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Printing Unicode Filenames"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="printing_unicode_filenames"></a>Printing Unicode Filenames</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>One fine point before <a id="sys6.2.5"></a><a id="uni6.2.5"></a><a id="print6.2.5"></a>we move on: notice the seemingly superfluous exception
          handling in Example 6-4’s
          <code class="epub__literal">tryprint</code> function. When I first
          tried to scan an entire drive as shown in the preceding section,
          this script died on a Unicode encoding error while trying to print a
          directory name of a saved web page. Adding the exception handler
          skips the error entirely.</p>
<p>This demonstrates a subtle but pragmatically important issue:
          Python 3.X’s Unicode orientation extends to filenames, even if they
          are just printed. As we learned in Chapter 4, because filenames may contain
          arbitrary text, <code class="epub__literal">os.listdir</code>
<a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21682"></a>returns filenames in two different ways—we get back
          decoded Unicode strings when we pass in a normal <code class="epub__literal">str</code> argument, and still-encoded byte
          strings when we send a <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e21696"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import os</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>os.listdir('.')[:4]</code></strong>
['bigext-tree.py', 'bigpy-dir.py', 'bigpy-path.py', 'bigpy-tree.py']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>os.listdir(b'.')[:4]</code></strong>
[b'bigext-tree.py', b'bigpy-dir.py', b'bigpy-path.py', b'bigpy-tree.py']</pre>
<p>Both <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code> (used in the
          Example 6-4 script) and
          <code class="epub__literal">glob.glob</code> inherit this behavior
          for the directory and file names they return, because they work by
          calling <code class="epub__literal">os.listdir</code> internally at
          each directory level. For all these calls, passing in a byte string
          argument suppresses Unicode decoding of file and directory names.
          Passing a normal string assumes that filenames are decodable per the
          file system’s Unicode scheme.</p>
<p>The reason this potentially mattered to this section’s example
          is that running the tree search version over an entire hard drive
          eventually reached an undecodable filename (an old saved web page
          with an odd name), which generated an exception when the <code class="epub__literal">print</code> function tried to display it. Here’s
          a simplified recreation of the error, run in a shell window (Command
          Prompt) on Windows:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e21725"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>root = r'C:\py3000'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for (dir, subs, files) in os.walk(root): print(dir)</code></strong>
...
C:\py3000
C:\py3000\FutureProofPython - PythonInfo Wiki_files
C:\py3000\Oakwinter_com  Code » Porting setuptools to py3k_files
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "&lt;stdin&gt;", line 1, in &lt;module&gt;
  File "C:\Python31\lib\encodings\cp437.py", line 19, in encode
    return codecs.charmap_encode(input,self.errors,encoding_map)[0]
UnicodeEncodeError: 'charmap' codec can't encode character '\u2019' in position
45: character maps to &lt;undefined&gt;</pre>
<p>One way out of this dilemma is to use <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> strings for the directory root
          name—this suppresses filename decoding in the <code class="epub__literal">os.listdir</code> calls run by <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code>, and effectively limits the scope
          of later printing to raw bytes. Since printing does not have to deal
          with encodings, it works without error. Manually encoding to bytes
          prior to printing works too, but the results are slightly
          different:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e21744"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>root.encode()</code></strong>
b'C:\\py3000'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for (dir, subs, files) in os.walk(root.encode()): print(dir)</code></strong>
...
b'C:\\py3000'
b'C:\\py3000\\FutureProofPython - PythonInfo Wiki_files'
b'C:\\py3000\\Oakwinter_com  Code \xbb Porting setuptools to py3k_files'
b'C:\\py3000\\What\x92s New in Python 3_0 \x97 Python Documentation'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for (dir, subs, files) in os.walk(root): print(dir.encode())</code></strong>
...
b'C:\\py3000'
b'C:\\py3000\\FutureProofPython - PythonInfo Wiki_files'
b'C:\\py3000\\Oakwinter_com  Code \xc2\xbb Porting setuptools to py3k_files'
b'C:\\py3000\\What\xe2\x80\x99s New in Python 3_0 \xe2\x80\x94 Python Documentation'</pre>
<p>Unfortunately, either approach means that all the directory
          names printed during the walk display as cryptic byte strings. To
          maintain the better readability of normal strings, I instead opted
          for the exception handler approach used in the script’s code. This
          avoids the issues entirely:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e21757"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"> &gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for (dir, subs, files) in os.walk(root):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>try:</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(dir)</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>except UnicodeEncodeError:</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(dir.encode())</code></strong>           # or simply punt if enocde may fail too
...
C:\py3000
C:\py3000\FutureProofPython - PythonInfo Wiki_files
C:\py3000\Oakwinter_com  Code » Porting setuptools to py3k_files
b'C:\\py3000\\What\xe2\x80\x99s New in Python 3_0 \xe2\x80\x94 Python Documentation'</pre>
<p>Oddly, though, the error seems more related to printing than
          to Unicode encodings of filenames—because the filename did not fail
          until printed, it must have been decodable when its string was
          created initially. That’s why wrapping up the <code class="epub__literal">print</code> in a <code class="epub__literal">try</code> suffices; otherwise, the error would
          occur earlier.</p>
<p>Moreover, this error does not occur if the script’s output is
          redirected to a file, either at the shell level (<code class="epub__literal">bigext-tree.py c:\ &gt; out</code>), or by the
          print call itself (<code class="epub__literal">print(dir,
          file=F)</code>). In the latter case the output file must later be
          read back in binary mode, as text mode triggers the same error when
          printing the file’s content to the shell window (but again, not
          until printed). In fact, the exact same code that fails when run in
          a system shell Command Prompt on Windows works without error when
          run in the IDLE GUI on the same platform—the tkinter GUI used by
          IDLE handles display of characters that printing to standard output
          connected to a shell terminal window does not:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e21791"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import os</code></strong>                  # run in IDLE (a tkinter GUI), not system shell
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>root = r'C:\py3000'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for (dir, subs, files) in os.walk(root): print(dir)</code></strong>

C:\py3000
C:\py3000\FutureProofPython - PythonInfo Wiki_files
C:\py3000\Oakwinter_com  Code » Porting setuptools to py3k_files
C:\py3000\What's New in Python 3_0 — Python Documentation_files</pre>
<p>In other words, the exception occurs only when printing to a
          shell window, and long after the file name string is created. This
          reflects an artifact of extra translations <span>performed</span> by the Python printer, not
          of Unicode file names in general. Because we have no room for
          further exploration here, though, we’ll have to be satisfied with
          the fact that our exception handler sidesteps the printing problem
          altogether. You should still be aware of the implications of Unicode
          filename decoding, though; on some platforms you may need to pass
          byte strings to <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code> in this
          script to prevent decoding errors as filenames are <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21810"></a>created.<sup>[18]</sup></p>
<p>Since Unicode is still relatively new in 3.1, be sure to test
          for such errors on your computer and your Python. Also see also
          Python’s manuals for more on the treatment of Unicode filenames, and
          the text <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Learning Python</em></span> for more on Unicode in
          general. As noted earlier, our scripts also had to open text files
          in binary mode because some might contain undecodable
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>content</em></span> too. It might seem surprising that
          Unicode issues can crop up in basic printing like this too, but such
          is life in the brave new Unicode world. Many real-world scripts
          don’t need to care much about Unicode, of course—including those
          we’ll explore in the next <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21830"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21832"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21834"></a>section.</p>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[18] </sup>For a related <code class="epub__literal">print</code>
              issue, see Chapter 14’s workaround
              for program aborts when printing stack tracebacks to standard
              output from spawned programs. Unlike the problem described here,
              that issue does not appear to be related to Unicode characters
              that may be unprintable in shell windows but reflects another
              regression for standard output prints in general in Python 3.1,
              which may or may not be repaired by the time you read this text.
              See also the Python environment variable PYTHONIOENCODING, which
              can override the default encoding used for standard
              streams.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
