<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Splitting and Joining Files</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Splitting and Joining Files"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="splitting_and_joining_files"></a>Splitting and Joining Files</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Like most kids, <a id="sys6.3"></a>mine spent a lot of time on the Internet when they were
        growing up. As far as I could tell, it was the thing to do. Among
        their generation, computer geeks and gurus seem to have been held in
        the same sort of esteem that my generation once held rock stars. When
        kids disappeared into their rooms, chances were good that they were
        hacking on computers, not mastering guitar riffs (well, real ones, at
        least). It may or may not be healthier than some of the diversions of
        my own misspent youth, but that’s a topic for another kind of
        book.</p>
<p>Despite the rhetoric of techno-pundits about the Web’s potential
        to empower an upcoming generation in ways unimaginable by their
        predecessors, my kids seemed to spend most of their time playing
        games. To fetch new ones in my house at the time, they had to download
        to a shared computer which had Internet access and transfer those
        games to their own computers to install. (Their own machines did not
        have <span>Internet</span> access until
        later, for reasons that most parents in the crowd could probably
        expand upon.)</p>
<p>The problem with this scheme is that game files are not small.
        They were usually much too big to fit on a floppy or memory stick of
        the time, and burning a CD or DVD took away valuable game-playing
        time. If all the machines in my house ran Linux, this would have been
        a nonissue. There are standard command-line programs on Unix for
        chopping a file into pieces small enough to fit on a transfer device
        (<code class="epub__literal">split</code>), and others for putting the
        pieces back together to re-create the original file (<code class="epub__literal">cat</code>). Because we had all sorts of different
        machines in the house, though, we needed a more portable
        solution.<sup>[19]</sup></p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Splitting Files Portably"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="splitting_files_portably"></a>Splitting Files Portably</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Since all the computers <a id="files6.3.1"></a><a id="split6.3.1"></a>in my house ran Python, a simple portable Python
          script came to the rescue. The Python program in Example 6-5 distributes a single
          file’s contents among a set of part files and stores those part
          files in a directory.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id54"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 6-5. PP4E\System\Filetools\split.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">#!/usr/bin/python
"""
################################################################################
split a file into a set of parts; join.py puts them back together;
this is a customizable version of the standard Unix split command-line
utility; because it is written in Python, it also works on Windows and
can be easily modified; because it exports a function, its logic can
also be imported and reused in other applications;
################################################################################
"""

import sys, os
kilobytes = 1024
megabytes = kilobytes * 1000
chunksize = int(1.4 * megabytes)                   # default: roughly a floppy

def split(fromfile, todir, chunksize=chunksize):
    if not os.path.exists(todir):                  # caller handles errors
        os.mkdir(todir)                            # make dir, read/write parts
    else:
        for fname in os.listdir(todir):            # delete any existing files
            os.remove(os.path.join(todir, fname))
    partnum = 0
    input = open(fromfile, 'rb')                   # binary: no decode, endline
    while True:                                    # eof=empty string from read
        chunk = input.read(chunksize)              # get next part &lt;= chunksize
        if not chunk: break
        partnum += 1
        filename = os.path.join(todir, ('part%04d' % partnum))
        fileobj  = open(filename, 'wb')
        fileobj.write(chunk)
        fileobj.close()                            # or simply open().write()
    input.close()
    assert partnum &lt;= 9999                         # join sort fails if 5 digits
    return partnum

if __name__ == '__main__':
    if len(sys.argv) == 2 and sys.argv[1] == '-help':
        print('Use: split.py [file-to-split target-dir [chunksize]]')
    else:
        if len(sys.argv) &lt; 3:
            interactive = True
            fromfile = input('File to be split? ')           # input if clicked
            todir    = input('Directory to store part files? ')
        else:
            interactive = False
            fromfile, todir = sys.argv[1:3]                  # args in cmdline
            if len(sys.argv) == 4: chunksize = int(sys.argv[3])
        absfrom, absto = map(os.path.abspath, [fromfile, todir])
        print('Splitting', absfrom, 'to', absto, 'by', chunksize)

        try:
            parts = split(fromfile, todir, chunksize)
        except:
            print('Error during split:')
            print(sys.exc_info()[0], sys.exc_info()[1])
        else:
            print('Split finished:', parts, 'parts are in', absto)
        if interactive: input('Press Enter key') # pause if clicked</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>By default, this script splits the input file into chunks that
          are roughly the size of a floppy disk—perfect for moving big files
          between the electronically isolated machines of the time. Most
          importantly, because this is all portable Python code, this script
          will run on just about any machine, even ones without their own file
          splitter. All it requires is an installed Python. Here it is at work
          splitting a Python 3.1 self-installer executable located in the
          current working directory on Windows (I’ve omitted a few <code class="epub__literal">dir</code> output lines to save space here; use
          <code class="epub__literal">ls -l</code> on Unix):</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e21893"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\temp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>cd C:\temp</code></strong>

C:\temp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dir python-3.1.msi</code></strong>
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...more...</span></em>
06/27/2009  04:53 PM        13,814,272 python-3.1.msi
               1 File(s)     13,814,272 bytes
               0 Dir(s)  188,826,189,824 bytes free

C:\temp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools\split.py -help</code></strong>
Use: split.py [file-to-split target-dir [chunksize]]

C:\temp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python C:\...\P4E\System\Filetools\split.py python-3.1.msi pysplit</code></strong>
Splitting C:\temp\python-3.1.msi to C:\temp\pysplit by 1433600
Split finished: 10 parts are in C:\temp\pysplit

C:\temp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dir pysplit</code></strong>
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...more...</span></em>
02/21/2010  11:13 AM    &lt;DIR&gt;          .
02/21/2010  11:13 AM    &lt;DIR&gt;          ..
02/21/2010  11:13 AM         1,433,600 part0001
02/21/2010  11:13 AM         1,433,600 part0002
02/21/2010  11:13 AM         1,433,600 part0003
02/21/2010  11:13 AM         1,433,600 part0004
02/21/2010  11:13 AM         1,433,600 part0005
02/21/2010  11:13 AM         1,433,600 part0006
02/21/2010  11:13 AM         1,433,600 part0007
02/21/2010  11:13 AM         1,433,600 part0008
02/21/2010  11:13 AM         1,433,600 part0009
02/21/2010  11:13 AM           911,872 part0010
              10 File(s)     13,814,272 bytes
               2 Dir(s)  188,812,328,960 bytes free</pre>
<p>Each of these generated part files represents one binary chunk
          of the file <span><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>python-3.1.msi</em></span>—</span>a
          chunk small enough to fit comfortably on a floppy disk of the time.
          In fact, if you add the sizes of the generated part files given by
          the <code class="epub__literal">ls</code> command, you’ll come up
          with exactly the same number of bytes as the original file’s size.
          Before we see how to put these files back together again, here are a
          few points to ponder as you study this script’s code:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Operation modes</span></dt><dd>
<p>This script is designed to input its parameters in
                either <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>interactive</em></span> or
                <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>command-line</em></span> mode; it checks the number
                of command-line arguments to find out the mode in which it is
                being used. In command-line mode, you list the file to be
                split and the output directory on the command line, and you
                can optionally override the default part file size with a
                third command-line argument.</p>
<p>In interactive mode, the script asks for a filename and
                output directory at the console window with <code class="epub__literal">input</code> and pauses for a key press at
                the end before exiting. This mode is nice when the program
                file is started by clicking on its icon; on Windows,
                parameters are typed into a pop-up DOS box that doesn’t
                automatically disappear. The script also shows the absolute
                paths of its parameters (by running them through <code class="epub__literal">os.path.abspath</code>) because they may
                not be obvious in interactive mode.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Binary file mode</span></dt><dd>
<p>This code is careful to open both input and output files
                in binary mode (<code class="epub__literal">rb</code>,
                <code class="epub__literal">wb</code>), because it needs to
                portably handle things like executables and audio files, not
                just text. In Chapter 4, we
                learned that on Windows, text-mode files automatically map
                <code class="epub__literal">\r\n</code> end-of-line sequences
                to <code class="epub__literal">\n</code> on input and map
                <code class="epub__literal">\n</code> to <code class="epub__literal">\r\n</code> on output. For true binary
                data, we really don’t want any <code class="epub__literal">\r</code> characters in the data to go away
                when read, and we don’t want any superfluous <code class="epub__literal">\r</code> characters to be added on output.
                Binary-mode files suppress this <code class="epub__literal">\r</code> mapping when the script is run on
                Windows and so avoid data corruption.</p>
<p>In Python 3.X, binary mode also means that file data is
                <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> objects in our
                script, not encoded <code class="epub__literal">str</code>
                text, though we don’t need to do anything special—this
                script’s file processing code runs the same on Python 3.X as
                it did on 2.X. In fact, binary mode is required in 3.X for
                this program, because the target file’s data may not be
                encoded text at all; text mode requires that file content must
                be decodable in 3.X, and that might fail both for truly binary
                data and text files obtained from other platforms. On output,
                binary mode accepts <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>
                and suppresses Unicode encoding and line-end
                translations.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Manually closing files</span></dt><dd>
<p>This script also goes out of its way to manually close
                its files. As we also saw <span>in
                Chapter 4,</span> we can
                often get by with a single line: <code class="epub__literal">open(partname, 'wb').write(chunk)</code>.
                This shorter form relies on the fact that the current Python
                implementation automatically closes files for you when file
                objects are reclaimed (i.e., when they are garbage collected,
                because there are no more references to the file object). In
                this one-liner, the file object would be reclaimed
                immediately, because the <code class="epub__literal">open</code> result is temporary in an
                expression and is never referenced by a longer-lived name.
                Similarly, the <code class="epub__literal">input</code> file
                is reclaimed when the <code class="epub__literal">split</code>
                function exits.</p>
<p>However, it’s not impossible that this automatic-close
                behavior may go away in the future. Moreover, the Jython
                Java-based Python implementation does not reclaim unreferenced
                objects as immediately as the standard Python. You should
                close manually if you care about the Java port, your script
                may potentially create many files in a short amount of time,
                and it may run on a machine that has a limit on the number of
                open files per program. Because the <code class="epub__literal">split</code> function in this module is
                intended to be a general-purpose tool, it accommodates such
                worst-case <span>scenarios</span>.
                Also see Chapter 4’s mention
                of the file context manager and the <code class="epub__literal">with</code> statement; this provides an
                alternative way to guarantee file <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e22031"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e22033"></a>closes.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Joining Files Portably"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="joining_files_portably"></a>Joining Files Portably</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Back to moving big files around <a id="files6.3.2"></a><a id="join6.3.2"></a>the house: after downloading a big game program file,
          you can run the previous splitter script by clicking on its name in
          Windows Explorer and typing filenames. After a split, simply copy
          each part file onto its own floppy (or other more modern medium),
          walk the files to the destination machine, and re-create the split
          output directory on the target computer by copying the part files.
          Finally, the script in Example 6-6 is clicked or
          otherwise run to put the parts back together.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id55"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 6-6. PP4E\System\Filetools\join.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">#!/usr/bin/python
"""
################################################################################
join all part files in a dir created by split.py, to re-create file.
This is roughly like a 'cat fromdir/* &gt; tofile' command on unix, but is
more portable and configurable, and exports the join operation as a
reusable function.  Relies on sort order of filenames: must be same
length.  Could extend split/join to pop up Tkinter file selectors.
################################################################################
"""

import os, sys
readsize = 1024

def join(fromdir, tofile):
    output = open(tofile, 'wb')
    parts  = os.listdir(fromdir)
    parts.sort()
    for filename in parts:
        filepath = os.path.join(fromdir, filename)
        fileobj  = open(filepath, 'rb')
        while True:
            filebytes = fileobj.read(readsize)
            if not filebytes: break
            output.write(filebytes)
        fileobj.close()
    output.close()

if __name__ == '__main__':
    if len(sys.argv) == 2 and sys.argv[1] == '-help':
        print('Use: join.py [from-dir-name to-file-name]')
    else:
        if len(sys.argv) != 3:
            interactive = True
            fromdir = input('Directory containing part files? ')
            tofile  = input('Name of file to be recreated? ')
        else:
            interactive = False
            fromdir, tofile = sys.argv[1:]
        absfrom, absto = map(os.path.abspath, [fromdir, tofile])
        print('Joining', absfrom, 'to make', absto)

        try:
            join(fromdir, tofile)
        except:
            print('Error joining files:')
            print(sys.exc_info()[0], sys.exc_info()[1])
        else:
           print('Join complete: see', absto)
        if interactive: input('Press Enter key') # pause if clicked</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Here is a join in progress on Windows, combining the split
          files we made a moment ago; after running the <code class="epub__literal">join</code> script, you still may need to run
          something like <code class="epub__literal">zip</code>, <code class="epub__literal">gzip</code>, or <code class="epub__literal">tar</code> to unpack an archive file unless it’s
          shipped as an executable, but at least the original downloaded file
          is set to go<sup>[20]</sup>:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e22119"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\temp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools\join.py -help</code></strong>
Use: join.py [from-dir-name to-file-name]

C:\temp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools\join.py pysplit mypy31.msi</code></strong>
Joining C:\temp\pysplit to make C:\temp\mypy31.msi
Join complete: see C:\temp\mypy31.msi

C:\temp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dir *.msi</code></strong>
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...more...</span></em>
02/21/2010  11:21 AM        13,814,272 mypy31.msi
06/27/2009  04:53 PM        13,814,272 python-3.1.msi
               2 File(s)     27,628,544 bytes
               0 Dir(s)  188,798,611,456 bytes free

C:\temp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>fc /b mypy31.msi python-3.1.msi</code></strong>
Comparing files mypy31.msi and PYTHON-3.1.MSI
FC: no differences encountered</pre>
<p>The join script simply uses<a id="I_indexterm5_d1e22138"></a> <code class="epub__literal">os.listdir</code> to
          collect all the part files in a directory created by <code class="epub__literal">split</code>, and sorts the filename list to put
          the parts back together in the correct order. We get back an exact
          byte-for-byte copy of the original file (proved by the DOS <code class="epub__literal">fc</code> command in the code; use <code class="epub__literal">cmp</code> on Unix).</p>
<p>Some of this process is still manual, of course (I never did
          figure out how to script the “walk the floppies to your bedroom”
          step), but the <code class="epub__literal">split</code> and <code class="epub__literal">join</code> scripts make it both quick and simple
          to move big files around. Because this script is also portable
          Python code, it runs on any platform to which we cared to move split
          files. For instance, my home computers ran both Windows and Linux at
          the time; since this script runs on either platform, the gamers were
          covered. Before we move on, here are a couple of implementation
          details worth underscoring in the <code class="epub__literal">join</code> script’s code:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Reading by blocks or files</span></dt><dd>
<p>First of all, notice that this script deals with files
                in binary mode but also reads each part file in blocks of 1 KB
                each. In fact, the <code class="epub__literal">readsize</code>
                setting here (the size of each block read from an input part
                file) has no relation to <code class="epub__literal">chunksize</code> in
                <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>split.py</em></span> (the total size of each output
                part file). As we learned in Chapter 4, this script could
                instead read each part file all at once: <code class="epub__literal">output.write(open(filepath,
                'rb').read())</code>. The downside to this scheme is that
                it really does load all of a file into memory at once. For
                example, reading a 1.4 MB part file into memory all at once
                with the file object <code class="epub__literal">read</code>
                method generates a 1.4 MB string in memory to hold the file’s
                bytes. Since <code class="epub__literal">split</code> allows
                users to specify even larger chunk sizes, the <code class="epub__literal">join</code> script plans for the worst and
                reads in terms of limited-size blocks. To be completely
                robust, the <code class="epub__literal">split</code> script
                could read its input data in smaller chunks too, but this
                hasn’t become a concern in practice (recall that as your
                program runs, Python automatically reclaims strings that are
                no longer referenced, so this isn’t as wasteful as it might
                seem).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Sorting filenames</span></dt><dd>
<p>If you study this script’s code closely, you may also
                notice that the <code class="epub__literal">join</code> scheme
                it uses relies completely on the sort order of filenames in
                the parts directory. Because it simply calls the list <code class="epub__literal">sort</code> method on the filenames list
                returned by <code class="epub__literal">os.listdir</code>, it
                implicitly requires that filenames have the same length and
                format when created by <code class="epub__literal">split</code>. To satisfy this requirement,
                the splitter uses zero-padding notation in a string formatting
                expression (<code class="epub__literal">'part%04d'</code>) to
                make sure that filenames all have the same number of digits at
                the end (four). When sorted, the leading zero characters in
                small numbers guarantee that part files are ordered for
                joining correctly.</p>
<p>Alternatively, we could strip off digits in filenames,
                convert them with <code class="epub__literal">int</code>, and
                sort numerically, by using the list <code class="epub__literal">sort</code> method’s <code class="epub__literal">keys</code> argument, but that would still
                imply that all filenames must start with the some type of
                substring, and so doesn’t quite remove the file-naming
                dependency between the <code class="epub__literal">split</code> and <code class="epub__literal">join</code> scripts. Because these scripts
                are designed to be two steps of the same process, though, some
                dependencies between them <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e22242"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e22244"></a>seem reasonable.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Usage Variations"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="usage_variations"></a>Usage Variations</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Finally, let’s run a few more <a id="split6.3.3"></a><a id="files6.3.3a"></a><a id="join6.3.3"></a><a id="files6.3.3b"></a>experiments with these Python system utilities to
          demonstrate other usage modes. When run without full command-line
          arguments, both <code class="epub__literal">split</code> and
          <code class="epub__literal">join</code> are smart enough to input
          their parameters <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>interactively</em></span>. Here they are
          chopping and gluing the Python self-installer file on Windows again,
          with parameters typed in the DOS console window:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e22278"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\temp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools\split.py</code></strong>
File to be split? <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python-3.1.msi</code></strong>
Directory to store part files? <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>splitout</code></strong>
Splitting C:\temp\python-3.1.msi to C:\temp\splitout by 1433600
Split finished: 10 parts are in C:\temp\splitout
Press Enter key

C:\temp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools\join.py</code></strong>
Directory containing part files? <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>splitout</code></strong>
Name of file to be recreated? <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>newpy31.msi</code></strong>
Joining C:\temp\splitout to make C:\temp\newpy31.msi
Join complete: see C:\temp\newpy31.msi
Press Enter key

C:\temp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>fc /B python-3.1.msi newpy31.msi</code></strong>
Comparing files python-3.1.msi and NEWPY31.MSI
FC: no differences encountered</pre>
<p>When these program files are
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>double-clicked</em></span> in a Windows file explorer GUI,
          they work the same way (there are usually no command-line arguments
          when they are launched this way). In this mode, absolute path
          displays help clarify where files really are. Remember, the current
          working directory is the script’s home directory when clicked like
          this, so a simple name actually maps to a source code directory;
          type a full path to make the split files show up somewhere
          else:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e22307"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">[in a pop-up DOS console box when split.py is clicked]</span></em>
File to be split? <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\temp\python-3.1.msi</code></strong>
Directory to store part files? <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\temp\parts</code></strong>
Splitting c:\temp\python-3.1.msi to c:\temp\parts by 1433600
Split finished: 10 parts are in c:\temp\parts
Press Enter key

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">[in a pop-up DOS console box when join.py is clicked]</span></em>
Directory containing part files? <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\temp\parts</code></strong>
Name of file to be recreated? <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\temp\morepy31.msi</code></strong>
Joining c:\temp\parts to make c:\temp\morepy31.msi
Join complete: see c:\temp\morepy31.msi
Press Enter key</pre>
<p>Because these scripts package their core logic in functions,
          though, it’s just as easy to reuse their code by
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>importing</em></span> and calling from another Python
          component (make sure your module import search path includes the
          directory containing the PP4E root first; the first abbreviated line
          here is one way to do so):</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e22331"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\temp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>set PYTHONPATH=C:\...\dev\Examples</code></strong>
C:\temp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from PP4E.System.Filetools.split import split</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from PP4E.System.Filetools.join  import join</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>numparts = split('python-3.1.msi', 'calldir')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>numparts</code></strong>
10
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>join('calldir', 'callpy31.msi')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import os</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>os.system('fc /B python-3.1.msi callpy31.msi')</code></strong>
Comparing files python-3.1.msi and CALLPY31.msi
FC: no differences encountered
0</pre>
<p>A word about performance: all the <code class="epub__literal">split</code> and <code class="epub__literal">join</code> tests shown so far process a 13 MB
          file, but they take less than one second of real wall-clock time to
          finish on my Windows 7 2GHz Atom processor laptop computer—plenty
          fast for just about any use I could imagine. Both scripts run just
          as fast for other reasonable <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>part file sizes</em></span>,
          too; here is the splitter chopping up the file into 4MB and 500KB
          parts:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e22372"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\temp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools\split.py python-3.1.msi tempsplit 4000000</code></strong>
Splitting C:\temp\python-3.1.msi to C:\temp\tempsplit by 4000000
Split finished: 4 parts are in C:\temp\tempsplit

C:\temp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dir tempsplit</code></strong>
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...more...</span></em>
Directory of C:\temp\tempsplit

02/21/2010  01:27 PM    &lt;DIR&gt;          .
02/21/2010  01:27 PM    &lt;DIR&gt;          ..
02/21/2010  01:27 PM         4,000,000 part0001
02/21/2010  01:27 PM         4,000,000 part0002
02/21/2010  01:27 PM         4,000,000 part0003
02/21/2010  01:27 PM         1,814,272 part0004
               4 File(s)     13,814,272 bytes
               2 Dir(s)  188,671,983,616 bytes free

C:\temp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools\split.py python-3.1.msi tempsplit 500000</code></strong>
Splitting C:\temp\python-3.1.msi to C:\temp\tempsplit by 500000
Split finished: 28 parts are in C:\temp\tempsplit

C:\temp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dir tempsplit</code></strong>
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...more...</span></em>
Directory of C:\temp\tempsplit

02/21/2010  01:27 PM    &lt;DIR&gt;          .
02/21/2010  01:27 PM    &lt;DIR&gt;          ..
02/21/2010  01:27 PM           500,000 part0001
02/21/2010  01:27 PM           500,000 part0002
02/21/2010  01:27 PM           500,000 part0003
02/21/2010  01:27 PM           500,000 part0004
02/21/2010  01:27 PM           500,000 part0005
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...more lines omitted...</span></em>
02/21/2010  01:27 PM           500,000 part0024
02/21/2010  01:27 PM           500,000 part0025
02/21/2010  01:27 PM           500,000 part0026
02/21/2010  01:27 PM           500,000 part0027
02/21/2010  01:27 PM           314,272 part0028
              28 File(s)     13,814,272 bytes
               2 Dir(s)  188,671,946,752 bytes free</pre>
<p>The split can take noticeably longer to finish, but only if
          the part file’s size is set small enough to generate thousands of
          part files—splitting into 1,382 parts works but runs slower (though
          some machines today are quick enough that you might not
          notice):</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e22400"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\temp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools\split.py python-3.1.msi tempsplit 10000</code></strong>
Splitting C:\temp\python-3.1.msi to C:\temp\tempsplit by 10000
Split finished: 1382 parts are in C:\temp\tempsplit

C:\temp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools\join.py tempsplit manypy31.msi</code></strong>
Joining C:\temp\tempsplit to make C:\temp\manypy31.msi
Join complete: see C:\temp\manypy31.msi

C:\temp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>fc /B python-3.1.msi manypy31.msi</code></strong>
Comparing files python-3.1.msi and MANYPY31.MSI
FC: no differences encountered

C:\temp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dir tempsplit</code></strong>
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...more...</span></em>
Directory of C:\temp\tempsplit

02/21/2010  01:40 PM    &lt;DIR&gt;          .
02/21/2010  01:40 PM    &lt;DIR&gt;          ..
02/21/2010  01:39 PM            10,000 part0001
02/21/2010  01:39 PM            10,000 part0002
02/21/2010  01:39 PM            10,000 part0003
02/21/2010  01:39 PM            10,000 part0004
02/21/2010  01:39 PM            10,000 part0005
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...over 1,000 lines deleted...</span></em>
02/21/2010  01:40 PM            10,000 part1378
02/21/2010  01:40 PM            10,000 part1379
02/21/2010  01:40 PM            10,000 part1380
02/21/2010  01:40 PM            10,000 part1381
02/21/2010  01:40 PM             4,272 part1382
            1382 File(s)     13,814,272 bytes
               2 Dir(s)  188,651,008,000 bytes free</pre>
<p>Finally, the splitter is also smart enough to create the
          output directory if it doesn’t yet exist and to clear out any old
          files there if it does exist—the following, for example, leaves only
          new files in the output directory. Because the joiner combines
          whatever files exist in the output directory, this is a nice
          ergonomic touch. If the output directory was not cleared before each
          split, it would be too easy to forget that a prior run’s files are
          still there. Given that target audience for these scripts, they
          needed to be as forgiving as possible; your user base may vary
          (though you often shouldn’t assume so).</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e22425"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\temp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools\split.py python-3.1.msi tempsplit 5000000</code></strong>
Splitting C:\temp\python-3.1.msi to C:\temp\tempsplit by 5000000
Split finished: 3 parts are in C:\temp\tempsplit

C:\temp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dir tempsplit</code></strong>
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...more...</span></em>
Directory of C:\temp\tempsplit

02/21/2010  01:47 PM    &lt;DIR&gt;          .
02/21/2010  01:47 PM    &lt;DIR&gt;          ..
02/21/2010  01:47 PM         5,000,000 part0001
02/21/2010  01:47 PM         5,000,000 part0002
02/21/2010  01:47 PM         3,814,272 part0003
               3 File(s)     13,814,272 bytes
               2 Dir(s)  188,654,452,736 bytes free</pre>
<p>Of course, the dilemma that these scripts address might today
          be more easily addressed by simply buying a bigger memory stick or
          giving kids their own Internet access. Still, once you catch the
          scripting bug, you’ll find the ease and flexibility of Python to be
          powerful and enabling tools, especially for writing custom
          automation scripts like these. When used well, Python may well
          become your Swiss Army knife <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e22438"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e22440"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e22442"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e22444"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e22446"></a>of <span>computing</span>.</p>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[19] </sup>I should note that this background story stems from the
            second edition of this book, written in 2000. Some ten years
            later, floppies have largely gone the way of the parallel port and
            the dinosaur. Moreover, burning a CD or DVD is no longer as
            painful as it once was; there are new options today such as large
            flash memory cards, wireless home networks, and simple email; and
            naturally, my home computers configuration isn’t what it once was.
            For that matter, some of my kids are no longer kids (though
            they’ve retained some backward compatibility with their former
            selves).</p>
</div><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[20] </sup>It turns out that the <code class="epub__literal">zip</code>, <code class="epub__literal">gzip</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">tar</code> commands can all be replaced with
              pure Python code today, too. The <code class="epub__literal">gzip</code> module in the Python standard
              library provides tools for reading and writing compressed
              <code class="epub__literal">gzip</code> files, usually named
              with a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>.gz</em></span> filename extension. It can serve
              as an all-Python equivalent of the standard <code class="epub__literal">gzip</code> and <code class="epub__literal">gunzip</code> command-line utility programs.
              This built-in module uses another module called <code class="epub__literal">zlib</code> that implements <code class="epub__literal">gzip</code>-compatible data compressions. In
              recent Python releases, the <code class="epub__literal">zipfile</code> module can be imported to make
              and use ZIP format archives (<code class="epub__literal">zip</code> is an archive and compression
              format, <code class="epub__literal">gzip</code> is a compression
              scheme), and the <code class="epub__literal">tarfile</code>
              module allows scripts to read and write tar archives. See the
              Python library manual for details.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
