<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Copying Directory Trees</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Copying Directory Trees"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="copying_directory_trees"></a>Copying Directory Trees</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>My CD writer <a id="sys6.6"></a><a id="dir6.6"></a><a id="co6.6"></a>sometimes does weird things. In fact, copies of files
        with odd names can be totally botched on the CD, even though other
        files show up in one piece. That’s not necessarily a showstopper; if
        just a few files are trashed in a big CD backup copy, I can always
        copy the offending files elsewhere one at a time. Unfortunately,
        drag-and-drop copies on some versions of Windows don’t play nicely
        with such a CD: the copy operation stops and exits the moment the
        first bad file is encountered. You get only as many files as were
        copied up to the error, but no more.</p>
<p>In fact, this is not limited to CD copies. I’ve run into similar
        problems when trying to back up my laptop’s hard drive to another
        drive—the drag-and-drop copy stops with an error as soon as it reaches
        a file with a name that is too long or odd to copy (common in saved
        web pages). The last 30 minutes spent copying is wasted time;
        frustrating, to say the least!</p>
<p>There may be some magical Windows setting to work around this
        feature, but I gave up hunting for one as soon as I realized that it
        would be easier to code a copier in Python. The
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>cpall.py</em></span> script in Example 6-10 is one way to do it.
        With this script, I control what happens when bad files are found—I
        can skip over them with Python exception handlers, for instance.
        Moreover, this tool works with the same interface and effect on other
        platforms. It seems to me, at least, that a few minutes spent writing
        a portable and reusable Python script to meet a need is a better
        investment than looking for solutions that work on only one platform
        (if at all).</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id59"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 6-10. PP4E\System\Filetools\cpall.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
################################################################################
Usage: "python cpall.py dirFrom dirTo".
Recursive copy of a directory tree.  Works like a "cp -r dirFrom/* dirTo"
Unix command, and assumes that dirFrom and dirTo are both directories.
Was written to get around fatal error messages under Windows drag-and-drop
copies (the first bad file ends the entire copy operation immediately),
but also allows for coding more customized copy operations in Python.
################################################################################
"""

import os, sys
maxfileload = 1000000
blksize = 1024 * 500

def copyfile(pathFrom, pathTo, maxfileload=maxfileload):
    """
    Copy one file pathFrom to pathTo, byte for byte;
    uses binary file modes to supress Unicde decode and endline transform
    """
    if os.path.getsize(pathFrom) &lt;= maxfileload:
        bytesFrom = open(pathFrom, 'rb').read()   # read small file all at once
        open(pathTo, 'wb').write(bytesFrom)
    else:
        fileFrom = open(pathFrom, 'rb')           # read big files in chunks
        fileTo   = open(pathTo,   'wb')           # need b mode for both
        while True:
            bytesFrom = fileFrom.read(blksize)    # get one block, less at end
            if not bytesFrom: break               # empty after last chunk
            fileTo.write(bytesFrom)

def copytree(dirFrom, dirTo, verbose=0):
    """
    Copy contents of dirFrom and below to dirTo, return (files, dirs) counts;
    may need to use bytes for dirnames if undecodable on other platforms;
    may need to do more file type checking on Unix: skip links, fifos, etc.
    """
    fcount = dcount = 0
    for filename in os.listdir(dirFrom):                  # for files/dirs here
        pathFrom = os.path.join(dirFrom, filename)
        pathTo   = os.path.join(dirTo,   filename)        # extend both paths
        if not os.path.isdir(pathFrom):                   # copy simple files
            try:
                if verbose &gt; 1: print('copying', pathFrom, 'to', pathTo)
                copyfile(pathFrom, pathTo)
                fcount += 1
            except:
                print('Error copying', pathFrom, 'to', pathTo, '--skipped')
                print(sys.exc_info()[0], sys.exc_info()[1])
        else:
            if verbose: print('copying dir', pathFrom, 'to', pathTo)
            try:
                os.mkdir(pathTo)                          # make new subdir
                below = copytree(pathFrom, pathTo)        # recur into subdirs
                fcount += below[0]                        # add subdir  counts
                dcount += below[1]
                dcount += 1
            except:
                print('Error creating', pathTo, '--skipped')
                print(sys.exc_info()[0], sys.exc_info()[1])
    return (fcount, dcount)

def getargs():
    """
    Get and verify directory name arguments, returns default None on errors
    """
    try:
        dirFrom, dirTo = sys.argv[1:]
    except:
        print('Usage error: cpall.py dirFrom dirTo')
    else:
        if not os.path.isdir(dirFrom):
            print('Error: dirFrom is not a directory')
        elif not os.path.exists(dirTo):
            os.mkdir(dirTo)
            print('Note: dirTo was created')
            return (dirFrom, dirTo)
        else:
            print('Warning: dirTo already exists')
            if hasattr(os.path, 'samefile'):
                same = os.path.samefile(dirFrom, dirTo)
            else:
                same = os.path.abspath(dirFrom) == os.path.abspath(dirTo)
            if same:
                print('Error: dirFrom same as dirTo')
            else:
                return (dirFrom, dirTo)

if __name__ == '__main__':
    import time
    dirstuple = getargs()
    if dirstuple:
        print('Copying...')
        start = time.clock()
        fcount, dcount = copytree(*dirstuple)
        print('Copied', fcount, 'files,', dcount, 'directories', end=' ')
        print('in', time.clock() - start, 'seconds')</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>This script implements its own recursive tree traversal logic
        and keeps track of both the “from” and “to” directory paths as it
        goes. At every level, it copies over simple files, creates directories
        in the “to” path, and recurs into subdirectories with “from” and “to”
        paths extended by one level. There are other ways to code this task
        (e.g., we might change the working directory along the way with
        <code class="epub__literal">os.chdir</code> calls or there is probably
        an <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code> solution which replaces
        from and to path prefixes as it walks), but extending paths on
        recursive descent works well in this script.</p>
<p>Notice this script’s reusable <code class="epub__literal">copyfile</code> function—just in case there are
        multigigabyte files in the tree to be copied, it uses a file’s size to
        decide whether it should be read all at once or in chunks (remember,
        the file <code class="epub__literal">read</code> method without
        arguments actually loads the entire file into an in-memory string). We
        choose fairly large file and block sizes, because the more we read at
        once in Python, the faster our scripts will typically run. This is
        more efficient than it may sound; strings left behind by prior reads
        will be garbage collected and reused as we go. We’re using binary file
        modes here again, too, to suppress the Unicode encodings and
        end-of-line translations of text files—trees may contain arbitrary
        kinds of files.</p>
<p>Also notice that this script creates the “to” directory if
        needed, but it assumes that the directory is empty when a copy starts
        up; for accuracy, be sure to remove the target directory before
        copying a new tree to its name, or old files may linger in the target
        tree (we could automatically remove the target first, but this may not
        always be desired). This script also tries to determine if the source
        and target are the same; on Unix-like platforms with oddities such as
        links, <code class="epub__literal">os.path.samefile</code> does a more
        accurate job than comparing absolute file names (different file names
        may be the same file).</p>
<p>Here is a copy of a big book examples tree (I use the tree from
        the prior edition throughout this chapter) in action on Windows; pass
        in the name of the “from” and “to” directories to kick off the
        process, redirect the output to a file if there are too many error
        messages to read all at once (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">&gt;
        output.txt</code>), and run an <code class="epub__literal">rm
        –r</code> or <code class="epub__literal">rmdir /S</code> shell
        command (or similar platform-specific tool) to delete the target
        directory first if needed:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e22977"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rmdir /S copytemp</code></strong>
copytemp, Are you sure (Y/N)? <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y</code></strong>

C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>cpall.py C:\temp\PP3E\Examples copytemp</code></strong>
Note: dirTo was created
Copying...
Copied 1430 files, 185 directories in 10.4470980971 seconds

C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>fc /B copytemp\PP3E\Launcher.py</code></strong>
                                    <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\Launcher.py</code></strong>
Comparing files COPYTEMP\PP3E\Launcher.py and C:\TEMP\PP3E\EXAMPLES\PP3E\LAUNCHER.PY
FC: no differences encountered</pre>
<p>You can use the copy function’s <code class="epub__literal">verbose</code> argument to trace the process if you
        wish. At the time I wrote this edition in 2010, this test run copied a
        tree of 1,430 files and 185 directories in 10 seconds on my woefully
        underpowered netbook machine (the built-in <code class="epub__literal">time.clock</code> call is used to query the system
        time in seconds); it may run arbitrarily faster or slower for you.
        Still, this is at least as fast as the best drag-and-drop I’ve timed
        on this machine.</p>
<p>So how does this script work around bad files on a CD backup?
        The secret is that it catches and ignores file
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>exceptions</em></span>, and it keeps walking. To copy all the
        files that are good on a CD, I simply run a command line such as this
        one:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e23008"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python cpall.py G:\Examples C:\PP3E\Examples</code></strong></pre>
<p>Because the CD is addressed as “G:” on my Windows machine, this
        is the command-line equivalent of drag-and-drop copying from an item
        in the CD’s top-level folder, except that the Python script will
        recover from errors on the CD and get the rest. On copy errors, it
        prints a message to standard output and continues; for big copies,
        you’ll probably want to redirect the script’s output to a file for
        later inspection.</p>
<p>In general, <code class="epub__literal">cpall</code> can be
        passed any absolute directory path on your machine, even those that
        indicate devices such as CDs. To make this go on Linux, try a root
        directory such as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>/dev/cdrom</em></span> or something similar
        to address your CD drive. Once you’ve copied a tree this way, you
        still might want to verify; to see how, let’s move on to the next
        <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e23022"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e23024"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e23026"></a>example.</p>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
