<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Comparing Directory Trees</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Comparing Directory Trees"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="comparing_directory_trees"></a>Comparing Directory Trees</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Engineers <a id="dir6.7"></a><a id="sys6.7"></a><a id="com6.7"></a>can be a paranoid sort (but you didn’t hear that from
        me). At least I am. It comes from decades of seeing things go terribly
        wrong, I suppose. When I create a CD backup of my hard drive, for
        instance, there’s still something a bit too magical about the process
        to trust the CD writer program to do the right thing. Maybe I should,
        but it’s tough to have a lot of faith in tools that occasionally trash
        files and seem to crash my Windows machine every third Tuesday of the
        month. When push comes to shove, it’s nice to be able to verify that
        data copied to a backup CD is the same as the <span>original—</span>or at least to spot deviations
        from the <span>original—</span>as soon as
        possible. If a backup is ever needed, it will be
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>really</em></span> needed.</p>
<p>Because data CDs are accessible as simple directory trees in the
        file system, we are once again in the realm of tree walkers—to verify
        a backup CD, we simply need to walk its top-level directory. If our
        script is general enough, we will also be able to use it to verify
        other copy operations as well—e.g., downloaded tar files, hard-drive
        backups, and so on. In fact, the combination of the <code class="epub__literal">cpall</code> script of the prior section and a
        general tree comparison would provide a portable and scriptable way to
        copy and verify data sets.</p>
<p>We’ve already studied generic directory tree walkers, but they
        won’t help us here directly: we need to walk <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>two</em></span>
        directories in parallel and inspect common files along the way.
        Moreover, walking either one of the two directories won’t allow us to
        spot files and directories that exist only in the other. Something
        more custom and recursive seems in order here.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Finding Directory Differences"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="finding_directory_differences"></a>Finding Directory Differences</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Before we start coding, <a id="dir6.7.1"></a>the first thing we need to clarify is what it means to
          compare two directory trees. If both trees have exactly the same
          branch structure and depth, this problem reduces to comparing
          corresponding files in each tree. In general, though, the trees can
          have arbitrarily different shapes, depths, and so on.</p>
<p>More generally, the contents of a directory in one tree may
          have more or fewer entries than the corresponding directory in the
          other tree. If those differing contents are filenames, there is no
          corresponding file to compare with; if they are directory names,
          there is no corresponding branch to descend through. In fact, the
          only way to detect files and directories that appear in one tree but
          not the other is to detect differences in each level’s
          directory.</p>
<p>In other words, a tree comparison algorithm will also have to
          perform <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>directory</em></span> comparisons along the way.
          Because this is a nested and simpler operation, let’s start by
          coding and debugging a single-directory comparison of filenames in
          Example 6-11.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id60"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 6-11. PP4E\System\Filetools\dirdiff.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
################################################################################
Usage: python dirdiff.py dir1-path dir2-path
Compare two directories to find files that exist in one but not the other.
This version uses the os.listdir function and list difference.  Note that
this script checks only filenames, not file contents--see diffall.py for an
extension that does the latter by comparing .read() results.
################################################################################
"""

import os, sys

def reportdiffs(unique1, unique2, dir1, dir2):
    """
    Generate diffs report for one dir: part of comparedirs output
    """
    if not (unique1 or unique2):
        print('Directory lists are identical')
    else:
        if unique1:
            print('Files unique to', dir1)
            for file in unique1:
                print('...', file)
        if unique2:
            print('Files unique to', dir2)
            for file in unique2:
                print('...', file)

def difference(seq1, seq2):
    """
    Return all items in seq1 only;
    a set(seq1) - set(seq2) would work too, but sets are randomly
    ordered, so any platform-dependent directory order would be lost
    """
    return [item for item in seq1 if item not in seq2]


def comparedirs(dir1, dir2, files1=None, files2=None):
    """
    Compare directory contents, but not actual files;
    may need bytes listdir arg for undecodable filenames on some platforms
    """
    print('Comparing', dir1, 'to', dir2)
    files1  = os.listdir(dir1) if files1 is None else files1
    files2  = os.listdir(dir2) if files2 is None else files2
    unique1 = difference(files1, files2)
    unique2 = difference(files2, files1)
    reportdiffs(unique1, unique2, dir1, dir2)
    return not (unique1 or unique2)               # true if no diffs

def getargs():
    "Args for command-line mode"
    try:
        dir1, dir2 = sys.argv[1:]                 # 2 command-line args
    except:
        print('Usage: dirdiff.py dir1 dir2')
        sys.exit(1)
    else:
        return (dir1, dir2)

if __name__ == '__main__':
    dir1, dir2 = getargs()
    comparedirs(dir1, dir2)</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Given listings of names in two directories, this script simply
          picks out unique names in the first and unique names in the second,
          and reports any unique names found as differences (that is, files in
          one directory but not the other). Its <code class="epub__literal">comparedirs</code> function <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e23097"></a>returns a true result if no differences were found,
          which is useful for detecting differences in callers.</p>
<p>Let’s run this script on a few directories; differences are
          detected and reported as names unique in either passed-in directory
          pathname. Notice that this is only a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>structural</em></span>
          comparison that just checks names in listings, not file contents
          (we’ll add the latter in a moment):</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e23106"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dirdiff.py C:\temp\PP3E\Examples copytemp</code></strong>
Comparing C:\temp\PP3E\Examples to copytemp
Directory lists are identical

C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dirdiff.py C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\System ..</code></strong>
Comparing C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\System to ..
Files unique to C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\System
... App
... Exits
... Media
... moreplus.py
Files unique to ..
... more.pyc
... spam.txt
... Tester
... __init__.pyc</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">unique</code> function
          <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e23119"></a>is the heart of this script: it performs a simple list
          difference <span>operation</span>. When
          applied to directories, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>unique</em></span> items represent
          tree differences, and <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>common</em></span> items are names of
          files or subdirectories that merit further comparisons or
          traversals. In fact, in Python 2.4 and later, we could also use the
          built-in <code class="epub__literal">set</code> object type if we
          don’t care about the order in the results—because sets are not
          sequences, they would not maintain any original and possibly
          platform-specific left-to-right order of the directory listings
          provided by <code class="epub__literal">os.listdir</code>. For that
          reason (and to avoid requiring users to upgrade), we’ll keep using
          our own comprehension-based function instead <span>of <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e23141"></a>sets</span>.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Finding Tree Differences"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="finding_tree_differences"></a>Finding Tree Differences</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>We’ve just coded a directory <a id="dir6.7.2"></a>comparison tool that picks out unique files and
          directories. Now all we need is a tree walker that applies<a id="dirdiff6.7.2"></a> <code class="epub__literal">dirdiff</code> at each
          level to report unique items, explicitly compares the contents of
          files in common, and descends through directories in common. Example 6-12 fits the bill.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id61"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 6-12. PP4E\System\Filetools\diffall.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
################################################################################
Usage: "python diffall.py dir1 dir2".
Recursive directory tree comparison: report unique files that exist in only
dir1 or dir2, report files of the same name in dir1 and dir2 with differing
contents, report instances of same name but different type in dir1 and dir2,
and do the same for all subdirectories of the same names in and below dir1
and dir2.  A summary of diffs appears at end of output, but search redirected
output for "DIFF" and "unique" strings for further details.  New: (3E) limit
reads to 1M for large files, (3E) catch same name=file/dir, (4E) avoid extra
os.listdir() calls in dirdiff.comparedirs() by passing results here along.
################################################################################
"""

import os, dirdiff
blocksize = 1024 * 1024              # up to 1M per read

def intersect(seq1, seq2):
    """
    Return all items in both seq1 and seq2;
    a set(seq1) &amp; set(seq2) woud work too, but sets are randomly
    ordered, so any platform-dependent directory order would be lost
    """
    return [item for item in seq1 if item in seq2]

def comparetrees(dir1, dir2, diffs, verbose=False):
    """
    Compare all subdirectories and files in two directory trees;
    uses binary files to prevent Unicode decoding and endline transforms,
    as trees might contain arbitrary binary files as well as arbitrary text;
    may need bytes listdir arg for undecodable filenames on some platforms
    """
    # compare file name lists
    print('-' * 20)
    names1 = os.listdir(dir1)
    names2 = os.listdir(dir2)
    if not dirdiff.comparedirs(dir1, dir2, names1, names2):
        diffs.append('unique files at %s - %s' % (dir1, dir2))

    print('Comparing contents')
    common = intersect(names1, names2)
    missed = common[:]

    # compare contents of files in common
    for name in common:
        path1 = os.path.join(dir1, name)
        path2 = os.path.join(dir2, name)
        if os.path.isfile(path1) and os.path.isfile(path2):
            missed.remove(name)
            file1 = open(path1, 'rb')
            file2 = open(path2, 'rb')
            while True:
                bytes1 = file1.read(blocksize)
                bytes2 = file2.read(blocksize)
                if (not bytes1) and (not bytes2):
                    if verbose: print(name, 'matches')
                    break
                if bytes1 != bytes2:
                    diffs.append('files differ at %s - %s' % (path1, path2))
                    print(name, 'DIFFERS')
                    break

    # recur to compare directories in common
    for name in common:
        path1 = os.path.join(dir1, name)
        path2 = os.path.join(dir2, name)
        if os.path.isdir(path1) and os.path.isdir(path2):
            missed.remove(name)
            comparetrees(path1, path2, diffs, verbose)

    # same name but not both files or dirs?
    for name in missed:
        diffs.append('files missed at %s - %s: %s' % (dir1, dir2, name))
        print(name, 'DIFFERS')


if __name__ == '__main__':
    dir1, dir2 = dirdiff.getargs()
    diffs = []
    comparetrees(dir1, dir2, diffs, True)      # changes diffs in-place
    print('=' * 40)                            # walk, report diffs list
    if not diffs:
        print('No diffs found.')
    else:
        print('Diffs found:', len(diffs))
        for diff in diffs: print('-', diff)</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>At each directory in the tree, this script simply runs the
          <code class="epub__literal">dirdiff</code> tool to detect unique
          names, and then compares names in common by intersecting directory
          lists. It uses recursive function calls to traverse the tree and
          visits subdirectories only after comparing all the files at each
          level so that the output is more coherent to read (the trace output
          for subdirectories appears after that for files; it is not
          intermixed).</p>
<p>Notice the <code class="epub__literal">misses</code> list,
          added in the third edition of this book; it’s very unlikely, but not
          impossible, that the same name might be a file in one directory and
          a subdirectory in the other. Also notice the <code class="epub__literal">blocksize</code> variable; much like the tree
          copy script we saw earlier, instead of blindly reading entire files
          into memory all at once, we limit each read to grab up to 1 MB at a
          time, just in case any files in the directories are too big to be
          loaded into available memory. Without this limit, I ran into
          <code class="epub__literal">MemoryError</code> exceptions on some
          machines with a prior version of this script that read both files
          all at once, like this:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e23186"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">    bytes1 = open(path1, 'rb').read()
    bytes2 = open(path2, 'rb').read()
    if bytes1 == bytes2: ...</pre>
<p>This code was simpler, but is less practical for very large
          files that can’t fit into your available memory space (consider CD
          and DVD image files, for example). In the new version’s loop, the
          file reads return what is left when there is less than 1 MB present
          or remaining and return empty strings at end-of-file. Files match if
          all blocks read are the same, and they reach end-of-file at the same
          time.</p>
<p>We’re also dealing in binary files and byte strings again to
          suppress Unicode decoding and end-line translations for file
          content, because trees may contain arbitrary binary and text files.
          The usual note about changing this to pass byte strings to <code class="epub__literal">os.listdir</code> on platforms where filenames
          may generate Unicode decoding errors applies here as well (e.g. pass
          <code class="epub__literal">dir1.encode()</code>). On some
          platforms, you may also want to detect and skip certain kinds of
          special files in order to be fully general, but these were not in my
          trees, so they are not in my script.</p>
<p>One minor change for the fourth edition of this book: <code class="epub__literal">os.listdir</code> results are now gathered just
          once per subdirectory and passed along, to avoid extra calls in
          <code class="epub__literal">dirdiff</code>—not a huge win, but every
          cycle counts on the pitifully underpowered netbook I used when
          writing this <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e23206"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e23208"></a>edition.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Running the Script"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="running_the_script-id1"></a>Running the Script</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Since we’ve already studied the tree-walking tools this script
          employs, let’s jump right into a few example runs. When run on
          identical trees, status messages scroll during the traversal, and a
          <code class="epub__literal">No diffs found.</code> message appears
          at the end:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e23219"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>diffall.py C:\temp\PP3E\Examples copytemp &gt; diffs.txt</code></strong>
C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type diffs.txt | more</code></strong>
--------------------
Comparing C:\temp\PP3E\Examples to copytemp
Directory lists are identical
Comparing contents
README-root.txt matches
--------------------
Comparing C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E to copytemp\PP3E
Directory lists are identical
Comparing contents
echoEnvironment.pyw matches
LaunchBrowser.pyw matches
Launcher.py matches
Launcher.pyc matches
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...over 2,000 more lines omitted...</span></em>
--------------------
Comparing C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\TempParts to copytemp\PP3E\TempParts
Directory lists are identical
Comparing contents
109_0237.JPG matches
lawnlake1-jan-03.jpg matches
part-001.txt matches
part-002.html matches
========================================
No diffs found.</pre>
<p>I usually run this with the <code class="epub__literal">verbose</code> flag passed in as <code class="epub__literal">True</code>, and redirect output to a file (for
          big trees, it produces too much output to scroll through
          comfortably); use <code class="epub__literal">False</code> to watch
          fewer status messages fly by. To show how differences are reported,
          we need to generate a few; for simplicity, I’ll manually change a
          few files scattered about one of the trees, but you could also run a
          global search-and-replace script like the one we’ll write later in
          this chapter. While we’re at it, let’s remove a few common files so
          that directory uniqueness differences show up on the scope, too; the
          last two removal commands in the following will generate one
          difference in the same directory in different trees:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e23241"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>notepad copytemp\PP3E\README-PP3E.txt</code></strong>
C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>notepad copytemp\PP3E\System\Filetools\commands.py</code></strong>
C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>notepad C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\__init__.py</code></strong>

C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>del copytemp\PP3E\System\Filetools\cpall_visitor.py</code></strong>
C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>del copytemp\PP3E\Launcher.py</code></strong>
C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>del C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\PyGadgets.py</code></strong></pre>
<p>Now, rerun the comparison walker to pick out differences and
          redirect its output report to a file for easy inspection. The
          following lists just the parts of the output report that identify
          differences. In typical use, I inspect the summary at the bottom of
          the report first, and then search for the strings <code class="epub__literal">"DIFF"</code> and <code class="epub__literal">"unique"</code> in the report’s text if I need
          more information about the differences summarized; this interface
          could be much more user-friendly, of course, but it does the job for
          me:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e23269"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>diffall.py C:\temp\PP3E\Examples copytemp &gt; diff2.txt</code></strong>
C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>notepad diff2.txt</code></strong>
--------------------
Comparing C:\temp\PP3E\Examples to copytemp
Directory lists are identical
Comparing contents
README-root.txt matches
--------------------
Comparing C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E to copytemp\PP3E
Files unique to C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E
... Launcher.py
Files unique to copytemp\PP3E
... PyGadgets.py
Comparing contents
echoEnvironment.pyw matches
LaunchBrowser.pyw matches
Launcher.pyc matches
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...more omitted...</span></em>
PyGadgets_bar.pyw matches
README-PP3E.txt DIFFERS
todos.py matches
tounix.py matches
__init__.py DIFFERS
__init__.pyc matches
--------------------
Comparing C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\System\Filetools to copytemp\PP3E\System\Fil...
Files unique to C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\System\Filetools
... cpall_visitor.py
Comparing contents
commands.py DIFFERS
cpall.py matches
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...more omitted...</span></em>
--------------------
Comparing C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\TempParts to copytemp\PP3E\TempParts
Directory lists are identical
Comparing contents
109_0237.JPG matches
lawnlake1-jan-03.jpg matches
part-001.txt matches
part-002.html matches
========================================
Diffs found: 5
- unique files at C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E - copytemp\PP3E
- files differ at C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\README-PP3E.txt –
         copytemp\PP3E\README-PP3E.txt
- files differ at C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\__init__.py –
         copytemp\PP3E\__init__.py
- unique files at C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\System\Filetools –
         copytemp\PP3E\System\Filetools
- files differ at C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\System\Filetools\commands.py –
         copytemp\PP3E\System\Filetools\commands.py</pre>
<p>I added line breaks and tabs in a few of these output lines to
          make them fit on this page, but the report is simple to understand.
          In a tree with 1,430 files and 185 directories, we found five
          differences—the three files we changed by edits, and the two
          directories we threw out of sync with the three removal
          commands.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Verifying Backups"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="verifying_backups"></a>Verifying Backups</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>So how does <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e23290"></a>this script placate CD backup paranoia? To
          double-check my CD writer’s work, I run a command such as the
          following. I can also use a command like this to find out what has
          been changed since the last backup. Again, since the CD is “G:” on
          my machine when plugged in, I provide a path rooted there; use a
          root such as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>/dev/cdrom</em></span> or
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>/mnt/cdrom</em></span> on Linux:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e23300"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python diffall.py</code></strong> <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Examples g:\PP3E\Examples &gt; diff0226</code></strong>
C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>more diff0226</code></strong>
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...output omitted...</span></em></pre>
<p>The CD spins, the script compares, and a summary of
          differences appears at the end of the report. For an example of a
          full difference report, see the file <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>diff*.txt</em></span>
          files in the book’s examples distribution package. And to be
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>really</em></span> sure, I run the following global
          comparison command to verify the entire book development tree backed
          up to a memory stick (which works just like a CD in terms of the
          filesystem):</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e23321"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>diffall.py</code></strong> <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F:\writing-backups\feb-26-10\dev</code></strong>
                                 <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>C:\Users\mark\Stuff\Books\4E\PP4E\dev &gt; diff3.txt</code></strong>
C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>more diff3.txt</code></strong>
--------------------
Comparing F:\writing-backups\feb-26-10\dev to C:\Users\mark\Stuff\Books\4E\PP4E\dev
Directory lists are identical
Comparing contents
ch00.doc DIFFERS
ch01.doc matches
ch02.doc DIFFERS
ch03.doc matches
ch04.doc DIFFERS
ch05.doc matches
ch06.doc DIFFERS
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...more output omitted...</span></em>
--------------------
Comparing F:\writing-backups\feb-26-10\dev\Examples\PP4E\System\Filetools to C:\…
Files unique to C:\Users\mark\Stuff\Books\4E\PP4E\dev\Examples\PP4E\System\Filetools
... copytemp
... cpall.py
... diff2.txt
... diff3.txt
... diffall.py
... diffs.txt
... dirdiff.py
... dirdiff.pyc
Comparing contents
bigext-tree.py matches
bigpy-dir.py matches
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...more output omitted...</span></em>
========================================
Diffs found: 7
- files differ at F:\writing-backups\feb-26-10\dev\ch00.doc –
         C:\Users\mark\Stuff\Books\4E\PP4E\dev\ch00.doc
- files differ at F:\writing-backups\feb-26-10\dev\ch02.doc –
         C:\Users\mark\Stuff\Books\4E\PP4E\dev\ch02.doc
- files differ at F:\writing-backups\feb-26-10\dev\ch04.doc –
         C:\Users\mark\Stuff\Books\4E\PP4E\dev\ch04.doc
- files differ at F:\writing-backups\feb-26-10\dev\ch06.doc –
         C:\Users\mark\Stuff\Books\4E\PP4E\dev\ch06.doc
- files differ at F:\writing-backups\feb-26-10\dev\TOC.txt –
         C:\Users\mark\Stuff\Books\4E\PP4E\dev\TOC.txt
- unique files at F:\writing-backups\feb-26-10\dev\Examples\PP4E\System\Filetools –
         C:\Users\mark\Stuff\Books\4E\PP4E\dev\Examples\PP4E\System\Filetools
- files differ at F:\writing-backups\feb-26-10\dev\Examples\PP4E\Tools\visitor.py –
         C:\Users\mark\Stuff\Books\4E\PP4E\dev\Examples\PP4E\Tools\visitor.py</pre>
<p>This particular run indicates that I’ve added a few examples
          and changed some chapter files since the last backup; if run
          immediately after a backup, nothing should show up on <code class="epub__literal">diffall</code> radar except for any files that
          cannot be copied in general. This global comparison can take a few
          minutes. It performs byte-for-byte comparisons of all chapter files
          and screenshots, the examples tree, and more, but it’s an accurate
          and complete verification. Given that this book development tree
          contained many files, a more manual verification procedure without
          Python’s help would be utterly impossible.</p>
<p>After writing this script, I also started using it to verify
          full automated backups of my laptops onto an external hard-drive
          device. To do so, I run the <code class="epub__literal">cpall</code>
          copy script we wrote earlier in the preceding section of this
          chapter, and then the comparison script developed here to check
          results and get a list of files that didn’t copy correctly. The last
          time I did this, this procedure copied and compared 225,000 files
          and 15,000 directories in 20 GB of space—not the sort of task that
          lends itself to manual labor!</p>
<p>Here are the magic incantations on my Windows laptop. <code class="epub__literal">f:\</code> is a partition on my external hard
          drive, and you shouldn’t be surprised if each of these commands runs
          for half an hour or more on currently common hardware. A
          drag-and-drop copy takes at least as long (assuming it works at
          all!):</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e23357"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\System\Filetools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>cpall.py c:\ f:\   &gt; f:\copy-log.txt</code></strong>
C:\...\System\Filetools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>diffall.py f:\ c:\ &gt; f:\diff-log.txt</code></strong></pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Reporting Differences and Other Ideas"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="reporting_differences_and_other_ideas"></a>Reporting Differences and Other Ideas</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Finally, it’s worth <a id="re6.7.5"></a><a id="dir6.7.5"></a>noting that this script still only
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>detects</em></span> differences in the tree but does not
          give any further details about individual file differences. In fact,
          it simply loads and compares the binary contents of corresponding
          files with string comparisons. It’s a simple yes/no result.</p>
<p>If and when I need more details about how two reported files
          actually differ, I either edit the files or run the file-comparison
          command on the host platform (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">fc</code> on Windows/DOS, <code class="epub__literal">diff</code> or <code class="epub__literal">cmp</code> on Unix and Linux). That’s not a
          portable solution for this last step; but for my purposes, just
          finding the differences in a 1,400-file tree was much more critical
          than reporting which lines differ in files flagged in the
          report.</p>
<p>Of course, since we can always run shell commands in Python,
          this last step could be automated by spawning a <code class="epub__literal">diff</code> or <code class="epub__literal">fc</code> command with <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code> as differences are encountered
          (or after the traversal, by scanning the report summary). The output
          of these system calls could be displayed verbatim, or parsed for
          relevant parts.</p>
<p>We also might try to do a bit better here by opening true text
          files in text mode to ignore line-terminator differences caused by
          transferring across platforms, but it’s not clear that such
          differences should be ignored (what if the caller wants to know
          whether line-end markers have been changed?). For example, after
          downloading a website with an FTP script we’ll meet in Chapter 13, the <code class="epub__literal">diffall</code> script detected a discrepancy
          between the local copy of a file and the one at the remote server.
          To probe further, I simply ran some interactive Python code:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e23410"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a = open('lp2e-updates.html', 'rb').read()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>b = open(r'C:\Mark\WEBSITE\public_html\lp2e-updates.html', 'rb').read()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a == b</code></strong>
False</pre>
<p>This verifies that there really is a binary difference in the
          downloaded and local versions of the file; to see whether it’s
          because a Unix or DOS line end snuck into the file, try again in
          text mode so that line ends are all mapped to the standard <code class="epub__literal">\n</code> character:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e23426"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a = open('lp2e-updates.html', 'r').read()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>b = open(r'C:\Mark\WEBSITE\public_html\lp2e-updates.html', 'r').read()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a == b</code></strong>
True</pre>
<p>Sure enough; now, to find where the difference is, the
          following code checks character by character until the first
          mismatch is found (in binary mode, so we retain the <span>difference</span>):</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e23442"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a = open('lp2e-updates.html', 'rb').read()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>b = open(r'C:\Mark\WEBSITE\public_html\lp2e-updates.html', 'rb').read()</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for (i, (ac, bc)) in enumerate(zip(a, b)):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if ac != bc:</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(i, repr(ac), repr(bc))</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>break</code></strong>
...
37966 '\r' '\n'</pre>
<p>This means that at byte offset 37,966, there is a <code class="epub__literal">\r</code> in the downloaded file, but a <code class="epub__literal">\n</code> in the local copy. This line has a DOS
          line end in one and a Unix line end in the other. To see more, print
          text around the mismatch:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e23472"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for (i, (ac, bc)) in enumerate(zip(a, b)):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if ac != bc:</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(i, repr(ac), repr(bc))</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(repr(a[i-20:i+20]))</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(repr(b[i-20:i+20]))</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>break</code></strong>
...
37966 '\r' '\n'
're&gt;\r\ndef min(*args):\r\n    tmp = list(arg'
're&gt;\r\ndef min(*args):\n    tmp = list(args'</pre>
<p>Apparently, I wound up with a Unix line end at one point in
          the local copy and a DOS line end in the version I downloaded—the
          combined effect of the text mode used by the download script itself
          (which translated <code class="epub__literal">\n</code> to <code class="epub__literal">\r\n</code>) and years of edits on both Linux and
          Windows PDAs and laptops (I probably coded this change on Linux and
          copied it to my local Windows copy in binary mode). Code such as
          this could be integrated into the <code class="epub__literal">diffall</code> script to make it more intelligent
          about text files and difference <span>reporting</span>.</p>
<p>Because Python excels at processing files and strings, it’s
          even possible to go one step further and code a Python equivalent of
          the <code class="epub__literal">fc</code> and <code class="epub__literal">diff</code> commands. In fact, much of the work
          has already been done; the standard library module <code class="epub__literal">difflib</code> could make this task simple. See
          the Python library manual for details and usage examples.</p>
<p>We could also be smarter by avoiding the load and compare
          steps for files that differ in size, and we might use a smaller
          block size to reduce the script’s memory requirements. For most
          trees, such optimizations are unnecessary; reading multimegabyte
          files into strings is very fast in Python, and garbage collection
          reclaims the space as you go.</p>
<p>Since such extensions are beyond both this script’s scope and
          this chapter’s size limits, though, they will have to await the
          attention of a curious reader (this book doesn’t have formal
          exercises, but that almost sounds like one, doesn’t it?). For now,
          let’s move on to explore ways to code one more common directory
          task: <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e23522"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e23524"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e23526"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e23528"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e23530"></a>search.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
