<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Searching Directory Trees</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Searching Directory Trees"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="searching_directory_trees"></a>Searching Directory Trees</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Engineers <a id="sys6.8"></a><a id="dir6.8"></a><a id="se6.8"></a>love to change things. As I was writing this book, I
        found it almost <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>irresistible</em></span> to move and rename
        directories, variables, and shared modules in the book examples tree
        whenever I thought I’d stumbled onto a more coherent structure. That
        was fine early on, but as the tree became more intertwined, this
        became a maintenance nightmare. Things such as program directory paths
        and module names were hardcoded all over the place—in package import
        statements, program startup calls, text notes, configuration files,
        and more.</p>
<p>One way to repair these references, of course, is to edit every
        file in the directory by hand, searching each for information that has
        changed. That’s so tedious as to be utterly impossible in this book’s
        examples tree, though; the examples of the prior edition contained 186
        directories and 1,429 files! Clearly, I needed a way to automate
        updates after changes. There are a variety of solutions to such
        goals—from shell commands, to find operations, to custom tree walkers,
        to general-purpose frameworks. In this and the next section, we’ll
        explore each option in turn, just as I did while refining solutions to
        this real-world dilemma.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Greps and Globs and Finds"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="greps_and_globs_and_finds"></a>Greps and Globs and Finds</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>If you work on Unix-like systems, you probably already know
          that there is a standard way to search files for strings on such
          platforms—the command-line program <code class="epub__literal">grep</code> <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e23565"></a>and its relatives list all lines in one or more files
          containing a string or string pattern.<sup>[22]</sup> Given that shells expand (i.e., “glob”) filename
          patterns automatically, a command such as the following will search
          a single directory’s Python files for a string named on the command
          line (this uses the <code class="epub__literal">grep</code> command
          installed with the Cygwin Unix-like system for Windows that I
          described in the prior chapter):</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e23576"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\cygwin\bin\grep.exe walk *.py</code></strong>
bigext-tree.py:for (thisDir, subsHere, filesHere) in os.walk(dirname):
bigpy-path.py:    for (thisDir, subsHere, filesHere) in os.walk(srcdir):
bigpy-tree.py:for (thisDir, subsHere, filesHere) in os.walk(dirname):</pre>
<p>As we’ve seen, we can often accomplish the same within a
          Python script by running such a shell command with <code class="epub__literal">os.system</code> or <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code>. And if we search its results
          manually, we can also achieve similar results with the
          Python<a id="I_indexterm5_d1e23589"></a> <code class="epub__literal">glob</code> module we met
          in Chapter 4; it expands a
          filename pattern into a list of matching filename strings much like
          a shell:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e23600"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import os</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for line in os.popen(r'c:\cygwin\bin\grep.exe walk *.py'):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(line, end='')</code></strong>
...
bigext-tree.py:for (thisDir, subsHere, filesHere) in os.walk(dirname):
bigpy-path.py:    for (thisDir, subsHere, filesHere) in os.walk(srcdir):
bigpy-tree.py:for (thisDir, subsHere, filesHere) in os.walk(dirname):

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from glob import glob</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for filename in glob('*.py'):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if 'walk' in open(filename).read():</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(filename)</code></strong>
...
bigext-tree.py
bigpy-path.py
bigpy-tree.py</pre>
<p>Unfortunately, these tools are generally limited to a single
          directory. <code class="epub__literal">glob</code> can visit
          multiple directories given the right sort of pattern string, but
          it’s not a general directory walker of the sort I need to maintain a
          large examples tree. On Unix-like systems, a <code class="epub__literal">find</code> shell command<a id="I_indexterm5_d1e23635"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e23638"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e23643"></a> can go the extra mile to traverse an entire directory
          tree. For <span>instance</span>, the
          following Unix command line would pinpoint lines and files at and
          below the current directory that mention the string <code class="epub__literal">popen</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e23656"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">find . -name "*.py" -print -exec fgrep popen {} \;</pre>
<p>If you happen to have a Unix-like <code class="epub__literal">find</code> command on every machine you will
          ever use, this is one way to process directories.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Rolling Your Own find Module"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="rolling_your_own_find_module"></a>Rolling Your Own find Module</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>But if you don’t happen to have a Unix <code class="epub__literal">find</code> on all your computers, not to
          worry—it’s easy to code a portable one in Python. Python itself used
          to have a<a id="find6.8.2"></a> <code class="epub__literal">find</code> module in its
          standard library, which I used frequently in the past. Although that
          module was removed between the second and third editions of this
          book, the newer <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code> makes
          writing your own simple. Rather than lamenting the demise of a
          module, I decided to spend 10 minutes coding a custom
          equivalent.</p>
<p>Example 6-13
          implements a find utility in Python, which collects all matching
          filenames in a directory tree. Unlike <code class="epub__literal">glob.glob</code>, its <code class="epub__literal">find.find</code> automatically matches through an
          entire tree. And unlike the tree walk structure of <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code>, we can treat <code class="epub__literal">find.find</code> results as a simple linear
          group.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_tools_reverse"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 6-13. PP4E\Tools\find.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">#!/usr/bin/python
"""
################################################################################
Return all files matching a filename pattern at and below a root directory;

custom version of the now deprecated find module in the standard library:
import as "PP4E.Tools.find"; like original, but uses os.walk loop, has no
support for pruning subdirs, and is runnable as a top-level script;

find() is a generator that uses the os.walk() generator to yield just
matching filenames: use findlist() to force results list generation;
################################################################################
"""

import fnmatch, os

def find(pattern, startdir=os.curdir):
    for (thisDir, subsHere, filesHere) in os.walk(startdir):
        for name in subsHere + filesHere:
            if fnmatch.fnmatch(name, pattern):
                fullpath = os.path.join(thisDir, name)
                yield fullpath

def findlist(pattern, startdir=os.curdir, dosort=False):
    matches = list(find(pattern, startdir))
    if dosort: matches.sort()
    return matches

if __name__ == '__main__':
    import sys
    namepattern, startdir = sys.argv[1], sys.argv[2]
    for name in find(namepattern, startdir): print(name)</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>There’s not much to this file—it’s largely just a minor
          extension to<a id="I_indexterm5_d1e23703"></a> <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code>—but
          calling its <code class="epub__literal">find</code> function
          provides the same utility as both the deprecated <code class="epub__literal">find</code> standard library module and the Unix
          utility of the same name. It’s also much more portable, and
          noticeably easier than repeating all of this file’s code every time
          you need to perform a find-type search. Because this file is
          instrumented to be both a script and a library, it can also be both
          run as a command-line tool or called from other programs.</p>
<p>For instance, to process every Python file in the directory
          tree rooted one level up from the current working directory, I
          simply run the following command line from a system console window.
          Run this yourself to watch its progress; the script’s standard
          output is piped into the <code class="epub__literal">more</code>
          command to page it here, but it can be piped into any processing
          program that reads its input from the standard input stream:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e23725"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Tools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python find.py *.py .. | more</code></strong>
..\LaunchBrowser.py
..\Launcher.py
..\__init__.py
..\Preview\attachgui.py
..\Preview\customizegui.py
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...more lines omitted...</span></em></pre>
<p>For more control, run the following sort of Python code from a
          script or interactive prompt. In this mode, you can apply any
          operation to the found files that the Python language
          provides:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e23734"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\System\Filetools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from PP4E.Tools import find</code></strong>                  # or just import find if in cwd
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for filename in find.find('*.py', '..'):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if 'walk' in open(filename).read():</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(filename)</code></strong>
...
..\Launcher.py
..\System\Filetools\bigext-tree.py
..\System\Filetools\bigpy-path.py
..\System\Filetools\bigpy-tree.py
..\Tools\cleanpyc.py
..\Tools\find.py
..\Tools\visitor.py</pre>
<p>Notice how this avoids having to recode the nested loop
          structure required for <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code>
          every time you want a list of matching file names; for many use
          cases, this seems conceptually simpler. Also note that because this
          finder is a generator function, your script doesn’t have to wait
          until all matching files have been found and collected; <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code> yields results as it goes, and
          <code class="epub__literal">find.find</code> yields matching files
          among that set.</p>
<p>Here’s a more complex example of our <code class="epub__literal">find</code> module at work: the following system
          command line lists all Python files in directory
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>C:\temp\PP3E</em></span> whose names begin with the letter
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>q</em></span> or <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>t</em></span>. Note how <code class="epub__literal">find</code> returns full directory paths that
          begin with the start directory specification:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e23780"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Tools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>find.py [qx]*.py C:\temp\PP3E</code></strong>
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\Database\SQLscripts\querydb.py
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\Gui\Tools\queuetest-gui-class.py
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\Gui\Tools\queuetest-gui.py
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\Gui\Tour\quitter.py
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\Internet\Other\Grail\Question.py
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\Internet\Other\XML\xmlrpc.py
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\System\Threads\queuetest.py</pre>
<p>And here’s some Python code that does the same find but also
          extracts base names and file sizes for each file found:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e23787"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Tools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import os</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from find import find</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for name in find('[qx]*.py', r'C:\temp\PP3E'):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(os.path.basename(name), os.path.getsize(name))</code></strong>
...
querydb.py 635
queuetest-gui-class.py 1152
queuetest-gui.py 963
quitter.py 801
Question.py 817
xmlrpc.py 705
queuetest.py 1273</pre>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="The fnmatch module"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="the_fnmatch_module"></a>The fnmatch module</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To achieve such <a id="fn6.8.2.1"></a>code economy, the <code class="epub__literal">find</code> module calls <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code> to walk the tree and simply
            yields matching filenames along the way. New here, though, is the
            <code class="epub__literal">fnmatch</code> module—yet another
            Python standard library module that performs Unix-like pattern
            matching against filenames. This module supports common operators
            in name pattern strings: <code class="epub__literal">*</code> to
            match any number of characters, <code class="epub__literal">?</code> to match any single character, and
            <code class="epub__literal">[...]</code> and <code class="epub__literal">[!...]</code> to match any character inside the
            bracket pairs or not; other characters match themselves. Unlike
            the <code class="epub__literal">re</code> module, <code class="epub__literal">fnmatch</code> supports only common Unix shell
            matching operators, not full-blown regular expression patterns;
            we’ll see why this distinction matters in Chapter 19.</p>
<p>Interestingly, Python’s <code class="epub__literal">glob.glob</code> function also uses the
            <code class="epub__literal">fnmatch</code> module to match names:
            it combines <code class="epub__literal">os.listdir</code> and
            <code class="epub__literal">fnmatch</code> to match in directories
            in much the same way our <code class="epub__literal">find.find</code> combines <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code> and <code class="epub__literal">fnmatch</code> to match in trees (though
            <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code> ultimately uses
            <code class="epub__literal">os.listdir</code> as well). One
            ramification of all this is that you can pass byte strings for
            both pattern and start-directory to <code class="epub__literal">find.find</code> if you need to suppress
            Unicode filename decoding, just as you can for <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code> and <code class="epub__literal">glob.glob</code>; you’ll receive byte strings
            for filenames in the result. See Chapter 4 for more details on Unicode
            filenames.</p>
<p>By comparison, <code class="epub__literal">find.find</code>
            with just “*” for its name pattern is also roughly equivalent to
            platform-specific directory tree listing shell commands such as
            <code class="epub__literal">dir /B /S</code> on DOS and Windows.
            Since all files match “*”, this just exhaustively generates all
            the file names in a tree with a single traversal. Because we can
            usually run such shell commands in a Python script with <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code>, the following do the same
            work, but the first is inherently nonportable and must start up a
            separate program along the way:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e23896"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import os</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for line in os.popen('dir /B /S'): print(line, end='')</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from PP4E.Tools.find import find</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for name in find(pattern='*', startdir='.'): print(name)</code></strong></pre>
<p>Watch for this utility to show up in action later in this
            chapter and book, including an arguably strong showing in the next
            section and a cameo appearance in the Grep dialog of Chapter 11’s PyEdit text editor GUI, where
            it will serve a central role in a threaded external files search
            tool. The standard library’s <code class="epub__literal">find</code> module may be gone, but it need not
            be <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e23916"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e23918"></a>forgotten.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note"><h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p>In fact, you <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>must</em></span> pass a <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> pattern string for a <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> filename to <code class="epub__literal">fnnmatch</code> (or pass both as <code class="epub__literal">str</code>), because the <code class="epub__literal">re</code> pattern matching module it uses
              does not allow the string types of subject and pattern to be
              mixed. This rule is inherited by our <code class="epub__literal">find.find</code> for directory and pattern.
              See Chapter 19 for more on <code class="epub__literal">re</code>.</p>
<p>Curiously, the <code class="epub__literal">fnmatch</code>
              module in Python 3.1 also converts a <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> pattern string to and from
              Unicode <code class="epub__literal">str</code> in order to
              perform internal text processing, using the Latin-1 encoding.
              This suffices for many contexts, but may not be entirely sound
              for some encodings which do not map to Latin-1 cleanly. <code class="epub__literal">sys.getfilesystemencoding</code> might be a
              better encoding choice in such contexts, as this reflects the
              underlying file system’s constraints (as we learned in Chapter 4, <code class="epub__literal">sys.getdefaultencoding</code> reflects file
              content, not names).</p>
<p>In the absence of <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>, <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code> assumes filenames follow the
              platform’s convention and does not ignore decoding errors
              triggered by <code class="epub__literal">os.listdir</code>. In
              the “grep” utility of Chapter 11’s
              PyEdit, this picture is further clouded by the fact that a
              <code class="epub__literal">str</code> pattern string from a GUI
              would have to be encoded to <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> using a potentially
              inappropriate encoding for some files present. See <em class="epub__filename">fnmatch.py</em> and <em class="epub__filename">os.py</em> in Python’s library and the
              Python library manual for more details. Unicode can be a very
              subtle affair.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Cleaning Up Bytecode Files"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="cleaning_up_bytecode_files"></a>Cleaning Up Bytecode Files</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">find</code> module of
          <a id="dir6.8.3"></a><a id="byte6.8.3"></a><a name="section isn"></a>the prior section isn’t quite the general string
          searcher we’re after, but it’s an important first step—it collects
          files that we can then search in an automated script. In fact, the
          act of collecting matching files in a tree is enough by itself to
          support a wide variety of day-to-day system tasks.</p>
<p>For example, one of the other common tasks I perform on a
          regular basis is removing all the bytecode files in a tree. Because
          these are not always portable across major Python releases, it’s
          usually a good idea to ship programs without them and let Python
          create new ones on first imports. Now that we’re expert <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code> users, we could cut out the
          middleman and use it directly. Example 6-14 codes a portable
          and general command-line tool, with support for arguments, exception
          processing, tracing, and list-only mode.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_tools_reverse-id1"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 6-14. PP4E\Tools\cleanpyc.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
delete all .pyc bytecode files in a directory tree: use the
command line arg as root if given, else current working dir
"""

import os, sys
findonly = False
rootdir = os.getcwd() if len(sys.argv) == 1 else sys.argv[1]

found = removed = 0
for (thisDirLevel, subsHere, filesHere) in os.walk(rootdir):
    for filename in filesHere:
        if filename.endswith('.pyc'):
            fullname = os.path.join(thisDirLevel, filename)
            print('=&gt;', fullname)
            if not findonly:
                try:
                    os.remove(fullname)
                    removed += 1
                except:
                    type, inst = sys.exc_info()[:2]
                    print('*'*4, 'Failed:', filename, type, inst)
            found += 1

print('Found', found, 'files, removed', removed)</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>When run, this script walks a directory tree (the CWD by
          default, or else one passed in on the command line), deleting any
          and all bytecode files along the way:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e24030"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\Examples\PP4E&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Tools\cleanpyc.py</code></strong>
=&gt; C:\Users\mark\Stuff\Books\4E\PP4E\dev\Examples\PP4E\__init__.pyc
=&gt; C:\Users\mark\Stuff\Books\4E\PP4E\dev\Examples\PP4E\Preview\initdata.pyc
=&gt; C:\Users\mark\Stuff\Books\4E\PP4E\dev\Examples\PP4E\Preview\make_db_file.pyc
=&gt; C:\Users\mark\Stuff\Books\4E\PP4E\dev\Examples\PP4E\Preview\manager.pyc
=&gt; C:\Users\mark\Stuff\Books\4E\PP4E\dev\Examples\PP4E\Preview\person.pyc
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...more lines here...</span></em>
Found 24 files, removed 24

C:\...\PP4E\Tools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>cleanpyc.py .</code></strong>
=&gt; .\find.pyc
=&gt; .\visitor.pyc
=&gt; .\__init__.pyc
Found 3 files, removed 3</pre>
<p>This script works, but it’s a bit more manual and code-y than
          it needs to be. In fact, now that we also know about find
          operations, writing scripts based upon them is almost trivial when
          we just need to match filenames. Example 6-15, for instance,
          falls back on spawning shell find commands if you have them.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_tools_reverse-id2"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 6-15. PP4E\Tools\cleanpyc-find-shell.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
find and delete all "*.pyc" bytecode files at and below the directory
named on the command-line; assumes a nonportable Unix-like find command
"""

import os, sys

rundir = sys.argv[1]
if sys.platform[:3] == 'win':
    findcmd = r'c:\cygwin\bin\find %s -name "*.pyc" -print' % rundir
else:
    findcmd = 'find %s -name "*.pyc" -print' % rundir
print(findcmd)

count = 0
for fileline in os.popen(findcmd):                  # for all result lines
    count += 1                                      # have \n at the end
    print(fileline, end='')
    os.remove(fileline.rstrip())

print('Removed %d .pyc files' % count)</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>When run, files returned by the shell command are
          removed:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e24052"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Tools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>cleanpyc-find-shell.py .</code></strong>
c:\cygwin\bin\find . -name "*.pyc" -print
./find.pyc
./visitor.pyc
./__init__.pyc
Removed 3 .pyc files</pre>
<p>This script uses <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code>
          to collect the output of a Cygwin <code class="epub__literal">find</code> program installed on one of my
          Windows computers, or else the standard <code class="epub__literal">find</code> tool on the Linux side. It’s also
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>completely nonportable</em></span> to Windows machines that
          don’t have the Unix-like <code class="epub__literal">find</code>
          program installed, and that includes other computers of my own (not
          to mention those throughout most of the world at large). As we’ve
          seen, spawning shell commands also incurs performance penalties for
          starting a new program.</p>
<p>We can do much better on the portability and performance
          fronts and still retain code simplicity, by applying the find tool
          we wrote in Python in the prior section. The new script is shown in
          Example 6-16.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_tools_reverse-id3"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 6-16. PP4E\Tools\cleanpyc-find-py.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
find and delete all "*.pyc" bytecode files at and below the directory
named on the command-line; this uses a Python-coded find utility, and
so is portable; run this to delete .pyc's from an old Python release;
"""

import os, sys, find   # here, gets Tools.find

count = 0
for filename in find.find('*.pyc', sys.argv[1]):
    count += 1
    print(filename)
    os.remove(filename)

print('Removed %d .pyc files' % count)</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>When run, all bytecode files in the tree rooted at the
          passed-in directory name are removed as before; this time, though,
          our script works just about everywhere Python does:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e24086"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Tools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>cleanpyc-find-py.py .</code></strong>
.\find.pyc
.\visitor.pyc
.\__init__.pyc
Removed 3 .pyc files</pre>
<p>This works portably, and it avoids external program startup
          costs. But <code class="epub__literal">find</code> is really just
          half the story—it collects files matching a name pattern but doesn’t
          search their content. Although extra code can add such searching to
          a find’s result, a more manual approach can allow us to tap into the
          search process more directly. The next section shows <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e24096"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e24098"></a>how.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="A Python Tree Searcher"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="a_python_tree_searcher"></a>A Python Tree Searcher</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>After experimenting with greps and globs and finds, in the
          end, to help ease the task of performing global searches on all
          platforms I might ever use, I wound up coding a task-specific Python
          script to do most of the work for me. Example 6-17 employs the
          following standard Python tools that we met in the preceding
          chapters: <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code> to visit files
          in a directory, <code class="epub__literal">os.path.splitext</code>
          to skip over files with binary-type extensions, and <code class="epub__literal">os.path.join</code> to portably combine a
          directory path and filename.</p>
<p>Because it’s pure Python code, it can be run the same way on
          both Linux and Windows. In fact, it should work on any computer
          where Python has been installed. Moreover, because it uses direct
          system calls, it will likely be faster than approaches that rely on
          underlying shell commands.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_tools_reverse-id4"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 6-17. PP4E\Tools\search_all.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
################################################################################
Use: "python ...\Tools\search_all.py dir string".
Search all files at and below a named directory for a string; uses the
os.walk interface, rather than doing a find.find to collect names first;
similar to calling visitfile for each find.find result for "*" pattern;
################################################################################
"""

import os, sys
listonly = False
textexts = ['.py', '.pyw', '.txt', '.c', '.h']             # ignore binary files

def searcher(startdir, searchkey):
    global fcount, vcount
    fcount = vcount = 0
    for (thisDir, dirsHere, filesHere) in os.walk(startdir):
        for fname in filesHere:                            # do non-dir files here
            fpath = os.path.join(thisDir, fname)           # fnames have no dirpath
            visitfile(fpath, searchkey)

def visitfile(fpath, searchkey):                           # for each non-dir file
    global fcount, vcount                                  # search for string
    print(vcount+1, '=&gt;', fpath)                           # skip protected files
    try:
        if not listonly:
            if os.path.splitext(fpath)[1] not in textexts:
                print('Skipping', fpath)
            elif searchkey in open(fpath).read():
                input('%s has %s' % (fpath, searchkey))
                fcount += 1
    except:
        print('Failed:', fpath, sys.exc_info()[0])
    vcount += 1

if __name__ == '__main__':
    searcher(sys.argv[1], sys.argv[2])
    print('Found in %d files, visited %d' % (fcount, vcount))</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Operationally, this script works roughly the same as calling
          its <code class="epub__literal">visitfile</code> function for every
          result generated by our <code class="epub__literal">find.find</code>
          tool with a pattern of “*”; but because this version is specific to
          searching content it can better tailored for its goal. Really, this
          equivalence holds only because a “*” pattern invokes an exhaustive
          traversal in <code class="epub__literal">find.find</code>, and
          that’s all that this new script’s<a id="I_indexterm5_d1e24135"></a> <code class="epub__literal">searcher</code> function
          does. The finder is good at selecting specific file types, but this
          script benefits from a more custom single traversal.</p>
<p>When run standalone, the search key is passed on the command
          line; when imported, clients call this module’s <code class="epub__literal">searcher</code> function directly. For example,
          to search (that is, grep) for all appearances of a string in the
          book examples tree, I run a command line like this in a DOS or Unix
          shell:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e24147"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\\PP4E&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Tools\search_all.py . mimetypes</code></strong>
1 =&gt; .\LaunchBrowser.py
2 =&gt; .\Launcher.py
3 =&gt; .\Launch_PyDemos.pyw
4 =&gt; .\Launch_PyGadgets_bar.pyw
5 =&gt; .\__init__.py
6 =&gt; .\__init__.pyc
Skipping .\__init__.pyc
7 =&gt; .\Preview\attachgui.py
8 =&gt; .\Preview\bob.pkl
Skipping .\Preview\bob.pkl
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...more lines omitted: pauses for Enter key press at matches...</span></em>
Found in 2 files, visited 184</pre>
<p>The script lists each file it checks as it goes, tells you
          which files it is skipping (names that end in extensions not listed
          in the variable <code class="epub__literal">textexts</code> that
          imply binary data), and pauses for an Enter key press each time it
          announces a file containing the search string. The <code class="epub__literal">search_all</code> script works the same way when
          it is <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>imported</em></span> rather than run, but there is no
          final statistics output line (<code class="epub__literal">fcount</code> and <code class="epub__literal">vcount</code> live in the module and so would
          have to be imported to be inspected here):</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e24172"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\dev\Examples\PP4E&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import Tools.search_all</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>search_all.searcher(r'C:\temp\PP3E\Examples', 'mimetypes')</code></strong>
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...more lines omitted: 8 pauses for Enter key press along the way...</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>search_all.fcount, search_all.vcount</code></strong>     # matches, files
(8, 1429)</pre>
<p>However launched, this script tracks down all references to a
          string in an entire directory tree: a name of a changed book
          examples file, object, or directory, for instance. It’s exactly what
          I was looking for—or at least I thought so, until further
          deliberation drove me to seek more complete and better structured
          solutions, the topic of the next <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e24191"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e24193"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e24195"></a>section.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note"><h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p>Be sure to also see the coverage of regular expressions in
            Chapter 19. The <code class="epub__literal">search_all</code> script here searches for a
            simple string in each file with the <code class="epub__literal">in</code> string membership expression, but it
            would be trivial to extend it to search for a regular expression
            pattern match instead (roughly, just replace <code class="epub__literal">in</code> with a call to a regular expression
            object’s search method). Of course, such a mutation will be much
            more trivial after we’ve learned how.</p>
<p>Also notice the <code class="epub__literal">textexts</code>
            list in Example 6-17,
            which attempts to list all possible binary file types: it would be
            more general and robust to use the <code class="epub__literal">mimetypes</code> logic we will meet near the
            end of this chapter in order to guess file content type from its
            name, but the skips list provides more control and sufficed for
            the trees I used this script against.</p>
<p>Finally note that for simplicity many of the directory
            searches in this chapter assume that text is encoded per the
            underlying platform’s Unicode default. They could open text in
            binary mode to avoid decoding errors, but searches might then be
            inaccurate because of encoding scheme differences in the raw
            encoded bytes. To see how to do better, watch for the “grep”
            utility in Chapter 11’s PyEdit GUI,
            which will apply an encoding name to all the files in a searched
            tree and ignore those text or binary files that fail to
            decode.</p>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[22] </sup>In fact, the act of searching files often goes by the
              colloquial name “grepping” among developers who have spent any
              substantial time in the Unix ghetto.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
