<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Visitor: Walking Directories “++”</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Visitor: Walking Directories “++”"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="visitor_colon_walking_directories_quotat"></a>Visitor: Walking Directories “++”</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Laziness is the <a id="dir6.9"></a><a id="sys6.9"></a>mother of many a framework. Armed with the
        portable<a id="I_indexterm5_d1e24242"></a> <code class="epub__literal">search_all</code> script
        from Example 6-17, I was
        able to better pinpoint files to be edited every time I changed the
        book examples tree content or structure. At least initially, in one
        window I ran <code class="epub__literal">search_all</code> to pick out
        suspicious files and edited each along the way by hand in another
        window.</p>
<p>Pretty soon, though, this became tedious, too. Manually typing
        filenames into editor commands is no fun, especially when the number
        of files to edit is large. Since I occasionally have better things to
        do than manually start dozens of text editor sessions, I started
        looking for a way to <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>automatically</em></span> run an editor
        on each suspicious file.</p>
<p>Unfortunately, <code class="epub__literal">search_all</code>
        simply prints results to the screen. Although that text could be
        intercepted with <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code> and
        parsed by another program, a more direct approach that spawns edit
        sessions during the search may be simpler. That would require major
        changes to the tree search script as currently coded, though, and make
        it useful for just one specific purpose. At this point, three thoughts
        came to mind:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Redundancy</span></dt><dd>
<p>After writing a few directory walking utilities, it became
              clear that I was rewriting the same sort of code over and over
              again. Traversals could be even further simplified by wrapping
              common details for reuse. Although the <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code> tool avoids having to write
              recursive functions, its model tends to foster redundant
              operations and code (e.g., directory name joins, tracing
              prints).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Extensibility</span></dt><dd>
<p>Past experience informed me that it would be better in the
              long run to add features to a general directory searcher as
              external components, rather than changing the original script
              itself. Because editing files was just one possible extension
              (what about automating text replacements, too?), a more general,
              customizable, and reusable approach seemed the way to go.
              Although <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code> is
              straightforward to use, its nested loop-based structure doesn’t
              quite lend itself to customization the way a class can.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Encapsulation</span></dt><dd>
<p>Based on past experience, I also knew that it’s a
              generally good idea to insulate programs from implementation
              details as much as possible. While <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code> hides the details of recursive
              traversal, it still imposes a very specific interface on its
              clients, which is prone to change over time. Indeed it has—as
              I’ll explain further at the end of this section, one of Python’s
              tree walkers was removed altogether in 3.X, instantly breaking
              code that relied upon it. It would be better to hide such
              dependencies behind a more neutral interface, so that clients
              won’t break as our needs change.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Of course, if you’ve studied Python in any depth, you know that
        all these goals point to using an <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>object-oriented
        framework</em></span> for traversals and searching. Example 6-18 is a concrete
        realization of these goals. It exports a general<a id="file6.9"></a> <code class="epub__literal">FileVisitor</code> class
        that mostly just wraps <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code> for
        easier use and extension, as well as a generic<a id="se6.9"></a> <code class="epub__literal">SearchVisitor</code> class
        that generalizes the notion of directory searches.</p>
<p>By itself, <code class="epub__literal">SearchVisitor</code>
        simply does what <code class="epub__literal">search_all</code> did,
        but it also opens up the search process to customization—bits of its
        behavior can be modified by overloading its methods in subclasses.
        Moreover, its core search logic can be reused everywhere we need to
        search. Simply define a subclass that adds extensions for a specific
        task. The same goes for <code class="epub__literal">FileVisitor</code>—by redefining its methods and
        using its attributes, we can tap into tree search using OOP coding
        techniques. As is usual in programming, once you repeat
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>tactical</em></span> tasks often enough, they tend to inspire
        this kind of <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>strategic</em></span> <span>thinking</span>.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_tools_reverse-id5"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 6-18. PP4E\Tools\visitor.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
####################################################################################
Test: "python ...\Tools\visitor.py dir testmask [string]".  Uses classes and
subclasses to wrap some of the details of os.walk call usage to walk and search;
testmask is an integer bitmask with 1 bit per available self-test; see also:
visitor_*/.py subclasses use cases; frameworks should generally use__X pseudo
private names, but all names here are exported for use in subclasses and clients;
redefine reset to support multiple independent walks that require subclass updates;
####################################################################################
"""

import os, sys

class FileVisitor:
    """
    Visits all nondirectory files below startDir (default '.');
    override visit* methods to provide custom file/dir handlers;
    context arg/attribute is optional subclass-specific state;
    trace switch: 0 is silent, 1 is directories, 2 adds files
    """
    def __init__(self, context=None, trace=2):
        self.fcount   = 0
        self.dcount   = 0
        self.context  = context
        self.trace    = trace

    def run(self, startDir=os.curdir, reset=True):
        if reset: self.reset()
        for (thisDir, dirsHere, filesHere) in os.walk(startDir):
            self.visitdir(thisDir)
            for fname in filesHere:                          # for non-dir files
                fpath = os.path.join(thisDir, fname)         # fnames have no path
                self.visitfile(fpath)

    def reset(self):                                         # to reuse walker
        self.fcount = self.dcount = 0                        # for independent walks

    def visitdir(self, dirpath):                             # called for each dir
        self.dcount += 1                                     # override or extend me
        if self.trace &gt; 0: print(dirpath, '...')

    def visitfile(self, filepath):                           # called for each file
        self.fcount += 1                                     # override or extend me
        if self.trace &gt; 1: print(self.fcount, '=&gt;', filepath)


class SearchVisitor(FileVisitor):
    """
    Search files at and below startDir for a string;
    subclass: redefine visitmatch, extension lists, candidate as needed;
    subclasses can use testexts to specify file types to search (but can
    also redefine candidate to use mimetypes for text content: see ahead)
    """

    skipexts = []
    testexts = ['.txt', '.py', '.pyw', '.html', '.c', '.h']  # search these exts
   #skipexts = ['.gif', '.jpg', '.pyc', '.o', '.a', '.exe']  # or skip these exts

    def __init__(self, searchkey, trace=2):
        FileVisitor.__init__(self, searchkey, trace)
        self.scount = 0

    def reset(self):                                         # on independent walks
        self.scount = 0

    def candidate(self, fname):                              # redef for mimetypes
        ext = os.path.splitext(fname)[1]
        if self.testexts:
            return ext in self.testexts                      # in test list
        else:                                                # or not in skip list
            return ext not in self.skipexts

    def visitfile(self, fname):                              # test for a match
        FileVisitor.visitfile(self, fname)
        if not self.candidate(fname):
            if self.trace &gt; 0: print('Skipping', fname)
        else:
            text = open(fname).read()                        # 'rb' if undecodable
            if self.context in text:                         # or text.find() != −1
                self.visitmatch(fname, text)
                self.scount += 1

    def visitmatch(self, fname, text):                       # process a match
        print('%s has %s' % (fname, self.context))           # override me lower


if __name__ == '__main__':
    # self-test logic
    dolist   = 1
    dosearch = 2    # 3=do list and search
    donext   = 4    # when next test added

    def selftest(testmask):
        if testmask &amp; dolist:
           visitor = FileVisitor(trace=2)
           visitor.run(sys.argv[2])
           print('Visited %d files and %d dirs' % (visitor.fcount, visitor.dcount))

        if testmask &amp; dosearch:
           visitor = SearchVisitor(sys.argv[3], trace=0)
           visitor.run(sys.argv[2])
           print('Found in %d files, visited %d' % (visitor.scount, visitor.fcount))

    selftest(int(sys.argv[1]))    # e.g., 3 = dolist | dosearch</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>This module primarily serves to export classes for external use,
        but it does something useful when run standalone, too. If you invoke
        it as a script with a test mask of <code class="epub__literal">1</code> and a root directory name, it makes and
        runs a <code class="epub__literal">FileVisitor</code> object and
        prints an exhaustive listing of every file and directory at and below
        the root:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e24354"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Tools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>visitor.py 1 C:\temp\PP3E\Examples</code></strong>
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples ...
1 =&gt; C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\README-root.txt
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E ...
2 =&gt; C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\echoEnvironment.pyw
3 =&gt; C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\LaunchBrowser.pyw
4 =&gt; C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\Launcher.py
5 =&gt; C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\Launcher.pyc
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...more output omitted (pipe into more or a file)...</span></em>
1424 =&gt; C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\System\Threads\thread-count.py
1425 =&gt; C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\System\Threads\thread1.py
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\TempParts ...
1426 =&gt; C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\TempParts\109_0237.JPG
1427 =&gt; C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\TempParts\lawnlake1-jan-03.jpg
1428 =&gt; C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\TempParts\part-001.txt
1429 =&gt; C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\TempParts\part-002.html
Visited 1429 files and 186 dirs</pre>
<p>If you instead invoke this script with a <code class="epub__literal">2</code> as its first command-line argument, it
        makes and runs a <code class="epub__literal">SearchVisitor</code>
        object using the third argument as the search key. This form is
        similar to running the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>search_all.py</em></span> script we
        met earlier, but it simply reports each matching file without
        pausing:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e24374"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Tools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>visitor.py 2 C:\temp\PP3E\Examples mimetypes</code></strong>
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\extras\LosAlamosAdvancedClass\day1-system\data.txt ha
s mimetypes
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\Internet\Email\mailtools\mailParser.py has mimetypes
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\Internet\Email\mailtools\mailSender.py has mimetypes
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\Internet\Ftp\mirror\downloadflat.py has mimetypes
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\Internet\Ftp\mirror\downloadflat_modular.py has mimet
ypes
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\Internet\Ftp\mirror\ftptools.py has mimetypes
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\Internet\Ftp\mirror\uploadflat.py has mimetypes
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\System\Media\playfile.py has mimetypes
Found in 8 files, visited 1429</pre>
<p>Technically, passing this script a first argument of <code class="epub__literal">3</code> runs <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>both</em></span> a <code class="epub__literal">FileVisitor</code> and a <code class="epub__literal">SearchVisitor</code> (two separate traversals are
        performed). The first argument is really used as a bit mask to select
        one or more supported self-tests; if a test’s bit is on in the binary
        value of the argument, the test will be run. Because 3 is 011 in
        binary, it selects both a search (010) and a listing (001). In a more
        user-friendly system, we might want to be more symbolic about that
        (e.g., check for <code class="epub__literal">-search</code> and
        <code class="epub__literal">-list</code> arguments), but bit masks
        work just as well for this script’s scope.</p>
<p>As usual, this module can also be used interactively. The
        following is one way to determine how many files and directories you
        have in specific directories; the last command walks over your entire
        drive (after a generally noticeable delay!). See also the “biggest
        file” example at the start of this chapter for issues such as
        potential repeat visits not handled by this walker:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e24402"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Tools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from visitor import FileVisitor</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>V = FileVisitor(trace=0)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>V.run(r'C:\temp\PP3E\Examples')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>V.dcount, V.fcount</code></strong>
(186, 1429)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>V.run('..')</code></strong>                        # independent walk (reset counts)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>V.dcount, V.fcount</code></strong>
(19, 181)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>V.run('..', reset=False)</code></strong>           # accumulative walk (keep counts)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>V.dcount, V.fcount</code></strong>
(38, 362)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>V = FileVisitor(trace=0)</code></strong>           # new independent walker (own counts)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>V.run(r'C:\\')</code></strong>                     # entire drive: try '/' on Unix-en
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>V.dcount, V.fcount</code></strong>
(24992, 198585)</pre>
<p>Although the visitor module is useful by itself for listing and
        searching trees, it was really designed to be extended. In the rest of
        this section, let’s quickly step through a handful of visitor clients
        which add more specific tree operations, using normal OO customization
        <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e24444"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e24446"></a>techniques.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Editing Files in Directory Trees (Visitor)"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="editing_files_in_directory_trees_open_pa"></a>Editing Files in Directory Trees (Visitor)</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>After genericizing tree <a id="dir6.9.1"></a><a id="files6.9.1"></a><a id="edit6.9.1"></a>traversals and searches, it’s easy to add automatic
          file editing in a brand-new, separate component. Example 6-19 defines a
          new<a id="I_indexterm5_d1e24470"></a> <code class="epub__literal">EditVisitor</code> class
          that simply customizes the <code class="epub__literal">visitmatch</code> method of the <code class="epub__literal">SearchVisitor</code> class to open a text editor
          on the matched file. Yes, this is the complete program—it needs to
          do something special only when visiting matched files, and so it
          needs to provide only that behavior. The rest of the traversal and
          search logic is unchanged and inherited.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_tools_reverse-id6"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 6-19. PP4E\Tools\visitor_edit.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
Use: "python ...\Tools\visitor_edit.py string rootdir?".
Add auto-editor startup to SearchVisitor in an external subclass component;
Automatically pops up an editor on each file containing string as it traverses;
can also use editor='edit' or 'notepad' on Windows; to use texteditor from
later in the book, try r'python Gui\TextEditor\textEditor.py'; could also
send a search command to go to the first match on start in some editors;
"""

import os, sys
from visitor import SearchVisitor

class EditVisitor(SearchVisitor):
    """
    edit files at and below startDir having string
    """
    editor = r'C:\cygwin\bin\vim-nox.exe'  # ymmv!

    def visitmatch(self, fpathname, text):
        os.system('%s %s' % (self.editor, fpathname))

if __name__  == '__main__':
    visitor = EditVisitor(sys.argv[1])
    visitor.run('.' if len(sys.argv) &lt; 3 else sys.argv[2])
    print('Edited %d files, visited %d' % (visitor.scount, visitor.fcount))</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>When we make and run an <code class="epub__literal">EditVisitor</code>, a text editor is started with
          the <code class="epub__literal">os.system</code> command-line spawn
          call, which usually blocks its caller until the spawned program
          finishes. As coded, when run on my machines, each time this script
          finds a matched file during the traversal, it starts up the vi text
          editor within the console window where the script was started;
          exiting the editor resumes the tree walk.</p>
<p>Let’s find and edit some files. When run as a script, we pass
          this program the search string as a command argument (here, the
          string <code class="epub__literal">mimetypes</code> is the search
          key). The root directory passed to the <code class="epub__literal">run</code> method is either the second argument
          or “.” (the current run directory) by default. Traversal status
          messages show up in the console, but each matched file now
          automatically pops up in a text editor along the way. In the
          following, the editor is started eight times—try this with an editor
          and tree of your own to get a better feel for how it works:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e24505"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Tools&gt; visitor<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>_edit.py mimetypes C:\temp\PP3E\Examples</code></strong>
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples ...
1 =&gt; C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\README-root.txt
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E ...
2 =&gt; C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\echoEnvironment.pyw
3 =&gt; C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\LaunchBrowser.pyw
4 =&gt; C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\Launcher.py
5 =&gt; C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\Launcher.pyc
Skipping C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\Launcher.pyc
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...more output omitted...</span></em>
1427 =&gt; C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\TempParts\lawnlake1-jan-03.jpg
Skipping C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\TempParts\lawnlake1-jan-03.jpg
1428 =&gt; C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\TempParts\part-001.txt
1429 =&gt; C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\TempParts\part-002.html
Edited 8 files, visited 1429</pre>
<p>This, finally, is the exact tool I was looking for to simplify
          global book examples tree maintenance. After major changes to things
          such as shared modules and file and directory names, I run this
          script on the examples root directory with an appropriate search
          string and edit any files it pops up as needed. I still need to
          change files by hand in the editor, but that’s often safer than
          blind global <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e24515"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e24517"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e24519"></a>replacements.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Global Replacements in Directory Trees (Visitor)"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="global_replacements_in_directory_trees_o"></a>Global Replacements in Directory Trees (Visitor)</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>But since I brought it up: <a id="dir6.9.2"></a>given a general tree traversal class, it’s easy to
          code a global search-and-replace subclass, too. The<a id="I_indexterm5_d1e24533"></a> <code class="epub__literal">ReplaceVisitor</code>
          class in Example 6-20
          is a <code class="epub__literal">SearchVisitor</code> subclass that
          customizes the <code class="epub__literal">visitfile</code> method
          to globally replace any appearances of one string with another, in
          all text files at and below a root directory. It also collects the
          names of all files that were changed in a list just in case you wish
          to go through and verify the automatic edits applied (a text editor
          could be automatically popped up on each changed file, for
          instance).</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_tools_reverse-id7"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 6-20. PP4E\Tools\visitor_replace.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
Use: "python ...\Tools\visitor_replace.py rootdir fromStr toStr".
Does global search-and-replace in all files in a directory tree: replaces
fromStr with toStr in all text files; this is powerful but dangerous!!
visitor_edit.py runs an editor for you to verify and make changes, and so
is safer; use visitor_collect.py to simply collect matched files list;
listonly mode here is similar to both SearchVisitor and CollectVisitor;
"""

import sys
from visitor import SearchVisitor

class ReplaceVisitor(SearchVisitor):
    """
    Change fromStr to toStr in files at and below startDir;
    files changed available in obj.changed list after a run
    """
    def __init__(self, fromStr, toStr, listOnly=False, trace=0):
        self.changed  = []
        self.toStr    = toStr
        self.listOnly = listOnly
        SearchVisitor.__init__(self, fromStr, trace)

    def visitmatch(self, fname, text):
        self.changed.append(fname)
        if not self.listOnly:
            fromStr, toStr = self.context, self.toStr
            text = text.replace(fromStr, toStr)
            open(fname, 'w').write(text)

if __name__  == '__main__':
    listonly = input('List only?') == 'y'
    visitor  = ReplaceVisitor(sys.argv[2], sys.argv[3], listonly)
    if listonly or input('Proceed with changes?') == 'y':
        visitor.run(startDir=sys.argv[1])
        action = 'Changed' if not listonly else 'Found'
        print('Visited %d files'  % visitor.fcount)
        print(action, '%d files:' % len(visitor.changed))
        for fname in visitor.changed: print(fname)</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>To run this script over a directory tree, run the following
          sort of command line with appropriate “from” and “to” strings. On my
          shockingly underpowered netbook machine, doing this on a 1429-file
          tree and changing 101 files along the way takes roughly three
          seconds of real clock time when the system isn’t particularly
          busy.</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e24556"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Tools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>visitor_replace.py C:\temp\PP3E\Examples PP3E PP4E</code></strong>
List only?<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y</code></strong>
Visited 1429 files
Found 101 files:
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\README-root.txt
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\echoEnvironment.pyw
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\Launcher.py
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...more matching filenames omitted...</span></em>

C:\...\PP4E\Tools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>visitor_replace.py C:\temp\PP3E\Examples PP3E PP4E</code></strong>
List only?<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>n</code></strong>
Proceed with changes?<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y</code></strong>
Visited 1429 files
Changed 101 files:
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\README-root.txt
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\echoEnvironment.pyw
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\Launcher.py
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...more changed filenames omitted...</span></em>

C:\...\PP4E\Tools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>visitor_replace.py C:\temp\PP3E\Examples PP3E PP4E</code></strong>
List only?<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>n</code></strong>
Proceed with changes?<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y</code></strong>
Visited 1429 files
Changed 0 files:</pre>
<p>Naturally, we can also check our work by running the visitor
          script (and <code class="epub__literal">Search</code><code class="epub__literal">Visitor</code> superclass):</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e24596"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Tools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>visitor.py 2 C:\temp\PP3E\Examples PP3E</code></strong>
Found in 0 files, visited 1429

C:\...\PP4E\Tools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>visitor.py 2 C:\temp\PP3E\Examples PP4E</code></strong>
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\README-root.txt has PP4E
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\echoEnvironment.pyw has PP4E
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\Launcher.py has PP4E
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...more matching filenames omitted...</span></em>
Found in 101 files, visited 1429</pre>
<p>This is both wildly powerful and dangerous. If the string to
          be replaced can show up in places you didn’t anticipate, you might
          just ruin an entire tree of files by running the <code class="epub__literal">ReplaceVisitor</code> object defined here. On the
          other hand, if the string is something very specific, this object
          can obviate the need to manually edit suspicious files. For
          instance, website addresses in HTML files are likely too specific to
          show up in other places by <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e24612"></a>chance.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Counting Source Code Lines (Visitor)"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="counting_source_code_lines_open_parenthe"></a>Counting Source Code Lines (Visitor)</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The two <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e24620"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e24625"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e24628"></a>preceding <code class="epub__literal">visitor</code>
          module clients were both search-oriented, but it’s just as easy to
          extend the basic walker class for more specific goals. Example 6-21, for instance,
          extends <code class="epub__literal">FileVisitor</code> to count the
          number of lines in program source code files of various types
          throughout an entire tree. The effect is much like calling the
          <code class="epub__literal">visitfile</code> method of this class
          for each filename returned by the <code class="epub__literal">find</code> tool we wrote earlier in this
          chapter, but the OO structure here is arguably more flexible and
          extensible.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_tools_reverse-id8"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 6-21. PP4E\Tools\visitor_sloc.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
Count lines among all program source files in a tree named on the command
line, and report totals grouped by file types (extension).  A simple SLOC
(source lines of code) metric: skip blank and comment lines if desired.
"""

import sys, pprint, os
from visitor import FileVisitor

class LinesByType(FileVisitor):
    srcExts = [] # define in subclass

    def __init__(self, trace=1):
        FileVisitor.__init__(self, trace=trace)
        self.srcLines = self.srcFiles = 0
        self.extSums = {ext: dict(files=0, lines=0) for ext in self.srcExts}

    def visitsource(self, fpath, ext):
        if self.trace &gt; 0: print(os.path.basename(fpath))
        lines = len(open(fpath, 'rb').readlines())
        self.srcFiles += 1
        self.srcLines += lines
        self.extSums[ext]['files'] += 1
        self.extSums[ext]['lines'] += lines

    def visitfile(self, filepath):
        FileVisitor.visitfile(self, filepath)
        for ext in self.srcExts:
            if filepath.endswith(ext):
                self.visitsource(filepath, ext)
                break

class PyLines(LinesByType):
    srcExts = ['.py', '.pyw']   # just python files

class SourceLines(LinesByType):
    srcExts = ['.py', '.pyw', '.cgi', '.html', '.c', '.cxx', '.h', '.i']

if __name__ == '__main__':
    walker = SourceLines()
    walker.run(sys.argv[1])
    print('Visited %d files and %d dirs' % (walker.fcount, walker.dcount))
    print('-'*80)
    print('Source files=&gt;%d, lines=&gt;%d'  % (walker.srcFiles, walker.srcLines))
    print('By Types:')
    pprint.pprint(walker.extSums)

    print('\nCheck sums:', end=' ')
    print(sum(x['lines'] for x in walker.extSums.values()), end=' ')
    print(sum(x['files'] for x in walker.extSums.values()))

    print('\nPython only walk:')
    walker = PyLines(trace=0)
    walker.run(sys.argv[1])
    pprint.pprint(walker.extSums)</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>When run as a script, we get trace messages during the walk
          (omitted here to save space), and a report with line counts grouped
          by file type. Run this on trees of your own to watch its progress;
          my tree has 907 source files and 48K source lines, including 783
          files and 34K lines of “.py” Python code:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e24654"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Tools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>visitor_sloc.py C:\temp\PP3E\Examples</code></strong>
Visited 1429 files and 186 dirs
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source files=&gt;907, lines=&gt;48047
By Types:
{'.c': {'files': 45, 'lines': 7370},
 '.cgi': {'files': 5, 'lines': 122},
 '.cxx': {'files': 4, 'lines': 2278},
 '.h': {'files': 7, 'lines': 297},
 '.html': {'files': 48, 'lines': 2830},
 '.i': {'files': 4, 'lines': 49},
 '.py': {'files': 783, 'lines': 34601},
 '.pyw': {'files': 11, 'lines': 500}}

Check sums: 48047 907

Python only walk:
{'.py': {'files': 783, 'lines': 34601}, '.pyw': {'files': 11, 'lines': 500}}</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Recoding Copies with Classes (Visitor)"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="recoding_copies_with_classes_open_parent"></a>Recoding Copies with Classes (Visitor)</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Let’s peek <a id="sys6.9.4"></a>at one more visitor use case. When I first wrote the
          <code class="epub__literal">cpall.py</code> script earlier in this
          chapter, I couldn’t see a way that the <code class="epub__literal">visitor</code> class hierarchy we met earlier
          would help. <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Two</em></span> directories needed to be
          traversed in parallel (the original and the copy), and <code class="epub__literal">visitor</code> is based on walking just one tree
          with <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code>. There seemed no
          easy way to keep track of where the script was in the copy
          directory.</p>
<p>The trick I eventually stumbled onto is not to keep track at
          all. Instead, the script in Example 6-22 simply replaces
          the “from” directory path string with the “to” directory path
          string, at the front of all directory names and pathnames passed in
          from <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code>. The results of the
          string replacements are the paths to which the original files and
          directories are to be copied.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_tools_reverse-id9"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 6-22. PP4E\Tools\visitor_cpall.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
Use: "python ...\Tools\visitor_cpall.py fromDir toDir trace?"
Like System\Filetools\cpall.py, but with the visitor classes and os.walk;
does string replacement of fromDir with toDir at the front of all the names
that the walker passes in; assumes that the toDir does not exist initially;
"""

import os
from visitor import FileVisitor                       # visitor is in '.'
from PP4E.System.Filetools.cpall import copyfile      # PP4E is in a dir on path

class CpallVisitor(FileVisitor):
    def __init__(self, fromDir, toDir, trace=True):
        self.fromDirLen = len(fromDir) + 1
        self.toDir      = toDir
        FileVisitor.__init__(self, trace=trace)

    def visitdir(self, dirpath):
        toPath = os.path.join(self.toDir, dirpath[self.fromDirLen:])
        if self.trace: print('d', dirpath, '=&gt;', toPath)
        os.mkdir(toPath)
        self.dcount += 1

    def visitfile(self, filepath):
        toPath = os.path.join(self.toDir, filepath[self.fromDirLen:])
        if self.trace: print('f', filepath, '=&gt;', toPath)
        copyfile(filepath, toPath)
        self.fcount += 1

if __name__ == '__main__':
    import sys, time
    fromDir, toDir = sys.argv[1:3]
    trace = len(sys.argv) &gt; 3
    print('Copying...')
    start = time.clock()
    walker = CpallVisitor(fromDir, toDir, trace)
    walker.run(startDir=fromDir)
    print('Copied', walker.fcount, 'files,', walker.dcount, 'directories', end=' ')
    print('in', time.clock() - start, 'seconds')</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>This version accomplishes roughly the same goal as the
          original, but it has made a few assumptions to keep the code simple.
          The “to” directory is assumed not to exist initially, and exceptions
          are not ignored along the way. Here it is copying the book examples
          tree from the prior edition again on Windows:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e24701"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Tools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>set PYTHONPATH</code></strong>
PYTHONPATH=C:\Users\Mark\Stuff\Books\4E\PP4E\dev\Examples

C:\...\PP4E\Tools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rmdir /S copytemp</code></strong>
copytemp, Are you sure (Y/N)? <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y</code></strong>

C:\...\PP4E\Tools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>visitor_cpall.py C:\temp\PP3E\Examples copytemp</code></strong>
Copying...
Copied 1429 files, 186 directories in 11.1722033777 seconds

C:\...\PP4E\Tools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>fc /B copytemp\PP3E\Launcher.py</code></strong>
                         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\Launcher.py</code></strong>
Comparing files COPYTEMP\PP3E\Launcher.py and C:\TEMP\PP3E\EXAMPLES\PP3E\LAUNCHER.PY
FC: no differences encountered</pre>
<p>Despite the extra string slicing going on, this version seems
          to run just as fast as the original (the actual difference can be
          chalked up to system load variations). For tracing purposes, this
          version also prints all the “from” and “to” copy paths during the
          traversal if you pass in a third argument on the command <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e24724"></a>line:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e24727"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Tools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rmdir /S copytemp</code></strong>
copytemp, Are you sure (Y/N)? <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y</code></strong>

C:\...\PP4E\Tools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>visitor_cpall.py C:\temp\PP3E\Examples copytemp 1</code></strong>
Copying...
d C:\temp\PP3E\Examples =&gt; copytemp\
f C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\README-root.txt =&gt; copytemp\README-root.txt
d C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E =&gt; copytemp\PP3E
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...more lines omitted: try this on your own for the full output...</span></em></pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Other Visitor Examples (External)"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="other_visitor_examples_open_parenthesis"></a>Other Visitor Examples (External)</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Although the <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e24745"></a>visitor is widely applicable, we don’t have space to
          explore additional subclasses in this book. For more example clients
          and use cases, see the following examples in book’s examples
          distribution package described in the Preface:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><em class="epub__filename">Tools\visitor_collect.py</em> collects
              and/or prints files containing a search string</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><em class="epub__filename">Tools\visitor_poundbang.py</em> replaces
              directory paths in “#!” lines at the top of Unix scripts</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><em class="epub__filename">Tools\visitor_cleanpyc.py</em> is a
              visitor-based recoding of our earlier bytecode cleanup
              scripts</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><em class="epub__filename">Tools\visitor_bigpy.py</em> is a
              visitor-based version of the “biggest file” example at the start
              of this chapter</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Most of these are almost as trivial as the <em class="epub__filename">visitor_edit.py</em> code in Example 6-19, because the
          visitor framework handles walking details automatically. The
          collector, for instance, simply appends to a list as a search
          visitor detects matched files and allows the default list of text
          filename extensions in the search visitor to be overridden per
          <span>instance—</span>it’s roughly like a
          combination of <code class="epub__literal">find</code> and <code class="epub__literal">grep</code> on Unix:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e24791"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from visitor_collect import CollectVisitor</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>V = CollectVisitor('mimetypes', testexts=['.py', '.pyw'], trace=0)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>V.run(r'C:\temp\PP3E\Examples')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for name in V.matches: print(name)</code></strong>        # .py and .pyw files with 'mimetypes'
...
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\Internet\Email\mailtools\mailParser.py
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\Internet\Email\mailtools\mailSender.py
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\Internet\Ftp\mirror\downloadflat.py
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\Internet\Ftp\mirror\downloadflat_modular.py
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\Internet\Ftp\mirror\ftptools.py
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\Internet\Ftp\mirror\uploadflat.py
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\System\Media\playfile.py

C:\...\PP4E\Tools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>visitor_collect.py mimetypes C:\temp\PP3E\Examples</code></strong>   # as script</pre>
<p>The core logic of the biggest-file visitor is similarly
          straightforward, and harkens back to chapter start:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e24810"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class BigPy(FileVisitor):
    def __init__(self, trace=0):
        FileVisitor.__init__(self, context=[], trace=trace)

    def visitfile(self, filepath):
        FileVisitor.visitfile(self, filepath)
        if filepath.endswith('.py'):
            self.context.append((os.path.getsize(filepath), filepath))</pre>
<p>And the bytecode-removal visitor brings us back full circle,
          showing an additional alternative to those we met earlier in this
          chapter. It’s essentially the same code, but it runs <code class="epub__literal">os.remove</code> on “.pyc” file visits.</p>
<p>In the end, while the visitor classes are really just simple
          wrappers for <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code>, they
          further automate walking chores and provide a general framework and
          alternative class-based structure which may seem more natural to
          some than simple unstructured loops. They’re also representative of
          how Python’s OOP support maps well to real-world structures like
          file systems. Although <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code>
          works well for one-off scripts, the better extensibility, reduced
          redundancy, and greater encapsulation possible with OOP can be a
          major asset in real work as our needs change and evolve over
          <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e24825"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e24827"></a>time.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note"><h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p>In fact, those needs <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>have</em></span> changed over
            time. Between the third and fourth editions of this book, the
            original <code class="epub__literal">os.path.walk</code> call was
            removed in Python 3.X, and <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code> became the only automated way to
            perform tree walks in the standard library. Examples from the
            prior edition that used <code class="epub__literal">os.path.walk</code> were effectively broken. By
            contrast, although the visitor classes used this call, too, its
            clients did not. Because updating the visitor classes to use
            <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code> internally did not
            alter those classes’ interfaces, visitor-based tools continued to
            work unchanged.</p>
<p>This seems a prime example of the benefits of OOP’s support
            for encapsulation. Although the future is never completely
            predictable, in practice, user-defined tools like visitor tend to
            give you more control over changes than standard library tools
            like <code class="epub__literal">os.walk</code>. Trust me on that;
            as someone who has had to update three Python books over the last
            15 years, I can say with some certainty that Python change is a
            constant!</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
