<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Playing Media Files</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Playing Media Files"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="playing_media_files"></a>Playing Media Files</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>We have <a id="sys6.10"></a><a id="me6.10"></a>space for just one last, quick example in this chapter,
        so we’ll close with a bit of fun. Did you notice how the file
        extensions for text and binary file types were hard-coded in the
        directory search scripts of the prior two sections? That approach
        works for the trees they were applied to, but it’s not necessarily
        complete or portable. It would be better if we could deduce file type
        from file name automatically. That’s exactly what Python’s<a id="mime6.10"></a> <code class="epub__literal">mimetypes</code> module can
        do for us. In this section, we’ll use it to build a script that
        attempts to launch a file based upon its media type, and in the
        process develop general tools for opening media portably with specific
        or generic players.</p>
<p>As we’ve seen, on Windows this task is trivial—the <code class="epub__literal">os.startfile</code> call opens files per the
        Windows registry, a system-wide mapping of file extension types to
        handler programs. On other platforms, we can either run specific media
        handlers per media type, or fall back on a resident web browser to
        open the file generically using Python’s<a id="web6.10"></a> <code class="epub__literal">webbrowser</code> module.
        Example 6-23 puts these ideas
        into code.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_system-id62"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 6-23. PP4E\System\Media\playfile.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">#!/usr/local/bin/python
"""
##################################################################################
Try to play an arbitrary media file.  Allows for specific players instead of
always using general web browser scheme.  May not work on your system as is;
audio files use filters and command lines on Unix, and filename associations
on Windows via the start command (i.e., whatever you have on your machine to
run .au files--an audio player, or perhaps a web browser).  Configure and
extend as needed.  playknownfile assumes you know what sort of media you wish
to open, and playfile tries to determine media type automatically using Python
mimetypes module; both try to launch a web browser with Python webbrowser module
as a last resort when mimetype or platform unknown.
##################################################################################
"""

import os, sys, mimetypes, webbrowser

helpmsg = """
Sorry: can't find a media player for '%s' on your system!
Add an entry for your system to the media player dictionary
for this type of file in playfile.py, or play the file manually.
"""

def trace(*args): print(*args)   # with spaces between

##################################################################################
# player techniques: generic and otherwise: extend me
##################################################################################

class MediaTool:
    def __init__(self, runtext=''):
        self.runtext = runtext
    def run(self, mediafile, **options):            # most ignore options
        fullpath = os.path.abspath(mediafile)       # cwd may be anything
        self.open(fullpath, **options)

class Filter(MediaTool):
    def open(self, mediafile, **ignored):
        media  = open(mediafile, 'rb')
        player = os.popen(self.runtext, 'w')        # spawn shell tool
        player.write(media.read())                  # send to its stdin

class Cmdline(MediaTool):
    def open(self, mediafile, **ignored):
        cmdline = self.runtext % mediafile          # run any cmd line
        os.system(cmdline)                          # use %s for filename

class Winstart(MediaTool):                          # use Windows registry
    def open(self, mediafile, wait=False, **other): # or os.system('start file')
        if not wait:                                # allow wait for curr media
            os.startfile(mediafile)
        else:
            os.system('start /WAIT ' + mediafile)

class Webbrowser(MediaTool):
    # file:// requires abs path
    def open(self, mediafile, **options):
        webbrowser.open_new('file://%s' % mediafile, **options)

##################################################################################
# media- and platform-specific policies: change me, or pass one in
##################################################################################

# map platform to player: change me!

audiotools = {
    'sunos5':  Filter('/usr/bin/audioplay'),             # os.popen().write()
    'linux2':  Cmdline('cat %s &gt; /dev/audio'),           # on zaurus, at least
    'sunos4':  Filter('/usr/demo/SOUND/play'),           # yes, this is that old!
    'win32':   Winstart()                                # startfile or system
   #'win32':   Cmdline('start %s')
    }

videotools = {
    'linux2':  Cmdline('tkcVideo_c700 %s'),              # zaurus pda
    'win32':   Winstart(),                               # avoid DOS pop up
    }

imagetools = {
    'linux2':  Cmdline('zimager %s'),                    # zaurus pda
    'win32':   Winstart(),
    }

texttools = {
    'linux2':  Cmdline('vi %s'),                         # zaurus pda
    'win32':   Cmdline('notepad %s')                     # or try PyEdit?
    }

apptools = {
    'win32':   Winstart()   # doc, xls, etc: use at your own risk!
    }

# map mimetype of filenames to player tables

mimetable = {'audio':       audiotools,
             'video':       videotools,
             'image':       imagetools,
             'text':        texttools,                   # not html text: browser
             'application': apptools}

##################################################################################
# top-level interfaces
##################################################################################

def trywebbrowser(filename, helpmsg=helpmsg, **options):
    """
    try to open a file in a web browser
    last resort if unknown mimetype or platform, and for text/html
    """
    trace('trying browser', filename)
    try:
        player = Webbrowser()                            # open in local browser
        player.run(filename, **options)
    except:
        print(helpmsg % filename)                        # else nothing worked

def playknownfile(filename, playertable={}, **options):
    """
    play media file of known type: uses platform-specific
    player objects, or spawns a web browser if nothing for
    this platform; accepts a media-specific player table
    """
    if sys.platform in playertable:
        playertable[sys.platform].run(filename, **options)     # specific tool
    else:
        trywebbrowser(filename, **options)                     # general scheme

def playfile(filename, mimetable=mimetable, **options):
    """
    play media file of any type: uses mimetypes to guess media
    type and map to platform-specific player tables; spawn web
    browser if text/html, media type unknown, or has no table
    """
    contenttype, encoding = mimetypes.guess_type(filename)        # check name
    if contenttype == None or encoding is not None:               # can't guess
        contenttype = '?/?'                                       # poss .txt.gz
    maintype, subtype = contenttype.split('/', 1)                 # 'image/jpeg'
    if maintype == 'text' and subtype == 'html':
        trywebbrowser(filename, **options)                        # special case
    elif maintype in mimetable:
        playknownfile(filename, mimetable[maintype], **options)   # try table
    else:
        trywebbrowser(filename, **options)                        # other types

###############################################################################
# self-test code
###############################################################################

if __name__ == '__main__':
    # media type known
    playknownfile('sousa.au', audiotools, wait=True)
    playknownfile('ora-pp3e.gif', imagetools, wait=True)
    playknownfile('ora-lp4e.jpg', imagetools)

    # media type guessed
    input('Stop players and press Enter')
    playfile('ora-lp4e.jpg')                     # image/jpeg
    playfile('ora-pp3e.gif')                     # image/gif
    playfile('priorcalendar.html')               # text/html
    playfile('lp4e-preface-preview.html')        # text/html
    playfile('lp-code-readme.txt')               # text/plain
    playfile('spam.doc')                         # app
    playfile('spreadsheet.xls')                  # app
    playfile('sousa.au', wait=True)              # audio/basic
    input('Done')                                # stay open if clicked</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Although it’s generally possible to open most media files by
        passing their names to a web browser these days, this module provides
        a simple framework for launching media files with more specific tools,
        tailored by both media type and platform. A web browser is used only
        as a fallback option, if more specific tools are not available. The
        net result is an extendable media file player, which is as specific
        and portable as the customizations you provide for its tables.</p>
<p>We’ve seen the program launch tools employed by this script in
        prior chapters. The script’s main new concepts have to do with the
        modules it uses: the <code class="epub__literal">webbrowser</code>
        module to open some files in a local web browser, as well as the
        Python <code class="epub__literal">mimetypes</code> module to
        determine media type from file name. Since these are the heart of this
        code’s matter, let’s explore these briefly before we run the
        <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e24905"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e24907"></a>script.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The Python webbrowser Module"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_python_webbrowser_module"></a>The Python webbrowser Module</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The standard library <code class="epub__literal">webbrowser</code> module <a id="web6.10.1"></a>used by this example provides a portable interface for
          launching web browsers from Python scripts. It attempts to locate a
          suitable web browser on your local machine to open a given URL (file
          or web address) for display. Its interface is
          straightforward:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e24922"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; import webbrowser
&gt;&gt;&gt; webbrowser.open_new('file://' + <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>fullfilename</code></em>)         # use os.path.abspath()</pre>
<p>This code will open the named file in a new web browser window
          using whatever browser is found on the underlying computer, or raise
          an exception if it cannot. You can tailor the browsers used on your
          platform, and the order in which they are attempted, by using the
          <code class="epub__literal">BROWSER</code> environment variable and
          <code class="epub__literal">register</code> function. By default,
          <code class="epub__literal">webbrowser</code> attempts to be
          automatically portable across platforms.</p>
<p>Use an argument string of the form “file://...” or
          “http://...” to open a file on the local computer or web server,
          respectively. In fact, you can pass in any URL that the browser
          understands. The following pops up Python’s home page in a new
          locally-running browser window, for example:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e24940"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; webbrowser.open_new('http://www.python.org')</pre>
<p>Among other things, this is an easy way to display HTML
          documents as well as media files, as demonstrated by this section’s
          example. For broader applicability, this module can be used as both
          command-line script (Python’s <code class="epub__literal">-m</code>
          module search path flag helps here) and as importable tool:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e24947"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\Users\mark\Stuff\Websites\public_html&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python -m webbrowser about-pp.html</code></strong>
C:\Users\mark\Stuff\Websites\public_html&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python -m webbrowser -n about-pp.html</code></strong>
C:\Users\mark\Stuff\Websites\public_html&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python -m webbrowser -t about-pp.html</code></strong>

C:\Users\mark\Stuff\Websites\public_html&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import webbrowser</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>webbrowser.open('about-pp.html')</code></strong>            # reuse, new window, new tab
True
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>webbrowser.open_new('about-pp.html')</code></strong>        # file:// optional on Windows
True
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>webbrowser.open_new_tab('about-pp.html')</code></strong>
True</pre>
<p>In both modes, the difference between the three usage forms is
          that the first tries to reuse an already-open browser window if
          possible, the second tries to open a new window, and the third tries
          to open a new tab. In practice, though, their behavior is totally
          dependent on what the browser selected on your platform supports,
          and even on the platform in general. All three forms may behave the
          same.</p>
<p>On Windows, for example, all three simply run <code class="epub__literal">os.startfile</code> by default and thus create a
          new tab in an existing window under Internet Explorer 8. This is
          also why I didn’t need the “file://” full URL prefix in the
          preceding listing. Technically, Internet Explorer is only run if
          this is what is registered on your computer for the file type being
          opened; if not, that file type’s handler is opened instead. Some
          images, for example, may open in a photo viewer instead. On other
          platforms, such as Unix and Mac OS X, browser behavior differs, and
          non-URL file names might not be opened; use “file://” for <span>portability</span>.</p>
<p>We’ll use this module again later in this book. For example,
          the PyMailGUI program in Chapter 14
          will employ it as a way to display HTML-formatted email messages and
          attachments, as well as program help. See the Python library manual
          for more details. In Chapters 13 and 15,
          we’ll also meet a related call, <code class="epub__literal">urllib.request.urlopen</code>, which fetches a
          web page’s text given a URL, but does not open it in a browser; it
          may be parsed, saved, or otherwise <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e24995"></a>used.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The Python mimetypes Module"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_python_mimetypes_module"></a>The Python mimetypes Module</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To make this <a id="mime6.10.2"></a>media player module even more useful, we also use the
          Python <code class="epub__literal">mimetypes</code> standard library module to
          automatically determine the media type from the filename. We get
          back a <code class="epub__literal">type/subtype</code> MIME
          content-type string if the type can be determined or <code class="epub__literal">None</code> if the guess failed:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e25018"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import mimetypes</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mimetypes.guess_type('spam.jpg')</code></strong>
('image/jpeg', None)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mimetypes.guess_type('TheBrightSideOfLife.mp3')</code></strong>
('audio/mpeg', None)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mimetypes.guess_type('lifeofbrian.mpg')</code></strong>
('video/mpeg', None)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mimetypes.guess_type('lifeofbrian.xyz')</code></strong>       # unknown type
(None, None)</pre>
<p>Stripping off the first part of the content-type string gives
          the file’s general media type, which we can use to select a generic
          player; the second part (subtype) can tell us if text is plain or
          HTML:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e25037"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>contype, encoding = mimetypes.guess_type('spam.jpg')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>contype.split('/')[0]</code></strong>
'image'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mimetypes.guess_type('spam.txt')</code></strong>              # subtype is 'plain'
('text/plain', None)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mimetypes.guess_type('spam.html')</code></strong>
('text/html', None)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mimetypes.guess_type('spam.html')[0].split('/')[1]</code></strong>
'html'</pre>
<p>A subtle thing: the second item in the tuple returned from the
          <code class="epub__literal">mimetypes</code> guess is an encoding
          type we won’t use here for opening purposes. We still have to pay
          attention to it, though—if it is not <code class="epub__literal">None</code>, it means the file is compressed
          (<code class="epub__literal">gzip</code> or <code class="epub__literal">compress</code>), even if we receive a media
          content type. For example, if the filename is something like
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>spam.gif.gz</em></span>, it’s a compressed image that we
          don’t want to try to open directly:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e25071"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mimetypes.guess_type('spam.gz')</code></strong>              # content unknown
(None, 'gzip')

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mimetypes.guess_type('spam.gif.gz')</code></strong>          # don't play me!
('image/gif', 'gzip')

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mimetypes.guess_type('spam.zip')</code></strong>             # archives
('application/zip', None)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mimetypes.guess_type('spam.doc')</code></strong>             # office app files
('application/msword', None)</pre>
<p>If the filename you pass in contains a directory path, the
          path portion is ignored (only the extension is used). This module is
          even smart enough to give us a filename extension for a type—useful
          if we need to go the other way, and create a file name from a
          content type:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e25087"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mimetypes.guess_type(r'C:\songs\sousa.au')</code></strong>
('audio/basic', None)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mimetypes.guess_extension('audio/basic')</code></strong>
'.au'</pre>
<p>Try more calls on your own for more details. We’ll use the
          <code class="epub__literal">mimetypes</code> module again in FTP
          examples in Chapter 13 to determine
          transfer type (text or binary), and in our email examples in
          Chapters 13, 14,
          and 16 to send, save, and open mail
          attachments.</p>
<p>In Example 6-23, we use
          <code class="epub__literal">mimetypes</code> to select a table of
          platform-specific player commands for the media type of the file to
          be played. That is, we pick a player table for the file’s media
          type, and then pick a command from the player table for the
          platform. At both steps, we give up and run a web browser if there
          is nothing more specific to be done.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Using mimetypes guesses for SearchVisitor"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="using_mimetypes_guesses_for_searchvisito"></a>Using mimetypes guesses for SearchVisitor</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To use this <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e25121"></a>module for directing our text file search scripts we
            wrote earlier in this chapter, simply extract the first item in
            the content-type returned for a file’s name. For instance, all in
            the following list are considered text (except “.pyw”, which we
            may have to special-case if we must care):</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e25125"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for ext in ['.txt', '.py', '.pyw', '.html', '.c', '.h', '.xml']:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(ext, mimetypes.guess_type('spam' + ext))</code></strong>
...
.txt ('text/plain', None)
.py ('text/x-python', None)
.pyw (None, None)
.html ('text/html', None)
.c ('text/plain', None)
.h ('text/plain', None)
.xml ('text/xml', None)</pre>
<p>We can add this technique to our earlier <code class="epub__literal">SearchVisitor</code> class by redefining its
            candidate selection method, in order to replace its default
            extension lists with <code class="epub__literal">mimetypes</code>
<span>guesses—</span>yet more evidence of
            the power of OOP customization at work:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e25144"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Tools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import mimetypes</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from visitor import SearchVisitor</code></strong>             # or PP4E.Tools.visitor if not .
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class SearchMimeVisitor(SearchVisitor):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def candidate(self, fname):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>contype, encoding = mimetypes.guess_type(fname)</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return (contype and</code></strong>
...                 <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>contype.split('/')[0] == 'text' and</code></strong>
...                 <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>encoding == None)</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>V = SearchMimeVisitor('mimetypes', trace=0)</code></strong>             # search key
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>V.run(r'C:\temp\PP3E\Examples')</code></strong>                         # root dir
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\extras\LosAlamosAdvancedClass\day1-system\data.txt ha
s mimetypes
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\Internet\Email\mailtools\mailParser.py has mimetypes
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\Internet\Email\mailtools\mailSender.py has mimetypes
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\Internet\Ftp\mirror\downloadflat.py has mimetypes
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\Internet\Ftp\mirror\downloadflat_modular.py has mimet
ypes
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\Internet\Ftp\mirror\ftptools.py has mimetypes
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\Internet\Ftp\mirror\uploadflat.py has mimetypes
C:\temp\PP3E\Examples\PP3E\System\Media\playfile.py has mimetypes
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>V.scount, V.fcount, V.dcount</code></strong>
(8, 1429, 186)</pre>
<p>Because this is not completely accurate, though (you may
            need to add logic to include extensions like “.pyw” missed by the
            guess), and because it’s not even appropriate for all search
            clients (some may want to search specific kinds of text only),
            this scheme was not used for the original class. Using and
            tailoring it for your own searches is left as optional <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e25186"></a>exercise.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Running the Script"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="running_the_script-id2"></a>Running the Script</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Now, when Example 6-23
          is run from the command line, if all goes well its canned self-test
          code at the end opens a number of audio, image, text, and other file
          types located in the script’s directory, using either
          platform-specific players or a general web browser. On my Windows 7
          laptop, GIF and HTML files open in new IE browser tabs; JPEG files
          in Windows Photo Viewer; plain text files in Notepad; DOC and XLS
          files in Microsoft Word and Excel; and audio files in Windows Media
          Player.</p>
<p>Because the programs used and their behavior may vary widely
          from machine to machine, though, you’re best off studying this
          script’s code and running it on your own computer and with your own
          test files to see what happens. As usual, you can also test it
          interactively (use the package path like this one to import from a
          different directory, assuming your module search path includes the
          PP4E root):</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e25198"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from PP4E.System.Media.playfile import playfile</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>playfile(r'C:\movies\mov10428.mpg')</code></strong>                       # video/mpeg</pre>
<p>We’ll use the <code class="epub__literal">playfile</code>
          module again as an imported library like this in Chapter 13 to open media files downloaded by
          FTP. Again, you may want to tweak this script’s tables for your
          players. This script also assumes the media file is located on the
          local machine (even though the <code class="epub__literal">webbrowser</code> module supports remote files
          with “http://” names), and it does not currently allow different
          players for most different MIME subtypes (it special-cases text to
          handle “plain” and “html” differently, but no others). In fact, this
          script is really just something of a simple framework that was
          designed to be extended. As always, hack on; this is Python,
          <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e25216"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e25218"></a>after all.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
