<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Automated Program Launchers (External)</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Automated Program Launchers (External)"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="automated_program_launchers_open_parenth"></a>Automated Program Launchers (External)</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Finally, some <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e25227"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e25232"></a>optional reading—in the examples distribution package
        for this book (available at sites listed in the Preface) you can find additional system-related scripts
        we do not have space to cover here:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><em class="epub__filename">PP4E\Launcher.py</em>—contains tools used by
            some GUI programs later in the book to start Python programs
            without any environment configuration. Roughly, it sets up both
            the system path and module import search paths as needed to run
            book examples, which are inherited by spawned programs. By using
            this module to search for files and configure environments
            automatically, users can avoid (or at least postpone) having to
            learn the intricacies of manual environment configuration before
            running programs. Though there is not much new in this example
            from a system interfaces perspective, we’ll refer back to it
            later, when we explore GUI programs that use its tools, as well as
            those of its <code class="epub__literal">launchmodes</code>
            cousin, which we wrote in Chapter 5.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><em class="epub__filename">PP4E\Launch_PyDemos.pyw</em>
            and <em class="epub__filename">PP4E\Launch_PyGadgets_bar.pyw</em>—use
            <em class="epub__filename">Launcher.py</em> to start major
            GUI book examples without any environment configuration. Because
            all spawned processes inherit configurations performed by the
            launcher, they all run with proper search path settings. When run
            directly, the underlying <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>PyDemos2.pyw</em></span> and
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>PyGadgets_bar.pyw</em></span> scripts (which we’ll
            explore briefly at the end of Chapter 10) instead rely on the
            configuration settings on the underlying machine. In other words,
            <code class="epub__literal">Launcher</code> effectively hides
            configuration details from the GUI interfaces by enclosing them in
            a configuration program layer.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><em class="epub__filename">PP4E\LaunchBrowser.pyw</em>—portably locates
            and starts an Internet web browser program on the host machine in
            order to view a local file or remote web page. In prior versions,
            it used tools in <em class="epub__filename">Launcher.py</em>
            to search for a reasonable browser to run. The original version of
            this example has now been largely superseded by the standard
            library’s <code class="epub__literal">webbrowser</code> module,
            which arose after this example had been developed (reptilian minds
            think alike!). In this edition, <code class="epub__literal">LaunchBrowser</code> simply parses command-line
            arguments for backward compatibility and invokes the <code class="epub__literal">open</code> function in <code class="epub__literal">webbrowser</code>. See this module’s help text,
            or PyGadgets and PyDemos in Chapter 10, for example command-line
            usage.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>That’s the end of our system tools exploration. In the next part
        of this book we leave the realm of the system shell and move on to
        explore ways to add graphical user interfaces to our program. Later,
        we’ll do the same using web-based approaches. As we continue, keep in
        mind that the system tools we’ve studied in this part of the book see
        action in a wide variety of programs. For instance, we’ll put threads
        to work to spawn long-running tasks in the GUI part, use both threads
        and processes when exploring server implementations in the Internet
        part, and use files and file-related system calls throughout the
        remainder of the book.</p>
<p>Whether your interfaces are command lines, multiwindow GUIs, or
        distributed client/server websites, Python’s system interfaces toolbox
        is sure to play a important part in your Python programming
        future.</p>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
