<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Part III. GUI Programming</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__part" title="Part III. GUI Programming"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="gui_programming"></a>Part III. GUI Programming</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__partintro" id="id4158591" title="GUI Programming"><div>
</div>
<p>This part of the book shows you how to apply Python to build
      portable graphical user interfaces, primarily with Python’s standard
      tkinter library. The following chapters cover this topic in
      depth:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Chapter 7</span></dt><dd>
<p>This chapter outlines GUI options available to Python
            developers, and then presents a brief tutorial that illustrates
            core tkinter coding concepts.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Chapter 8</span></dt><dd>
<p>This chapter begins a two-part tour of the tkinter
            library—its widget set and related tools. This first tour chapter
            covers simpler library tools and widgets: pop-up windows, various
            types of buttons, images, and so on.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Chapter 9</span></dt><dd>
<p>This chapter continues the library tour begun in the prior
            chapter. It presents the rest of the tkinter widget library,
            including menus, text, canvases, scroll bars, grids, and
            time-based events and animation.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Chapter 10</span></dt><dd>
<p>This chapter takes a look at GUI programming techniques:
            we’ll learn how to build menus automatically from object
            templates, spawn GUIs as separate programs, run long-running tasks
            in parallel with threads and queues, and more.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Chapter 11</span></dt><dd>
<p>This chapter pulls the earlier chapters’ ideas together to
            implement a collection of user interfaces. It presents a number of
            larger GUIs—clocks, text editors, drawing programs, image viewers,
            and so on—which also demonstrate general Python
            programming-in-the-large concepts along the way.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>As in the first part of this book, the material presented here is
      applicable to a wide variety of domains and will be utilized again to
      build domain-specific user interfaces in later chapters of this book.
      For instance, the PyMailGUI and PyCalc examples of later chapters will
      assume that you’ve covered the basics here.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
