<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 7. Graphical User Interfaces</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 7. Graphical User Interfaces"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="graphical_user_interfaces"></a>Chapter 7. Graphical User Interfaces</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="“Here’s Looking at You, Kid”"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="quotation_mark_here_apostrophy_s_looking"></a>“Here’s Looking at You, Kid”</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>For most software systems, a graphical user interface (GUI) has
        become an expected part of the package. Even if the GUI acronym is new
        to you, chances are that you are already familiar with such
        interfaces—the windows, buttons, and menus that we use to interact
        with software programs. In fact, most of what we do on computers today
        is done with some sort of point-and-click graphical interface. From
        web browsers to system tools, programs are routinely dressed up with a
        GUI component to make them more flexible and easier to use.</p>
<p>In this part of the book, we will learn how to make Python
        scripts sprout such graphical interfaces, too, by studying examples of
        programming with the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>tkinter</em></span> module, a portable
        GUI library that is a standard part of the Python system and the
        toolkit most widely used by Python programmers. As we’ll see, it’s
        easy to program user interfaces in Python scripts thanks to both the
        simplicity of the language and the power of its GUI libraries. As an
        added bonus, GUIs programmed in Python with tkinter are automatically
        portable to all major computer systems.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="GUI Programming Topics"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="gui_programming_topics"></a>GUI Programming Topics</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Because GUIs are <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25358"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25363"></a>a major area, I want to say a few more words about
          this part of the book before we get started. To make them easier to
          absorb, GUI programming topics are split over the next five
          chapters:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>This chapter begins with a quick tkinter tutorial to teach
              coding basics. Interfaces are kept simple here on purpose, so
              you can master the fundamentals before moving on to the
              following chapter’s interfaces. On the other hand, this chapter
              covers all the basics: event processing, the <code class="epub__literal">pack</code> geometry manager, using
              inheritance and composition in GUIs, and more. As we’ll see,
              object-oriented programming (OOP) isn’t required for tkinter,
              but it makes GUIs structured and reusable.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Chapters 8 and 9 take you on a tour of the
              tkinter widget set.<sup>[23]</sup> Roughly, Chapter 8 presents simple widgets
              and Chapter 9 covers more
              advanced widgets and related tools. Most of the interface
              devices you’re accustomed to seeing—sliders, menus, dialogs,
              images, and their kin—show up here. These two chapters are not a
              fully complete tkinter reference (which could easily fill a
              large book by itself), but they should be enough to help you get
              started coding substantial Python GUIs. The examples in these
              chapters are focused on widgets and tkinter tools, but Python’s
              support for code reuse is also explored along the way.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Chapter 10 covers more
              advanced GUI programming techniques. It includes an exploration
              of techniques for automating common GUI tasks with Python.
              Although tkinter is a full-featured library, a small amount of
              reusable Python code can make its interfaces even more powerful
              and easier to use.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Chapter 11 wraps up by
              presenting a handful of complete GUI programs that make use of
              coding and widget techniques presented in the four preceding
              chapters. We’ll learn how to implement text editors, image
              viewers, clocks, and more.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Because GUIs are actually cross-domain tools, other GUI
          examples will also show up throughout the remainder of this book.
          For example, we’ll later see complete email GUIs and calculators, as
          well as a basic FTP client GUI; additional examples such as tree
          viewers and table browsers are available externally in the book
          examples package. Chapter 11 gives a
          list of forward pointers to other tkinter examples in this
          text.</p>
<p>After we explore GUIs, in Part IV we’ll also learn how to build
          basic user interfaces within a web browser using HTML and Python
          scripts that run on a server—a very different model with advantages
          and tradeoffs all its own that are important to understand. Newer
          technologies such as the RIAs described later in this chapter build
          on the web browser model to offer even more interface
          choices.</p>
<p>For now, though, our focus here is on more traditional
          GUIs—known as “desktop” applications to some, and as “standalone”
          GUIs to others. As we’ll see when we meet FTP and email client GUIs
          in the Internet part of this book, though, such programs often
          connect to a network to do their work as well.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Running the Examples"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="running_the_examples"></a>Running the Examples</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>One other <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25415"></a>point I’d like to make right away: most GUIs are
          dynamic and interactive interfaces, and the best I can do here is
          show static screenshots representing selected states in the
          interactions such programs implement. This really won’t do justice
          to most examples. If you are not working along with the examples
          already, I encourage you to run the GUI examples in this and later
          chapters on your own.</p>
<p>On Windows, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25423"></a>the standard Python install comes with tkinter support
          built in, so all these examples should work immediately. Mac OS X
          <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25429"></a>comes bundled with a tkinter-aware Python as well. For
          other systems, Pythons with tkinter support are either provided with
          the system itself or are readily available (see the top-level
          <span class="epub__keep-together">README-PP4E.txt</span> file in
          the book examples distribution for more details). Getting tkinter to
          work on your computer is worth whatever extra install details you
          may need to absorb, though; experimenting with these programs is a
          great way to learn about both GUI programming and Python
          itself.</p>
<p>Also see the description of book example portability in
          general in this book’s Preface. Although Python and tkinter are both
          largely platform neutral, you may run into some minor
          platform-specific issues if you try to run this book’s examples on
          platforms other than that used to develop this book. Mac OS X, for
          example, might pose subtle differences in some of the examples’
          operation. Be sure to watch this book’s website for pointers and
          possible future patches for using the examples on other
          platforms.</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="has_anyone_noticed_that_g-u-i_are_the_fi"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Has Anyone Noticed That G-U-I Are the First Three Letters
            of “GUIDO”?</p>
<p>Python creator Guido van Rossum <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25445"></a>didn’t originally set out to build a GUI development
            tool, but Python’s ease of use and rapid turnaround have made this
            one of its primary roles. From an implementation perspective, GUIs
            in Python are really just instances of C extensions, and
            extensibility was one of the main ideas behind Python. When a
            script builds push buttons and menus, it ultimately talks to a C
            library; and when a script responds to a user event, a C library
            ultimately talks back to Python. It’s really just an example of
            what is possible when Python is used to script external
            libraries.</p>
<p>But from a practical point of view, GUIs are a critical part
            of modern systems and an ideal domain for a tool like Python. As
            we’ll see, Python’s simple syntax and object-oriented flavor blend
            well with the GUI model—it’s natural to represent each device
            drawn on a screen as a Python class. Moreover, Python’s quick
            turnaround lets programmers experiment with alternative layouts
            and behavior rapidly, in ways not possible with traditional
            development techniques. In fact, you can usually make a change to
            a Python-based GUI and observe its effects in a matter of seconds.
            Don’t try this with C++!</p>
</div>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[23] </sup>The term “widget set” refers to the objects used to
                  build familiar point-and-click user interface devices—push
                  buttons, sliders, input fields, and so on. tkinter comes
                  with Python classes that correspond to all the widgets
                  you’re accustomed to seeing in graphical displays. Besides
                  widgets, tkinter also comes with tools for other activities,
                  such as scheduling events to occur, waiting for socket data
                  to arrive, and so on.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
