<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Python GUI Development Options</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Python GUI Development Options"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="python_gui_development_options"></a>Python GUI Development Options</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Before we start wading <a id="gui7.2"></a>into the tkinter pond, let’s begin with some perspective
        on Python GUI options in general. Because Python has proven to be such
        a good match for GUI work, this domain has seen much activity over the
        years. In fact, although tkinter is by most accounts still the most
        widely used GUI toolkit in the Python world, there are a variety of
        ways to program user interfaces in Python today. Some are specific to
        Windows or X <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25462"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25465"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25470"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25475"></a>Windows,<sup>[24]</sup> some are cross-platform solutions, and all have
        followings and strong points of their own. To be fair to all the
        alternatives, here is a brief inventory of GUI toolkits available to
        Python programmers as I write these words:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>tkinter</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>An open <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25493"></a>source GUI library and the continuing de facto
              standard for portable GUI development in Python. Python scripts
              that use tkinter to build GUIs run portably on Windows, X
              Windows (Unix and Linux), and Macintosh OS X, and they display a
              native look-and-feel on each of these platforms today. tkinter
              makes it easy to build simple and portable GUIs quickly.
              Moreover, it can be easily augmented with Python code, as well
              as with larger extension packages such as<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25499"></a> <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Pmw</em></span> (a third-party widget
              library); <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Tix</em></span> (<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25511"></a>another widget library, and now a standard part of
              Python); <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>PIL</em></span> (<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25521"></a>an image-processing extension); and
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>ttk</em></span> (<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25530"></a>Tk themed widgets, also now a standard part of
              Python as of version 3.1). More on such extensions like these
              later in this introduction.</p>
<p>The underlying Tk library used by tkinter is a standard in
              the open source world at large and is also used by the Perl,
              Ruby, PHP, Common Lisp, and Tcl scripting languages, giving it a
              user base that likely numbers in the millions. The Python
              binding to Tk is enhanced by Python’s simple object model—Tk
              widgets become customizable and embeddable objects, instead of
              string commands. tkinter takes the form of a module package in
              Python 3.X, with nested modules that group some of its tools by
              functionality (it was formerly known as module
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Tkinter</em></span> in Python 2.X, but was renamed to
              follow naming conventions, and restructured to provide a more
              hierarchical organization).</p>
<p>tkinter is mature, robust, widely used, and well
              documented. It includes roughly 25 basic widget types, plus
              various dialogs and other tools. Moreover, there is a dedicated
              book on the subject, plus a large library of published tkinter
              and Tk documentation. Perhaps most importantly, because it is
              based on a library <span>developed</span> for scripting languages,
              tkinter is also a relatively lightweight toolkit, and as such it
              meshes well with a scripting language like Python.</p>
<p>Because of such attributes, Python’s tkinter module ships
              with Python as a standard library module and is the basis of
              Python’s standard IDLE integrated development environment GUI.
              In fact, tkinter is the only GUI toolkit that is part of Python;
              all others on this list are third-party extensions. The
              underlying Tk library is also shipped with Python on some
              platforms (including Windows, Mac OS X, and most Linux and
              Unix-like systems). You can be reasonably sure that tkinter will
              be present when your script runs, and you can guarantee this if
              needed by freezing your GUI into a self-contained binary
              executable with tools like<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25546"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25549"></a> PyInstaller and py2exe (see the Web for
              details).</p>
<p>Although tkinter is easy to use, its text and canvas
              widgets are powerful enough to implement web pages,
              three-dimensional visualization, and animation. In addition, a
              variety of systems aim to provide GUI builders for
              Python/tkinter today, including GUI Builder (formerly part of
              the Komodo IDE and relative of SpecTCL), Rapyd-Tk, xRope, and
              others (though this set has historically tended to change much
              over time; see http://wiki.python.org/moin/GuiProgramming or
              search the Web for updates). As we will see, though, tkinter is
              usually so easy to code that GUI builders are not widely used.
              This is especially true once we leave the realm of the static
              layouts that builders typically support.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>wxPython</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>A Python <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25564"></a>interface for the open source wxWidgets (formerly
              called wxWindows) library, which is a portable GUI class
              framework originally written to be used from the C++ programming
              language. The wxPython system is an extension module that wraps
              wxWidgets classes. This library is generally considered to excel
              at building sophisticated interfaces and is probably the second
              most popular Python GUI toolkit today, behind tkinter. GUIs
              coded in Python with wxPython are portable to Windows, Unix-like
              platforms, and Mac OS X.</p>
<p>Because wxPython is based on a C++ class library, most
              observers consider it to be more complex than tkinter: it
              provides hundreds of classes, generally requires an
              object-oriented coding style, and has a design that some find
              reminiscent of the MFC class library on Windows. wxPython often
              expects programmers to write more code, partly because it is a
              more functional and thus complex system, and partly because it
              inherits this mindset from its underlying C++ library.</p>
<p>Moreover, some of wxPython’s documentation is oriented
              toward C++, though this story has been improved recently with
              the publication of a book dedicated to wxPython. By contrast,
              tkinter is covered by one book dedicated to it, large sections
              of other Python books, and an even larger library of existing
              literature on the underlying Tk toolkit. Since the world of
              Python books has been remarkably dynamic over the years, though,
              you should investigate the accuracy of these observations at the
              time that you read these words; some books fade, while new
              Python books appear on a regular basis.</p>
<p>On the other hand, in exchange for its added complexity,
              wxPython provides a powerful toolkit. wxPython comes with a
              richer set of widgets out of the box than tkinter, including
              trees and HTML viewers—things that may require extensions such
              as Pmw, Tix, or ttk in tkinter. In addition, some prefer the
              appearance of the interfaces it renders. BoaConstructor and
              wxDesigner, among other options, provide a GUI builder that
              generates wxPython code. Some wxWidgets tools also support
              non-GUI Python work as well. For a quick look at wxPython
              widgets and code, run the demo that comes with the system (see
              http://wxpython.org/, or search the Web
              for links).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>PyQt</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>A Python <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25583"></a>interface to the Qt toolkit (now from Nokia,
              formerly by Trolltech), and perhaps the third most widely used
              GUI toolkit for Python today. PyQt is a full-featured GUI
              library and runs portably today on Windows, Mac OS X, and Unix
              and Linux. Like wxPython, Qt is generally more complex, yet more
              feature rich, than tkinter; it contains hundreds of classes and
              thousands of functions and methods. Qt grew up on Linux but
              became portable to other systems over time; reflecting this
              heritage, the PyQt and PyKDE extension packages provide access
              to KDE development libraries (PyKDE requires PyQt). The
              BlackAdder and Qt <span>Designer</span>
              systems provide GUI builders for PyQt.</p>
<p>Perhaps Qt’s most widely cited drawback in the past has
              been that it was not completely open source for full commercial
              use. Today, Qt provides both GPL and LGPL open source licensing,
              as well as commercial license options. The LGPL and GPL versions
              are open source, but conform to GPL licensing constraints (GPL
              may also impose requirements beyond those of the Python
              BSD-style license; you must, for example, make your source code
              freely available to end users).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>PyGTK</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>A Python <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25599"></a>interface to GTK, a portable GUI library
              originally used as the core of the Gnome window system on Linux.
              The gnome-python and PyGTK extension packages export Gnome and
              GTK toolkit calls. At this writing, PyGTK runs portably on
              Windows and POSIX systems such as Linux and Mac OS X (according
              to its documentation, it currently requires that an X server for
              Mac OS X has been installed, though a native Mac version is in
              the works).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Jython</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Jython (the <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25610"></a>system formerly known as JPython) is a Python
              implementation for Java, which compiles Python source code to
              Java bytecode, and gives Python scripts seamless access to Java
              class libraries on the local machine. Because of that, Java GUI
              libraries such as <code class="epub__literal">swing</code> and
              <code class="epub__literal">awt</code> become another way to
              construct GUIs in Python code run by the JPython system. Such
              solutions are obviously Java specific and limited in portability
              to that of Java and its libraries. Furthermore, <code class="epub__literal">swing</code> may be one of the largest and
              most complex GUI option for Python work. A new package named
              <code class="epub__literal">jTkinter</code> also provides a
              tkinter port to Jython using Java’s JNI; if <span>installed</span>, Python scripts may also
              use tkinter to build GUIs under Jython. Jython also has Internet
              roles we’ll meet briefly in Chapter 12.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>IronPython</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>In a very similar vein, the IronPython system<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25641"></a>—an implementation of the Python language for the
              .NET environment and runtime engine, which, among other things,
              compiles Python programs to .NET bytecode—also offers Python
              scripts GUI construction options in the .NET framework. You
              write Python code, but use C#/.NET components to construct
              interfaces, and applications at large. Iron<span>Python</span> code can be run on .NET on
              Windows, but also on Linux under the Mono implementation of
              .NET, and in the Silverlight client-side RIA framework for web
              browsers (discussed ahead).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>PythonCard</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>An open source GUI <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25657"></a>builder and library built on top of the wxPython
              toolkit and considered by some to be one of Python’s closest
              equivalents to the kind of GUI builders familiar to Visual Basic
              developers. PythonCard describes itself as a GUI construction
              kit for building cross-platform desktop applications on Windows,
              Mac OS X, and Linux, using the Python language.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Dabo</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>An open <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25668"></a>source GUI builder also built on wxPython, and a
              bit more. Dabo is a portable, three-tier, cross-platform desktop
              application development framework, inspired by Visual FoxPro and
              written in Python. Its tiers support database access, business
              logic, and user interface. Its open design is intended to
              eventually support a variety of databases and multiple user
              interfaces (wxPython, tkinter, and even HTML over HTTP).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Rich Internet Applications
            (RIAs)</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Although web pages <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25679"></a>rendered with HTML are also a kind of user
              interface, they have historically been too limited to include in
              the general GUI category. However, some observers would extend
              this category today to include systems which allow browser-based
              interfaces to be much more dynamic than traditional web pages
              have allowed. Because such systems provide widget toolkits
              rendered by web browsers, they can offer some of the same
              portability benefits as web pages in general.</p>
<p>The going buzzword for this brave new breed of toolkits is
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>rich Internet applications</em></span> (RIAs). It
              includes AJAX and JavaScript-oriented frameworks for use on the
              client, such as:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Flex</span></dt><dd>
<p>An open source framework from Adobe and part of the
                    Flash platform<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25695"></a></p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Silverlight</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25704"></a>A Microsoft framework which is also usable
                    on Linux with Mono’s Moonlight, and can be accessed by
                    Python code with the IronPython system described
                    above</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>JavaFX</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>A <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25715"></a>Java platform for building RIAs which can
                    run across a variety of connected devices</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">pyjamas</span></dt><dd>
<p>An AJAX-based port of the Google Web Toolkit to
                    Python, which comes with a set of interface widgets and
                    compiles Python code that uses those widgets into
                    JavaScript, to be run in a browser on a client<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25725"></a></p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>The <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>HTML5</em></span> standard under development
              proposes to address this domain as well.</p>
<p>Web browsers ultimately are “desktop” GUI applications,
              too, but are more pervasive than GUI libraries, and can be
              generalized with RIA tools to render other GUIs. While it’s
              possible to build a widget-based GUI with such frameworks, they
              can also add overheads associated with networking in general and
              often imply a substantially heavier software stack than
              traditional GUI toolkits. Indeed, in order to morph browsers
              into general GUI platforms, RIAs may imply extra software layers
              and dependencies, and even multiple programming languages.
              Because of that, and because not everyone codes for the Web
              today (despite what you may have heard), we won’t include them
              in our look at traditional standalone/desktop GUIs in this part
              of the book.</p>
<p>See the Internet part for more on RIAs and user interfaces
              based on browsers, and be sure to watch for news and trends on
              this front over time. The interactivity these tools provide is
              also a key part of what some refer to as “Web 2.0” when viewed
              more from the perspective of the Web than GUIs. Since we’re
              concerned with the latter here (and since user interaction is
              user interaction regardless of what jargon we use for it), we’ll
              postpone further enumeration of this topic until the next part
              of the book.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Platform-specific options</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Besides the portable toolkits like tkinter, wxPython, and
              PyQt, and platform-<span>agnostic</span> approaches such as RIAs,
              most major platforms have nonportable options for Python-coded
              GUIs as well. For instance, on <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25747"></a>Macintosh OS X, PyObjC <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25753"></a>provides a Python binding to Apple’s
              Objective-C/Cocoa framework, which is the basis for much Mac
              development. On <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25757"></a>Windows, the<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25763"></a> PyWin32 extensions package for Python includes
              wrappers for the C++ Microsoft Foundation Classes
              (MFC)<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25770"></a> framework (a library that includes interface
              components), as well as Pythonwin, an MFC sample program that
              implements a Python development GUI. Although .NET technically
              runs on Linux, too, the IronPython system mentioned earlier
              offers additional Windows-focused options.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>See the websites of these toolkits for more details. There are
        other lesser-known GUI toolkits for Python, and new ones are likely to
        emerge by the time you read this book (in fact, IronPython was new in
        the third edition, and RIAs are new in the fourth). Moreover, packages
        like those in this list are prone to mutate over time. For an
        up-to-date list of available tools, search the Web or browse http://www.python.org and the PyPI third-party packages
        index <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25778"></a>maintained there.</p><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[24] </sup>In this book, “Windows” refers to the Microsoft Windows
            interface common on PCs, and “X Windows” refers to the X11
            interface most commonly found on Unix and Linux platforms. These
            two interfaces are generally tied to the Microsoft and Unix (and
            Unix-like) platforms, respectively. It’s possible to run X Windows
            on top of a Microsoft operating system and Windows emulators on
            Unix and Linux, but it’s not common. As if to muddy the waters
            further, Mac OS X supports Python’s tkinter on both X Windows and
            the native Aqua GUI system directly, in addition to
            platform-specific cocoa options (though it’s usually not too
            misleading to lump OS X in with the “Unix-like” crowd).</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
