<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>tkinter Overview</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="tkinter Overview"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="tkinter_overview"></a>tkinter Overview</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Of all the prior section’s GUI options, though, tkinter is by
        far the de facto standard way to implement portable user interfaces in
        Python today, and the focus of this part of the book. The rationale
        for this approach was explained in Chapter 1;
        in short, we elected to present one toolkit in satisfying depth
        instead of many toolkits in less-than-useful fashion. Moreover, most
        of the tkinter programming concepts you learn here will translate
        directly to any other GUI toolkit you choose to utilize.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="tkinter Pragmatics"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="tkinter_pragmatics"></a>tkinter Pragmatics</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Perhaps more to <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25793"></a>the point, though, there are pragmatic reasons that
          the Python world still gravitates to tkinter as its de facto
          standard portable GUI toolkit. Among them, tkinter’s accessibility,
          portability, availability, documentation, and extensions have made
          it the most widely used Python GUI solution for many years
          running:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Accessibility</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>tkinter is generally regarded as a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>lightweight
                toolkit</em></span> and one of the simplest GUI solutions for
                Python available today. Unlike larger frameworks, it is easy
                to get started in tkinter right away, without first having to
                grasp a much larger class interaction model. As we’ll see,
                programmers can create simple tkinter GUIs in a few lines of
                Python code and scale up to writing industrial-strength GUIs
                gradually. Although the tkinter API is basic, additional
                widgets can be coded in Python or obtained in extension
                packages such as Pmw, Tix, and ttk.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Portability</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>A Python script that builds a GUI with tkinter will run
                without source code changes on all major windowing platforms
                today: Microsoft Windows, X Windows (on Unix and Linux), and
                the Macintosh OS X (and also ran on Mac classics). Further,
                that same script will provide a native look-and-feel to its
                users on each of these platforms. In fact, this feature became
                more apparent as Tk matured. A Python/tkinter script today
                looks like a Windows program on Windows; on Unix and Linux, it
                provides the same interaction but sports an appearance
                familiar to X Windows users; and on the Mac, it looks like a
                Mac program should.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Availability</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>tkinter is a standard module in the Python library,
                shipped with the interpreter. If you have Python, you have
                tkinter. Moreover, most Python installation packages
                (including the standard Python self-installer for Windows,
                that provided on Mac OS X, and many Linux distributions) come
                with tkinter support bundled. Because of that, scripts written
                to use the tkinter module work immediately on most Python
                interpreters, without any extra installation steps. tkinter is
                also generally better supported than its alternatives today.
                Because the underlying Tk library is also used by the Tcl and
                Perl programming languages (and others), it tends to receive
                more development resources than other toolkits
                available.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Naturally, other factors such as documentation and extensions
          are important when using a GUI toolkit, too; let’s take a quick look
          at the story tkinter has to tell on these fronts as well.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="tkinter Documentation"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="tkinter_documentation"></a>tkinter Documentation</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>This book explores <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25831"></a>tkinter fundamentals and most widgets tools, and it
          should be enough to get started with substantial GUI development in
          Python. On the other hand, it is not an exhaustive reference to the
          tkinter library or extensions to it. Happily, at least one book
          dedicated to using tkinter in Python is now commercially available
          as I write this paragraph, and others are on the way (search the Web
          for details). Besides books, you can also find tkinter documentation
          online; a complete set of tkinter manuals is currently maintained on
          the Web at http://www.pythonware.com/library.</p>
<p>In addition, because the underlying Tk toolkit used by tkinter
          is also a de facto standard in the open source scripting community
          at large, other documentation sources apply. For instance, because
          Tk has also been adopted by the Tcl and Perl programming languages,
          Tk-oriented books and documentation written for both of these are
          directly applicable to Python/tkinter as well (albeit, with some
          syntactic mapping).</p>
<p>Frankly, I learned tkinter by studying Tcl/Tk texts and
          references—just replace Tcl strings with Python objects and you have
          additional reference libraries at your disposal (see Table 7-2, the Tk-to-tkinter conversion
          guide, at the end of this chapter for help reading Tk
          documentation). For instance, the book <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Tcl/Tk Pocket
          Reference</em></span> (O’Reilly) can serve as a nice
          supplement to the tkinter tutorial material in this part of the
          book. Moreover, since Tk concepts are familiar to a large body of
          programmers, Tk support is also readily available on the Net.</p>
<p>After you’ve learned the basics, examples can help, too. You
          can find tkinter demo programs, besides those you’ll study in this
          book, at various locations around the Web. Python itself includes a
          set of demo programs in the <code class="epub__literal">Demos\tkinter</code> subdirectory of its source
          distribution package. The IDLE development GUI mentioned in the next
          section makes for an interesting code read as well.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="tkinter Extensions"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="tkinter_extensions"></a>tkinter Extensions</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Because tkinter is <a id="tk7.3.3"></a>so widely used, programmers also have access to
          precoded Python extensions designed to work with or augment it. Some
          of these may not yet be available for Python 3.X as I write this but
          are expected to be soon. For instance:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Pmw</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Python Mega Widgets<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25873"></a> is an extension toolkit for building high-level
                compound widgets in Python using the tkinter module. It
                extends the tkinter API with a collection of more
                sophisticated widgets for advanced GUI development and a
                framework for implementing some of your own. Among the
                precoded and extensible megawidgets shipped with the package
                are notebooks, combo boxes, selection widgets, paned widgets,
                scrolled widgets, dialog windows, button boxes, balloon help,
                and an interface to the Blt graph widget.</p>
<p>The interface to Pmw megawidgets is similar to that of
                basic tkinter widgets, so Python scripts can freely mix Pmw
                megawidgets with standard tkinter widgets. Moreover, Pmw is
                pure Python code, and so requires no C compiler or tools to
                install. To view its widgets and the corresponding code you
                use to construct them, run the
                <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>demos\All.py</em></span> script in the Pmw
                distribution package. You can find Pmw at http://pmw.sourceforge.net.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Tix</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Tix is a <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25893"></a>collection of more than 40 advanced widgets,
                originally written for <span>Tcl/Tk</span> but now available for use
                in Python/tkinter programs. This package is now a Python
                standard library module, called <code class="epub__literal">tkinter.tix</code>. Like Tk, the underlying
                Tix library is also shipped today with Python on Windows. In
                other words, on Windows, if you install Python, you also have
                Tix as a preinstalled library of additional widgets.</p>
<p>Tix includes many of the same devices as Pmw, including
                spin boxes, trees, tabbed notebooks, balloon help pop ups,
                paned windows, and much more. See the Python library manual’s
                entry for the Tix module for more details. For a quick look at
                its widgets, as well as the Python source code used to program
                them, run the <span class="epub__keep-together">tixwidgets.py</span> demonstration
                program in the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Demo\tix</em></span> directory of the
                Python source distribution (this directory is not installed by
                default on Windows and is prone to change—you can generally
                find it after fetching and unpacking Python’s source code from
                Python.org).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>ttk</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Tk themed widgets, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25920"></a>ttk, is a relatively new widget set which
                attempts to separate the code implementing a widget’s behavior
                from that implementing its appearance. Widget classes handle
                state and callback invocation, whereas widget appearance is
                managed separately by themes. Much like Tix, this extension
                began life separately, but was very recently incorporated into
                Python’s standard library in Python 3.1, as module <code class="epub__literal">tkinter.ttk</code>.</p>
<p>Also like Tix, this extension comes with advanced widget
                types, some of which are not present in standard tkinter
                itself. Specifically, ttk comes with 17 widgets, 11 of which
                are already present in tkinter and are meant as replacements
                for some of tkinter’s standard widgets, and 6 of which are
                new—Combobox, Notebook, Progressbar, Separator, Sizegrip and
                Treeview. In a nutshell, scripts import from the ttk module
                after tkinter in order to use its replacement widgets and
                configure style objects possibly shared by multiple widgets,
                instead of configuring widgets <span>themselves</span>.</p>
<p>As we’ll see in this chapter, it’s possible to provide a
                common look-and-feel for a set of widgets with standard
                tkinter, by subclassing its widget classes using normal OOP
                techniques (see Customizing Widgets with Classes). However, ttk
                offers additional style options and advanced widget types. For
                more details on ttk widgets, see the entry in the Python
                library manual or search the Web; this book focuses on tkinter
                fundamentals, and tix and ttk are both too large to cover in a
                useful fashion here.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>PIL</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>The Python Imaging Library (PIL)<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25943"></a> is an open source extension package that adds
                image-processing tools to Python. Among other things, it
                provides tools for image thumbnails, transforms, and
                conversions, and it extends the basic tkinter image object to
                add support for displaying many image file types. PIL, for
                instance, allows tkinter GUIs to display JPEG, TIFF, and PNG
                images not supported by the base tkinter toolkit itself
                (without extension, tkinter supports GIFs and a handful of
                bitmap formats). See the end of Chapter 8 for more details and
                examples; we’ll use PIL in this book in a number of
                image-related example scripts. PIL can be found at http://www.pythonware.com or via a web
                search.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>IDLE</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>The IDLE <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25960"></a>integrated Python development environment is
                both written in Python with tkinter and shipped and installed
                with the Python package (if you have a recent Python
                interpreter, you should have IDLE too; on Windows, click the
                Start button, select the Programs menu, and click the Python
                entry to find it). IDLE provides syntax-coloring text editors
                for Python code, point-and-click debugging, and more, and is
                an example of tkinter’s utility.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Others</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Many of the extensions that provide visualization tools
                for Python are based on the tkinter library and its canvas
                widget. See the PyPI website and your favorite web search
                engine for more tkinter extension examples.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>If you plan to do any commercial-grade GUI development with
          tkinter, you’ll probably want to explore extensions such as Pmw,
          PIL, Tix, and ttk after learning tkinter basics in this text. They
          can save development time and add pizzazz to your GUIs. See the
          Python-related websites mentioned earlier for up-to-date details and
          <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25975"></a>links.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="tkinter Structure"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="tkinter_structure"></a>tkinter Structure</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>From a more nuts-and-bolts perspective, tkinter is an
          integration system that implies a somewhat unique program structure.
          We’ll see what this means in terms of code in a moment, but here is
          a brief introduction to some of the terms and concepts at the core
          of Python GUI programming.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Implementation structure"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="implementation_structure"></a>Implementation structure</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Strictly speaking, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e25988"></a>tkinter is simply the name of Python’s interface to
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Tk</em></span>—a GUI library originally written for use
            with the Tcl programming language and developed by Tcl’s creator,
            John Ousterhout. Python’s tkinter module talks to Tk, and the Tk
            library in turn interfaces with the underlying window system:
            Microsoft Windows, X Windows on Unix, or whatever GUI system your
            Python uses on your Macintosh. The portability of tkinter actually
            stems from the underling Tk library it wraps.</p>
<p>Python’s tkinter adds a software layer on top of Tk that
            allows Python scripts to call out to Tk to build and configure
            interfaces and routes control back to Python scripts that handle
            user-generated events (e.g., mouse clicks). That is, GUI calls are
            internally routed from Python script, to tkinter, to Tk; GUI
            events are routed from Tk, to tkinter, and back to a Python
            script. In Chapter 20, we’ll
            know these transfers by their C integration terms,
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>extending</em></span> and
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>embedding</em></span>.</p>
<p>Technically, tkinter is today structured as a combination of
            the Python-coded <code class="epub__literal">tkinter</code> module
            package’s files and an extension module called <code class="epub__literal">_tkinter</code> that is written in C. <code class="epub__literal">_tkinter</code> interfaces with the Tk library
            using extending tools and dispatches callbacks back to Python
            objects using embedding tools; <code class="epub__literal">tkinter</code> simply adds a class-based
            interface on top of <code class="epub__literal">_tkinter</code>.
            You should almost always import <code class="epub__literal">tkinter</code> in your scripts, though, not
            <code class="epub__literal">_tkinter</code>; the latter is an
            implementation module meant for internal use only (and was oddly
            named for that reason).</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Programming structure"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="programming_structure"></a>Programming structure</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Luckily, Python <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e26036"></a>programmers don’t normally need to care about all
            this integration and call routing going on internally; they simply
            make widgets and register Python functions to handle widget
            events. Because of the overall structure, though, event handlers
            are usually known as<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e26042"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e26047"></a> <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>callback</em></span> handlers, because the
            GUI library “calls back” to Python code when events occur.</p>
<p>In fact, we’ll find that Python/tkinter programs are
            entirely <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>event driven</em></span>: they build displays
            and register handlers for events, and then do nothing but wait for
            events to occur. During the wait, the Tk GUI library runs an event
            loop that watches for mouse clicks, keyboard presses, and so on.
            All application program processing happens in the registered
            callback handlers in response to events. Further, any information
            needed across events must be stored in long-lived references such
            as global variables and class instance attributes. The notion of a
            traditional linear program control flow doesn’t really apply in
            the GUI domain; you need to think in terms of smaller
            chunks.</p>
<p>In Python, Tk also becomes <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>object
            oriented</em></span> simply because Python is object oriented: the
            tkinter layer exports Tk’s API as Python classes. With tkinter, we
            can either use a simple function-call approach to create widgets
            and interfaces, or apply object-oriented techniques such as
            inheritance and composition to customize and extend the base set
            of tkinter classes. Larger tkinter GUIs are generally constructed
            as trees of linked tkinter widget objects and are often
            implemented as Python classes to provide structure and retain
            state information between events. As we’ll see in this part of the
            book, a tkinter GUI coded with classes almost by default becomes a
            reusable software component.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
