<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Python/tkinter for Tcl/Tk Converts</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Python/tkinter for Tcl/Tk Converts"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="python_solidus_tkinter_for_tcl_solidus_t"></a>Python/tkinter for Tcl/Tk Converts</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>At the start <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e29853"></a>of this chapter, I mentioned that tkinter is Python’s
        interface to the<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e29857"></a> Tk GUI library, originally written for the Tcl
        language. To help readers migrating from Tcl to Python and to
        summarize some of the main topics we met in this chapter, this section
        contrasts Python’s Tk interface with Tcl’s. This mapping also helps
        make Tk references written for other languages more useful to Python
        developers.</p>
<p>In general terms, Tcl’s command-string view of the world differs
        widely from Python’s object-based approach to programming. In terms of
        Tk programming, though, the syntactic differences are fairly small.
        Here are some of the main distinctions in Python’s tkinter
        interface:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Creation</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Widgets are created as class instance objects by calling a
              widget class.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Masters (parents)</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Parents are previously created objects that are passed to
              widget-class constructors.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Widget options</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Options are constructor or <code class="epub__literal">config</code> keyword arguments or indexed
              keys.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Operations</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Widget operations (actions) become tkinter widget class
              object methods.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Callbacks</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Callback handlers are any callable objects: function,
              method, lambda, and so on.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Extension</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Widgets are extended using Python class inheritance
              mechanisms.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Composition</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Interfaces are constructed by attaching objects, not by
              concatenating names.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Linked variables (next chapter)</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Variables associated with widgets are tkinter class
              objects with methods.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>In Python, widget creation commands (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">button</code>) are Python class names that start
        with an uppercase letter (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">Button</code>), two-word widget operations (e.g.,
        <code class="epub__literal">add</code> <code class="epub__literal">command</code>) become a
        single method name with an underscore (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">add_command</code>), and the “configure” method can
        be abbreviated as “config,” as in Tcl. In Chapter 8, we will also see that
        tkinter “variables” associated with widgets take the form of class
        instance objects (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">StringVar</code>,
        <code class="epub__literal">IntVar</code>) with <code class="epub__literal">get</code> and <code class="epub__literal">set</code> methods, not simple Python or Tcl
        variable names. Table 7-2 shows some
        of the primary language mappings in more concrete terms.</p><div class="epub__table"><a id="tk-to-tkinter_mappings"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Table 7-2. Tk-to-tkinter mappings</p><div class="epub__table-contents"><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; " summary="Tk-to-tkinter mappings"><colgroup><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Operation</p></th><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Tcl/Tk</p></th><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Python/tkinter</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Creation</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Frame
                .panel</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>panel =
                Frame()</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Masters</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>button
                .panel.quit</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>quit =
                Button(panel)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Options</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>button .panel.go -fg
                black</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>go = Button(panel,
                fg='black')</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Configure</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>.panel.go config -bg
                red</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>go.config(bg='red')
                go['bg'] = ‘red’</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Actions</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>.popup
                invoke</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>popup.invoke()</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Packing</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>pack .panel -side left
                -fill x</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>panel.pack(side=LEFT,
                fill=X)</p></td></tr></tbody></table>
</div>
</div>
<p>Some of these differences are more than just syntactic, of
        course. For instance, Python builds an internal widget object tree
        based on parent arguments passed to widget constructors, without ever
        requiring concatenated widget pathname strings. Once you’ve made a
        widget object, you can use it directly by object reference. Tcl coders
        can hide some dotted pathnames by manually storing them in variables,
        but that’s not quite the same as Python’s purely object-based
        model.</p>
<p>Once you’ve written a few Python/tkinter scripts, though, the
        coding distinctions in the Python object world will probably seem
        trivial. At the same time, Python’s support for object-oriented
        techniques adds an entirely new component to Tk development; you get
        the same widgets, plus Python’s support for code structure and
        reuse.</p>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
