<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 8. A tkinter Tour, Part 1</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 8. A tkinter Tour, Part 1"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="a_tkinter_tour_comma_part_1"></a>Chapter 8. A tkinter Tour, Part 1</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="“Widgets and Gadgets and GUIs, Oh My!”"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="quotation_mark_widgets_and_gadgets_and_g"></a>“Widgets and Gadgets and GUIs, Oh My!”</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>This chapter is a continuation of our look at GUI programming in
        Python. The previous chapter used simple widgets—buttons, labels, and
        the like—to demonstrate the fundamentals of Python/tkinter coding.
        That was simple by design: it’s easier to grasp the big GUI picture if
        widget interface details don’t get in the way. But now that we’ve seen
        the basics, this chapter and the next move on to present a tour of
        more advanced widget objects and tools available in the tkinter
        library.</p>
<p>As we’ll find, this is where GUI scripting starts getting both
        practical and fun. In these two chapters, we’ll meet classes that
        build the interface devices you expect to see in real programs—e.g.,
        sliders, check buttons, menus, scrolled lists, dialogs, graphics, and
        so on. After these chapters, the last GUI chapter moves on to present
        larger GUIs that utilize the coding techniques and the interfaces
        shown in all prior GUI chapters. In these two chapters, though,
        examples are small and self-contained so that we can focus on widget
        details.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="This Chapter’s Topics"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="this_chapter_apostrophy_s_topics"></a>This Chapter’s Topics</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Technically, we’ve already used a handful of simple widgets in
          Chapter 7. So far we’ve met
          <code class="epub__literal">Label</code>, <code class="epub__literal">Button</code>, <code class="epub__literal">Frame</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">Tk</code>, and studied <code class="epub__literal">pack</code> geometry management concepts along
          the way. Although all of these are basic, they represent tkinter
          interfaces in general and can be workhorses in typical GUIs.
          <code class="epub__literal">Frame</code> containers, for instance,
          are the basis of hierarchical display layout.</p>
<p>In this and the following chapter, we’ll explore additional
          options for widgets we’ve already seen and move beyond the basics to
          cover the rest of the tkinter widget set. Here are some of the
          widgets and topics we’ll explore in this chapter:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">Toplevel</code> and <code class="epub__literal">Tk</code> widgets</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">Message</code> and <code class="epub__literal">Entry</code> widgets</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">Checkbutton</code>, <code class="epub__literal">Radiobutton</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">Scale</code> widgets</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Images: <code class="epub__literal">PhotoImage</code> and
              <code class="epub__literal">BitmapImage</code> objects</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Widget and window configuration options</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Dialogs, both standard and custom</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Low-level event binding</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>tkinter linked variable objects</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Using the Python Imaging Library (PIL) extension for other
              image types and <span>operations</span></p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>After this chapter, Chapter 9 concludes the two-part tour
          by presenting the remainder of the tkinter library’s tool set:
          menus, text, canvases, animation, and more.</p>
<p>To make this tour interesting, I’ll also introduce a few
          notions of component reuse along the way. For instance, some later
          examples will be built using components written for prior examples.
          Although these two tour chapters introduce widget interfaces, this
          book is also about Python programming in general; as we’ll see,
          tkinter programming in Python can be much more than simply drawing
          circles and arrows.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
