<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>The End of the Tour</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="The End of the Tour"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="the_end_of_the_tour"></a>The End of the Tour</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>And that’s a wrap for our tour of the tkinter library. You've
        now seen all the core widgets and tools previewed in Chapter 7 (flip back for a summary of
        territory covered on this tour). For more details, watch for all of
        the tools introduced here to appear again in the advanced GUI
        techniques in Chapter 10, the larger GUI
        examples in Chapter 11, and the
        remainder of the book at large. To some extent, the last few chapters
        have laid the groundwork needed to step up to the larger programs that
        <span>follow</span>.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Other Widgets and Options"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="other_widgets_and_options"></a>Other Widgets and Options</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>I should point <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e41305"></a>out, though, that this story is still not quite
          complete. Although we’ve covered the entire basic tkinter widget
          arsenal and mastered GUI fundamentals along the way, we’ve skipped a
          handful of newer and more advanced widgets introduced to tkinter
          recently:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">Spinbox</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>An <code class="epub__literal">Entry</code> used to
                <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e41322"></a>select among a set or range of values</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">LabelFrame</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>A <code class="epub__literal">Frame</code> with a
                <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e41336"></a>border and title around a group of items</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">PanedWindow</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>A geometry manager <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e41347"></a>widget containing multiple widgets that can be
                resized by moving separator lines with the mouse</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Moreover, we haven’t even mentioned any of the higher-level
          widgets available in the popular Pmw, Tix, or ttk extension packages
          for tkinter <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e41354"></a>(described in Chapter 7) or any other third-party
          packages in general. For instance:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Tix and ttk both provide additional widget options
              outlined in Chapter 7, which
              are now part of Python’s standard library.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The third-party domain tends to change over time, but has
              hosted tree widgets, HTML viewers, font selection dialogs,
              tables, and much more for tkinter, and includes the Pmw
              megawidget set.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Many tkinter programs such as Python’s standard IDLE
              development GUI include font dialogs, tree widgets, and more
              that you may be able to use in your own applications.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Because such extensions are too complex for us to cover in a
          useful fashion here, though, we’ll defer to other resources in the
          interest of space. To sample richer options for your GUI scripts, be
          sure to consult tkinter, Tk, Tix, ttk, and Pmw documentation for
          more details on additional widgets, and visit the PyPI website at
          http://python.org/ or search the Web for other
          third-party tkinter extensions.</p>
<p>I should also mention that there are more widget configuration
          options than we have met on this tour. Consult Tk and tkinter
          resources for options not listed explicitly here. Although other
          tkinter tools are analogous to those presented here, the space I
          have for illustrating additional widgets and options in this book is
          limited by both my publisher and the finite nature of trees.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
