<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 10. GUI Coding Techniques</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 10. GUI Coding Techniques"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="gui_coding_techniques"></a>Chapter 10. GUI Coding Techniques</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="“Building a Better Mousetrap”"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="quotation_mark_building_a_better_mouse_t"></a>“Building a Better Mousetrap”</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>This chapter continues our look at building GUIs with Python and
        the tkinter library by presenting a collection of more advanced GUI
        programming patterns and techniques. In the preceding three chapters,
        we explored all the fundamentals of tkinter itself. Here, our goal is
        to put them to work to add higher-level structures that will be useful
        in larger programs. That is, our focus shifts here to writing code of
        our own which implements utility above and beyond the basic tkinter
        toolkit—utility that we’ll actually find useful in more complete
        examples later in the book.</p>
<p>Some of the techniques we will be studying in this chapter are
        as follows:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Providing common GUI operations in “mixin” classes</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Building menus and toolbars from data structure
            templates</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Adding GUI interfaces to command-line tools</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Redirecting input and output streams to GUI widgets</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Reloading GUI callback handlers on the fly</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Wrapping up and automating top-level window
            interfaces</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Using threads and queues to avoiding blocking in GUIs</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Popping up GUI windows on demand from non-GUI
            programs</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Adding GUIs as separate programs with sockets and
            pipes</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>As with other chapters in this book, this chapter has a dual
        agenda—not only will we be studying GUI programming, but we’ll also be
        learning more about general Python development concepts such as
        object-oriented programming (OOP) and code reuse. As we’ll see, by
        coding GUI tools in Python, it’s easy to apply them in a wide variety
        of contexts and programs.</p>
<p>As a segue to the next chapter, this one also closes with a look
        at the PyDemos and PyGadgets launcher toolbars—GUIs used to start
        larger GUI examples. Although most of their code is external to this
        book, we’ll explore enough of their structure to help you study them
        in the examples distribution package.</p>
<p>Two notes before we begin: first, be sure to read the code
        listings in this chapter for details we won’t present in the
        narrative. Second, although small examples that apply in this
        chapter’s techniques will show up along the way, more realistic
        application will have to await more realistic programs. We’ll put
        these techniques to use in the larger examples in the next chapter and
        throughout the rest of the book. In fact, we’ll be reusing the modules
        we develop here often, as tools in other programs in this book;
        reusable software wants to be reused. First, though, let’s do what our
        species does best and build some tools.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
