<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Reloading Callback Handlers Dynamically</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Reloading Callback Handlers Dynamically"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="reloading_callback_handlers_dynamically"></a>Reloading Callback Handlers Dynamically</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Our next GUI programming <a id="gui10.6"></a><a id="call10.6"></a>technique is all about changing a GUI while it is
        <span>running—</span>the ultimate in
        customization. The Python <code class="epub__literal">imp.reload</code> function lets you dynamically
        change and reload a program’s modules without stopping the program.
        For instance, you can bring up a text editor window to change the
        source code of selected parts of a system while it is running and see
        those changes show up immediately after reloading the changed
        module.</p>
<p>This is a powerful feature, especially for developing programs
        that take a long time to restart. Programs that connect to databases
        or network servers, initialize large objects, implement long-running
        services, or travel through a long series of steps to retrigger a
        callback are prime candidates for <code class="epub__literal">reload</code>. It can shave substantial time from
        the development cycle and make systems more flexible.</p>
<p>The catch for GUIs, though, is that because callback handlers
        are registered as<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e42786"></a> <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>object references</em></span> rather than
        module and object names, reloads of callback handler functions are
        ineffective after the callback has been registered. The Python
        <code class="epub__literal">imp.reload</code> operation works by
        changing a module object’s contents in place. Because tkinter stores a
        pointer to the registered handler object directly, though, it is
        oblivious to any reloads of the module that the handler came from.
        That is, tkinter will still reference a module’s old objects even
        after the module is reloaded and changed.</p>
<p>This is a subtle thing, but you really only need to remember
        that you must do something special to reload callback handler
        functions dynamically. Not only do you need to explicitly request
        reloading of the modules that you change, but you must also generally
        provide an indirection layer that routes callbacks from registered
        objects to modules so that reloads have impact.</p>
<p>For example, the script in Example 10-14 goes the extra
        mile to indirectly dispatch callbacks to functions in an explicitly
        reloaded module. The callback handlers registered with tkinter are
        method objects that do nothing but reload and dispatch again. Because
        the true callback handler functions are fetched through a module
        object, reloading that module makes the latest versions of the
        functions accessible.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_gui_reverse-id119"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 10-14. PP4E\Gui\Tools\rad.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting"># reload callback handlers dynamically

from tkinter import *
import radactions           # get initial callback handlers
from imp import reload      # moved to a module in Python 3.X

class Hello(Frame):
    def __init__(self, master=None):
        Frame.__init__(self, master)
        self.pack()
        self.make_widgets()

    def make_widgets(self):
        Button(self, text='message1', command=self.message1).pack(side=LEFT)
        Button(self, text='message2', command=self.message2).pack(side=RIGHT)

    def message1(self):
        reload(radactions)         # need to reload actions module before calling
        radactions.message1()      # now new version triggered by pressing button

    def message2(self):
        reload(radactions)         # changes to radactions.py picked up by reload
        radactions.message2(self)  # call the most recent version; pass self

    def method1(self):
        print('exposed method...')       # called from radactions function

Hello().mainloop()</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>When run, this script makes a two-button window that triggers
        the <code class="epub__literal">message1</code> and <code class="epub__literal">message2</code> methods. Example 10-15 contains the
        actual callback handler code. Its functions receive a <code class="epub__literal">self</code> argument that gives access back to the
        <code class="epub__literal">Hello</code> class object, as though these
        were real methods. You can change this file any number of times while
        the <code class="epub__literal">rad</code> script’s GUI is active;
        each time you do so, you’ll change the behavior of the GUI when a
        button press occurs.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_gui_reverse-id120"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 10-15. PP4E\Gui\Tools\radactions.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting"># callback handlers: reloaded each time triggered

def message1():                 # change me
    print('spamSpamSPAM')       # or could build a dialog...

def message2(self):
    print('Ni! Ni!')            # change me
    self.method1()              # access the 'Hello' instance...</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Try running <code class="epub__literal">rad</code> and editing
        the messages printed by <code class="epub__literal">radactions</code>
        in another window; you should see your new messages printed in the
        <code class="epub__literal">stdout</code> console window each time the
        GUI’s buttons are pressed. This example is deliberately simple to
        illustrate the concept, but the actions reloaded like this in practice
        might build pop-up dialogs, new top-level windows, and so on.
        Reloading the code that creates such windows would also let us
        dynamically change their appearances.</p>
<p>There are other ways to change a GUI while it’s running. For
        instance, we saw in Chapter 9
        that appearances can be altered at any time by calling the widget
        <code class="epub__literal">config</code> method, and widgets can be
        added and deleted from a display dynamically with methods such as
        <code class="epub__literal">pack_forget</code> and <code class="epub__literal">pack</code> (and their <code class="epub__literal">grid</code> manager relatives). Furthermore,
        passing a new <code class="epub__literal">command=</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>action</code></em>
        option setting to a widget’s <code class="epub__literal">config</code>
        method might reset a callback handler to a new action object on the
        fly; with enough support code, this may be a viable alternative to the
        indirection scheme used earlier to make reloads more effective in
        GUIs.</p>
<p>Of course, not all GUIs need to be so dynamic. Imagine a game
        which allows character modification, though—dynamic reloads in such a
        system can greatly enhance their utility. (I’ll leave the task of
        extending this example with a massively multiplayer online
        role-playing game server as suggested <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e42873"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e42875"></a>exercise.)</p>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
