<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 11. Complete GUI Programs</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 11. Complete GUI Programs"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="complete_gui_programs"></a>Chapter 11. Complete GUI Programs</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="“Python, Open Source, and Camaros”"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="quotation_mark_python_comma_open_source"></a>“Python, Open Source, and Camaros”</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>This chapter concludes our look at building GUIs with Python and
        its standard tkinter library, by presenting a collection of realistic
        GUI programs. In the preceding four chapters, we met all the basics of
        tkinter programming. We toured the core set of
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>widgets</em></span>—Python classes that generate devices on a
        computer screen and respond to user events—and we studied a handful of
        advanced GUI programming techniques, including automation tools,
        redirection with sockets and pipes, and threading. Here, our focus is
        on putting those widgets and techniques together to create more useful
        GUIs. We’ll study:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>PyEdit</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>A text editor program</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>PyPhoto</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>A thumbnail photo viewer</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>PyView</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>An image slideshow</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>PyDraw</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>A painting program</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>PyClock</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>A graphical clock</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>PyToe</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>A simple tic-tac-toe game, just for fun<sup>[38]</sup></p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>As in Part II’s Chapter 6, I’ve pulled the examples in
        this chapter from my own library of Python programs that I really use.
        For instance, the text editor and clock GUIs that we’ll meet here are
        day-to-day workhorses on my machines. Because they are written in
        Python and tkinter, they work unchanged on my Windows and Linux
        machines, and they should work on Macs too.</p>
<p>Since these are pure Python scripts, their future evolution is
        entirely up to their <span>users—</span>once
        you get a handle on tkinter interfaces, changing or augmenting the
        behavior of such programs by editing their Python code is a snap.
        Although some of these examples are similar to commercially available
        programs (e.g., PyEdit is reminiscent of the Windows Notepad
        accessory), the portability and almost infinite configurability of
        Python scripts can be a decided advantage.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Examples in Other Chapters"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="examples_in_other_chapters"></a>Examples in Other Chapters</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Later in the book, we’ll meet other tkinter GUI programs that
          put a good face on specific application domains. For instance, the
          following larger GUI examples show up in later chapters also:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>PyMailGUI</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>A comprehensive email client (Chapter 14)</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>PyForm</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>A (mostly external) persistent object table viewer
                (Chapter 17)</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>PyTree</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>A (mostly external) tree data structure viewer (Chapter 18 and Chapter 19)</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>PyCalc</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>A customizable calculator widget (Chapter 19)</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Smaller examples, including FTP and file-transfer GUIs, pop up
          in the Internet part as well. Most of these programs see regular
          action on my desktop, too. Because GUI libraries are general-purpose
          tools, there are very few domains that cannot benefit from an
          easy-to-use, easy-to-program, and widely portable user interface
          coded in Python and tkinter.</p>
<p>Beyond the examples in this book, you can also find
          higher-level GUI toolkits for Python, such as the Pmw, Tix, and ttk
          packages introduced in Chapter 7.
          Some such systems build upon tkinter to provide compound components
          such as notebook tabbed widgets, tree views, and balloon pop-up
          help.</p>
<p>In the next part of the book, we’ll also explore programs that
          build user interfaces in web browsers, instead of tkinter—a very
          different way of approaching the user interface experience. Although
          web browser interfaces have been historically limited in
          functionality and slowed by network latency, when combined with the
          rich Internet application (RIA) toolkits mentioned at the start of
          Chapter 7, browser-based GUIs
          today can sometimes approach the utility of traditional GUIs, albeit
          at substantial cost in software complexity and dependencies.</p>
<p>Especially for highly interactive and nontrivial interfaces,
          though, standalone/desktop tkinter GUIs can be an indispensable
          feature of almost any Python program you write. The programs in this
          chapter underscore just how far Python and tkinter can take
          you.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="This Chapter’s Strategy"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="this_chapter_apostrophy_s_strategy"></a>This Chapter’s Strategy</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As for all case-study chapters in this text, this one is
          largely a learn-by-example exercise; most of the programs here are
          listed with minimal details. Along the way, I’ll highlight salient
          points and underscore new tkinter features that examples introduce,
          but I’ll also assume that you will study the listed source code and
          its comments for more information. Once we reach the level of
          complexity demonstrated by programs here, Python’s readability
          becomes a substantial advantage for programmers (and writers of
          books).</p>
<p>All of this book’s GUI examples are available in source code
          form in the book’s examples distribution described in the Preface<a name="section consists"></a>. Because I’ve already shown the interfaces
          these scripts employ, this section consists mostly of screenshots,
          program listings, and a few brief words describing some of the most
          important aspects of these programs. In other words, this is a
          self-study section: read the source, run the examples on your own
          computer, and refer to the previous chapters for further details on
          the code listed here. Some of these programs may also be accompanied
          in the book examples distribution by alternative or experimental
          implementations not listed here; see the distribution for extra code
          examples.</p>
<p>Finally, I want to remind you that all of the larger programs
          listed in the previous sections can be run from the <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e44514"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e44517"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e44520"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e44525"></a>PyDemos and PyGadgets launcher bar GUIs that we met at
          the end of Chapter 10. Although I will
          try hard to capture some of their behavior in screenshots here, GUIs
          are event-driven systems by nature, and there is nothing quite like
          running one live to sample the flavor of its user interactions.
          Because of that, the launcher bars are really a supplement to the
          material in this chapter. They should run on most platforms and are
          designed to be easy to start (see the top-level
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>README-PP4E.txt</em></span> file for hints). You should go
          there and start clicking things immediately if you haven’t done so
          already.</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="open_source_software_and_camaros"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Open Source Software and Camaros</p>
<p>Some of the GUI <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e44541"></a>programs in this chapter, as well as the rest of the
            book, are analogous to utilities found on commonly used operating
            systems like Windows. For instance, we’ll meet calculators, text
            editors, image viewers, clocks, email clients, and more.</p>
<p>Unlike most utilities, though, these programs are
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>portable</em></span>—because they are written in Python
            with tkinter, they will work on all major platforms (Windows,
            Unix/Linux, and Macs). Perhaps more important, because their
            source code is available, they can be
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>scripted</em></span>—you can change their appearance or
            function however you like, just by writing or modifying a little
            Python code.</p>
<p>An analogy might help underscore the importance of
            scriptability. There are still a few of us who remember a time
            when it was completely normal for car owners to work on and repair
            their own automobiles. I still fondly remember huddling with
            friends under the hood of a 1970 Camaro in my youth, tweaking and
            customizing its engine. With a little work, we could make it as
            fast, flashy, and loud as we liked. Moreover, a breakdown in one
            of those older cars wasn’t necessarily the end of the world. There
            was at least some chance that I could get the car going again on
            my own.</p>
<p>That’s not quite true today. With the introduction of
            electronic controls and diabolically cramped engine compartments,
            car owners are usually better off taking their cars back to the
            dealer or another repair professional for all but the simplest
            kinds of changes. By and large, cars are no longer
            user-maintainable products. And if I have a breakdown in my shiny
            new ride, I’m probably going to be completely stuck until an
            authorized repair person can get around to towing and fixing
            it.</p>
<p>I like to think of the closed and open software models in
            the same terms. When I use Microsoft-provided programs such as
            Notepad and Outlook, I’m stuck with the feature set that a large
            company dictates, as well as any bugs that it may harbor. But with
            programmable tools such as PyEdit and PyMailGUI, I can still get
            under the hood. I can add features, customize the system, and work
            my way out of any lurking bugs. And I can do so long before the
            next Microsoft patch or release is available. I’m no longer
            dependent on a self-interested company to support—or even to
            continue producing—the tools I use.</p>
<p>Of course, I’m still dependent on Python and whatever
            changes it may dictate over time (and after updating two 1,000+
            page books for Python 3.X, I can say with some confidence that
            this dependency isn’t always completely trivial). Having all the
            source code for every layer of the tools you depend on, though, is
            still a powerful last resort, and a major net win. As an added
            bonus, it fosters robustness by providing a built-in group of
            people to test and hone the system.</p>
<p>At the end of the day, open source software and Python are
            as much about <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>freedom</em></span> as they are about cost.
            Users, not an arbitrarily far-removed company, have the final say.
            Not everyone wants to work on his own car, of course. On the other
            hand, software tends to fail much more often than cars, and Python
            scripting is generally less greasy than auto mechanics.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[38] </sup>All of the larger examples in this book have
                  <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Py</em></span> at the start of their names. This is
                  by convention in the Python world. If you shop around at
                  http://www.python.org, you’ll find
                  other free software that follows this pattern too: PyOpenGL
                  (a Python interface to the OpenGL graphics library), PyGame
                  (a Python game development kit), and many more. I’m not sure
                  who started this pattern, but it has turned out to be a more
                  or less subtle way to advertise programming language
                  preferences to the rest of the open source world.
                  Pythonistas are nothing if not PySubtle.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
