<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Where to Go from Here</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Where to Go from Here"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="where_to_go_from_here"></a>Where to Go from Here</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>This concludes the GUI section of this book, but this is not an
        end to the book’s GUI coverage. If you want to learn more about
        <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e46906"></a>GUIs, be sure to see the tkinter examples that appear
        later in this book and are described at the start of this chapter.
        PyMailGUI, PyCalc, and the mostly external PyForm and PyTree provide
        additional GUI case <span>studies</span>. In
        the next section of this book, we’ll also learn how to build user
        interfaces that run in web browsers—a very different concept, but
        another option for interface design.</p>
<p>Keep in mind, too, that even if you don’t see a GUI example in
        this book that looks very close to one you need to program, you’ve
        already met all the building blocks. Constructing larger GUIs for your
        application is really just a matter of laying out hierarchical
        composites of the widgets presented in this part of the text.</p>
<p>For instance, a complex display might be composed as a
        collection of radio buttons, listboxes, scales, text fields, menus,
        and so on—all arranged in frames or grids to achieve the desired
        appearance. Pop-up top-level windows, as well as independently run GUI
        programs linked with Inter-Process Communication (IPC) mechanisms,
        such as pipes, signals, and sockets, can further supplement a complex
        graphical interface.</p>
<p>Moreover, you can implement larger GUI components as Python
        classes and attach or extend them anywhere you need a similar
        interface device; see PyEdit’s role in PyView and PyMailGUI for a
        prime example. With a little creativity, tkinter’s widget set and
        Python support a virtually unlimited number of layouts.</p>
<p>Beyond this book, see the<a id="I_indexterm5_d1e46923"></a> tkinter documentation overview in Chapter 7, the books department at
        Python’s website at http://www.python.org, and
        the Web at large. Finally, if you catch the tkinter bug, I want to
        again recommend downloading and experimenting with the packages
        introduced in Chapter 7—especially
        Pmw, PIL, Tix, and ttk (Tix and ttk are a standard part of Python
        today). Such extensions add additional tools to the tkinter arsenal
        that can make your GUIs more sophisticated, with minimal
        coding.</p>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
