<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Part IV. Internet Programming</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__part" title="Part IV. Internet Programming"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="internet_programming"></a>Part IV. Internet Programming</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__partintro" id="id3913094" title="Internet Programming"><div>
</div>
<p>This part of the book explores Python’s role as a language for
      programming Internet-based applications, and its library tools that
      support this role. Along the way, system and GUI tools presented earlier
      in the book are put to use as well. Because this is a popular Python
      domain, chapters here cover all fronts:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Chapter 12</span></dt><dd>
<p>This chapter introduces Internet concepts and options,
            presents Python low-level network tools such as sockets, and
            covers client and server basics.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Chapter 13</span></dt><dd>
<p>This chapter shows you how your scripts can use Python to
            access common client-side network protocols like FTP, email, HTTP,
            and more.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Chapter 14</span></dt><dd>
<p>This chapter uses the client-side email tools covered in the
            prior chapter, as well as the GUI techniques of the prior part, to
            implement a full-featured email client.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Chapter 15</span></dt><dd>
<p>This chapter introduces the basics of Python server-side
            Common Gateway Interface (CGI) scripts—a kind of program used to
            implement interactive websites.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Chapter 16</span></dt><dd>
<p>This chapter demonstrates Python website techniques by
            implementing a web-based email tool on a server, in part to
            compare and contrast with Chapter 14’s nonweb approach.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Although they are outside this book’s scope, Chapter 12 also provides brief overviews of more
      advanced Python Internet tools best covered in follow-up resources, such
      as Jython, Django, App Engine, Zope, PSP, pyjamas, and HTMLgen. Here,
      you’ll learn the fundamentals needed to use such tools when you’re ready
      to step up.</p>
<p>Along the way, we’ll also put general programming concepts such as
      object-oriented programming (OOP) and code refactoring and reuse to work
      here. As we’ll see, Python, GUIs, and networking are a powerful <span>combination</span>.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
