<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 12. Network Scripting</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 12. Network Scripting"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="network_scripting"></a>Chapter 12. Network Scripting</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="“Tune In, Log On, and Drop Out”"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="quotation_mark_tune_in_comma_log_on_comm"></a>“Tune In, Log On, and Drop Out”</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Over the 15 years since this book was first published, the
        Internet has virtually exploded onto the mainstream stage. It has
        rapidly grown from a simple communication device used primarily by
        academics and researchers into a medium that is now nearly as
        pervasive as the television and telephone. Social observers have
        likened the Internet’s cultural impact to that of the printing press,
        and technical observers have suggested that all new software
        development of interest occurs only on the Internet. Naturally, time
        will be the final arbiter for such claims, but there is little doubt
        that the Internet is a major force in society and one of the main
        application contexts for modern software systems.</p>
<p>The Internet also happens to be one of the primary application
        domains for the Python programming language. In the decade and a half
        since the first edition of this book was written, the Internet’s
        growth has strongly influenced Python’s tool set and roles. Given
        Python and a computer with a socket-based Internet connection today,
        we can write Python scripts to read and send email around the world,
        fetch web pages from remote sites, transfer files by FTP, program
        interactive websites, parse HTML and XML files, and much more, simply
        by using the Internet modules that ship with Python as standard
        tools.</p>
<p>In fact, companies all over the world do: Google, YouTube, Walt
        Disney, Hewlett-Packard, JPL, and many others rely on Python’s
        standard tools to power their websites. For example, the Google search
        engine—widely credited with making the Web <span>usable—</span>makes extensive use of Python
        code. The YouTube video server site is largely implemented in Python.
        And the BitTorrent peer-to-peer file transfer system—written in Python
        and downloaded by tens of millions of users—leverages Python’s
        networking skills to share files among clients and remove some server
        bottlenecks.</p>
<p>Many also build and manage their sites with larger Python-based
        toolkits. For instance, the Zope web application server was an early
        entrant to the domain and is itself written and customizable in
        Python. Others build sites with the Plone content management system,
        which is built upon Zope and delegates site content to its users.
        Still others use Python to script Java web applications with Jython
        (formerly known as JPython)—a system that compiles Python programs to
        Java bytecode, exports Java libraries for use in Python scripts, and
        allows Python code to serve as web applets downloaded and run in a
        browser.</p>
<p>In more recent years, new techniques and systems have risen to
        prominence in the Web sphere. For example, XML-RPC and SOAP interfaces
        for Python have enabled web service programming; frameworks such as
        Google App Engine, Django, and TurboGears have emerged as powerful
        tools for constructing websites; the XML package in Python’s standard
        library, as well as third-party extensions, provides a suite of XML
        processing tools; and the IronPython implementation provides seamless
        .NET/Mono integration for Python code in much the same way Jython
        leverages Java libraries.</p>
<p>As the Internet has grown, so too has Python’s role as an
        Internet tool. Python has proven to be well suited to Internet
        scripting for some of the very same reasons that make it ideal in
        other domains. Its modular design and rapid turnaround mix well with
        the intense demands of Internet development. In this part of the book,
        we’ll find that Python does more than simply support Internet
        scripting; it also fosters qualities such as productivity and
        maintainability that are essential to Internet projects of all shapes
        and sizes.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Internet Scripting Topics"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="internet_scripting_topics"></a>Internet Scripting Topics</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Internet programming entails many topics, so to make the
          presentation easier to digest, I’ve split this subject over the next
          five chapters of this book. Here’s this part’s chapter
          rundown:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>This chapter introduces Internet fundamentals and explores
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>sockets</em></span>, the underlying communications
              mechanism of the Internet. We met sockets briefly as IPC tools
              in Chapter 5 and again in a GUI
              use case in Chapter 10, but here
              we will study them in the depth afforded by their broader
              networking roles.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Chapter 13 covers the
              fundamentals of <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>client-side scripting</em></span> and
              Internet protocols. Here, we’ll explore Python’s standard
              support for FTP, email, HTTP, NNTP, and more.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Chapter 14 presents a larger
              client-side case study: PyMailGUI, a full-featured email
              client.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Chapter 15 discusses the
              fundamentals of <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>server-side scripting</em></span> and
              website construction. We’ll study basic CGI scripting techniques
              and concepts that underlie most of what happens in the
              Web.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Chapter 16 presents a larger
              server-side case study: PyMailCGI, a full-featured webmail
              site.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Each chapter assumes you’ve read the previous one, but you can
          generally skip around, especially if you have prior experience in
          the Internet domain. Since these chapters represent a substantial
          portion of this book at large, the following sections go into a few
          more details about what we’ll be studying.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="What we will cover"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="what_we_will_cover"></a>What we will cover</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In conceptual terms, the Internet can roughly be thought of
            as being composed of multiple functional layers:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Low-level networking layers</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Mechanisms such as the TCP/IP transport mechanism,
                  which deal with transferring bytes between machines, but
                  don’t care what they mean</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Sockets</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47064"></a>programmer’s interface to the network, which
                  runs on top of physical networking layers like TCP/IP and
                  supports flexible client/server models in both IPC and
                  networked modes</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Higher-level protocols</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Structured Internet communication schemes such as FTP
                  and email, which run on top of sockets and define message
                  formats and standard addresses</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Server-side web scripting</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Application models such as CGI, which define the
                  structure of communication between web browsers and web
                  servers, also run on top of sockets, and support the notion
                  of web-based programs</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Higher-level frameworks and
                tools</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Third-party systems such as Django, App Engine,
                  Jython, and pyjamas, which leverage sockets and
                  communication protocols, too, but address specific
                  techniques or larger problem domains</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>This book covers the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>middle three tiers</em></span>
            in this list—sockets, the Internet protocols that run on them, and
            the CGI model of web-based conversations. What we learn here will
            also apply to more specific toolkits in the last tier above,
            because they are all ultimately based upon the same Internet and
            web fundamentals.</p>
<p>More specifically, in this and the next chapter, our main
            focus is on programming the second and third layers:
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>sockets</em></span> and higher-level Internet
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>protocols</em></span>. We’ll start this chapter at the
            bottom, learning about the socket model of network programming.
            Sockets aren’t strictly tied to Internet scripting, as we saw in
            Chapter 5’s IPC examples, but they
            are presented in full here because this is one of their primary
            roles. As we’ll see, most of what happens on the Internet happens
            through sockets, whether you notice or not.</p>
<p>After introducing sockets, the next two chapters make their
            way up to Python’s <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>client-side</em></span> interfaces to
            higher-level protocols—things like email and FTP transfers, which
            run on top of sockets. It turns out that a lot can be done with
            Python on the client alone, and Chapters 13
            and 14 will sample the flavor of
            Python client-side scripting. Finally, the last two chapters in
            this part of the book then move on to present
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>server-side</em></span> <span>scripting—</span>programs that run on a
            server computer and are usually invoked by a web browser.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="What we won’t cover"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="what_we_won_apostrophy_t_cover"></a>What we won’t cover</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Now that I’ve told you what we will cover in this book, I
            also want to be clear about what we won’t cover. Like tkinter, the
            Internet is a vast topic, and this part of the book is mostly an
            introduction to its core concepts and an exploration of
            representative tasks. Because there are so many Internet-related
            modules and extensions, this book does not attempt to serve as an
            exhaustive survey of the domain. Even in just Python’s own tool
            set, there are simply too many Internet modules to include each in
            this text in any sort of useful fashion.</p>
<p>Moreover, higher-level tools like Django, Jython, and App
            Engine are very large systems in their own right, and they are
            best dealt with in more focused documents. Because dedicated books
            on such topics are now available, we’ll merely scratch their
            surfaces here with a brief survey later in this chapter. This book
            also says almost nothing about lower-level networking layers such
            as TCP/IP. If you’re curious about what happens on the Internet at
            the bit-and-wire level, consult a good networking text for more
            <span>details</span>.</p>
<p>In other words, this part is not meant to be an exhaustive
            reference to Internet and web programming with Python—a topic
            which has evolved between prior editions of this book, and will
            undoubtedly continue to do so after this one is published.
            Instead, the goal of this part of the book is to serve as a
            tutorial introduction to the domain to help you get started, and
            to provide context and examples which will help you understand the
            documentation for tools you may wish to explore after mastering
            the fundamentals here.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Other themes in this part of the book"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="other_themes_in_this_part_of_the_book"></a>Other themes in this part of the book</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Like the prior parts of the book, this one has other
            agendas, too. Along the way, this part will also put to work many
            of the operating-system and GUI interfaces we studied in Parts
            II and III
            (e.g., processes, threads, signals, and tkinter). We’ll also get
            to see the Python language applied in realistically scaled
            programs, and we’ll investigate some of the design choices and
            challenges that the Internet presents.</p>
<p>That last statement merits a few more words. Internet
            scripting, like GUIs, is one of the “sexier” application domains
            for Python. As in GUI work, there is an intangible but instant
            gratification in seeing a Python Internet program ship information
            all over the world. On the other hand, by its very nature, network
            programming can impose speed overheads and user interface
            limitations. Though it may not be a fashionable stance these days,
            some applications are still better off not being deployed on the
            Web.</p>
<p>A traditional “desktop” GUI like those of Part III, for example, can combine the
            feature-richness and responsiveness of client-side libraries with
            the power of network access. On the other hand, web-based
            applications offer compelling benefits in portability and
            administration. In this part of the book, we will take an honest
            look at the Net’s trade-offs as they arise and explore examples
            which illustrate the advantages of both web and nonweb
            architectures. In fact, the larger PyMailGUI and PyMailCGI
            examples we’ll explore are intended in part to serve this
            purpose.</p>
<p>The Internet is also considered by many to be something of
            an ultimate proof of concept for open source tools. Indeed, much
            of the Net runs on top of a large number of such tools, such as
            Python, Perl, the Apache web server, the sendmail program, MySQL,
            and <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47150"></a>Linux.<sup>[42]</sup> Moreover, new tools and technologies for programming
            the Web sometimes seem to appear faster than developers can absorb
            them.</p>
<p>The good news is that Python’s integration focus makes it a
            natural in such a heterogeneous world. Today, Python programs can
            be installed as client-side and server-side tools; used as applets
            and servlets in Java applications; mixed into distributed object
            systems like CORBA, SOAP, and XML-RPC; integrated into AJAX-based
            applications; and much more. In more general terms, the rationale
            for using Python in the Internet domain is exactly the same as in
            any other—Python’s emphasis on quality, productivity, portability,
            and integration makes it ideal for writing Internet programs that
            are open, maintainable, and delivered according to the
            ever-shrinking schedules in this field.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Running Examples in This Part of the Book"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="running_examples_in_this_part_of_the_boo"></a>Running Examples in This Part of the Book</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Internet scripts generally imply execution contexts that
          earlier examples in this book have not. That is, it usually takes a
          bit more to run programs that talk over networks. Here are a few
          pragmatic notes about this part’s examples, up front:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>You don’t need to download extra packages to run examples
              in this part of the book. All of the examples we’ll see are
              based on the standard set of Internet-related modules that come
              with Python and are installed in Python’s library
              directory.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>You don’t need a state-of-the-art network link or an
              account on a web server to run the socket and client-side
              examples in this part. Although some socket examples will be
              shown running remotely, most can be run on a single local
              machine. Client-side examples that demonstrate protocol like FTP
              require only basic Internet access, and email examples expect
              just POP and SMTP capable servers.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>You don’t need an account on a web server machine to run
              the server-side scripts in later chapters; they can be run by
              any web browser. You may need such an account to change these
              scripts if you store them remotely, but not if you use a locally
              running web server as we will in this book.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>We’ll discuss configuration details as we move along, but in
          short, when a Python script opens an Internet connection (with the
          <code class="epub__literal">socket</code> module or one of the
          Internet protocol modules), Python will happily use whatever
          Internet link exists on your machine, be that a dedicated T1 line, a
          DSL line, or a simple modem. For instance, opening a socket on a
          Windows PC automatically initiates processing to create a connection
          to your Internet provider if needed.</p>
<p>Moreover, as long as your platform supports sockets, you
          probably can run many of the examples here even if you have no
          Internet connection at all. As we’ll see, a machine name <code class="epub__literal">localhost</code> or <code class="epub__literal">""</code> (an empty string) usually means the
          local computer itself. This allows you to test both the client and
          the server sides of a dialog on the same computer without connecting
          to the Net. For example, you can run both socket-based clients and
          servers locally on a Windows PC without ever going out to the Net.
          In other words, you can likely run the programs here whether you
          have a way to connect to the Internet or not.</p>
<p>Some later examples assume that a particular kind of server is
          running on a server machine (e.g., FTP, POP, SMTP), but client-side
          scripts themselves work on any <span>Internet</span>-aware machine with Python
          installed. Server-side examples in Chapters 15
          and 16 require more: to develop CGI
          scripts, you’ll need to either have a web server account or run a
          web server program locally on your own computer (which is easier
          than you may think—we’ll learn how to code a simple one in Python in
          Chapter 15). Advanced third-party
          systems like Jython and Zope must be downloaded separately, of
          course; we’ll peek at some of these briefly in this chapter but
          defer to their own documentation for more details.</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="in_the_beginning_there_was_grail"></a>
<p class="epub__title">In the Beginning There Was Grail</p>
<p>Besides creating the Python language, Guido <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47204"></a>van Rossum also wrote a World Wide Web browser in
            Python years ago, named (appropriately enough) Grail. <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47208"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47211"></a>Grail was partly developed as a demonstration of
            Python’s capabilities. It allows users to browse the Web much like
            Firefox or Internet Explorer, but it can also be programmed with
            Grail applets—Python/tkinter programs downloaded from a server
            when accessed and run on the client by the browser. Grail applets
            work much like Java applets in more widespread browsers (more on
            applets in the next section).</p>
<p>Though it was updated to run under recent Python releases as
            I was finishing this edition, Grail is no longer under active
            development today, and it is mostly used for research purposes
            (indeed, the Netscape browser was counted among its
            contemporaries). Nevertheless, Python still reaps the benefits of
            the Grail project, in the form of a rich set of Internet tools. To
            write a full-featured web browser, you need to support a wide
            variety of Internet protocols, and Guido packaged support for all
            of these as standard library modules that were eventually shipped
            with the Python language.</p>
<p>Because of this legacy, Python now includes standard support
            for Usenet news (NNTP), email processing (POP, SMTP, IMAP), file
            transfers (FTP), web pages and interactions (HTTP, URLs, HTML,
            CGI), and other commonly used protocols such as Telnet. <span>Python</span> scripts can connect to all of
            these Internet components by simply importing the associated
            library module.</p>
<p>Since Grail, additional tools have been added to Python’s
            library for parsing XML files, OpenSSL secure sockets, and more.
            But much of Python’s Internet support can be traced back to the
            Grail browser—another example of Python’s support for code reuse
            at work. At this writing, you can still find the Grail by
            searching for “Grail web browser” at your favorite web search
            engine.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[42] </sup>There is even a common acronym for this today: LAMP, for
                the Linux operating system, the Apache web server, the MySQL
                database system, and the Python, Perl, and PHP scripting
                languages. It’s possible, and even very common, to put
                together an entire enterprise-level web server with open
                source tools. Python users would probably also like to include
                systems like Zope, Django, Webware, and CherryPy in this list,
                but the resulting acronym might be a bit of a stretch.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
