<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Python Internet Development Options</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Python Internet Development Options"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="python_internet_development_options"></a>Python Internet Development Options</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Although many are <a id="py12.2"></a><a id="pro12.2"></a><a id="net12.2"></a><a id="in12.2"></a>outside our scope here, there are a variety of ways that
        Python programmers script the Web. Just as we did for GUIs, I want to
        begin with a quick overview of some of the more popular tools in this
        domain before we jump into the fundamentals.</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Networking tools</span></dt><dd>
<p>As we’ll see in this chapter, Python comes with tools the
              support basic networking, as well as implementation of custom
              types of network servers. This includes
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>sockets</em></span>, but <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47262"></a>also the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>select</em></span> call for
              asynchronous servers, as well as higher-order and pre-coded
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>socket server classes</em></span>. Standard library
              modules <code class="epub__literal">socket</code>, <code class="epub__literal">select</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">socket</code><code class="epub__literal">server</code> support all these
              roles.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Client-side protocol tools</span></dt><dd>
<p>As we’ll see in the next chapter, Python’s <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47292"></a>Internet arsenal also includes canned support for
              the client side of most standard <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Internet
              protocols</em></span>—scripts <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47301"></a>can easily make use of FTP, email, HTTP, Telnet,
              and more. Especially when wedded to desktop GUIs of the sort we
              met in the preceding part of this book, these tools open the
              door to full-featured and highly responsive Web-aware
              applications.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Server-side CGI scripting</span></dt><dd>
<p>Perhaps the <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47313"></a>simplest way to implement interactive website
              behavior<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47319"></a>, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>CGI scripting</em></span> is an
              application model for running scripts on servers to process form
              data, take action based upon it, and produce reply pages. We’ll
              use it later in this part of the book. It’s supported by
              Python’s standard library directly, is the basis for much of
              what happens on the Web, and suffices for simpler site
              development tasks. Raw CGI scripting doesn’t by itself address
              issues such as cross-page state retention and concurrent
              updates, but CGI scripts that use devices like cookies and
              database systems often can.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Web frameworks and clouds</span></dt><dd>
<p>For more demanding Web work, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47334"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47337"></a>frameworks can automate many of the low-level
              details and provide more structured and powerful techniques for
              dynamic site implementation. Beyond basic CGI scripts, the
              Python world is flush with third-party web frameworks such
              as<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47341"></a> <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Django</em></span>—a high-level
              framework that encourages rapid development and clean, pragmatic
              design and includes a dynamic database access API and its own
              server-side templating language<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47348"></a>; <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Google App Engine</em></span>—a “cloud
              computing” framework that provides enterprise-level tools for
              use in Python scripts and allows sites to leverage the capacity
              of Google’s Web infrastructure; and<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47356"></a> <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Turbo Gears</em></span>—an integrated
              collection of tools including a JavaScript library, a template
              system, CherryPy for web interaction, and SQLObject for
              accessing databases using Python’s class model.</p>
<p>Also in the framework category are<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47365"></a> <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Zope</em></span>—an open source web
              application server and toolkit, written in and customizable with
              Python, in which websites are implemented using a fundamentally
              object-oriented model<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47372"></a>; <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Plone</em></span>—a Zope-based website
              builder which provides a workflow model (called a content
              management system) that allows content producers to add their
              content to a site; and other popular systems for website
              construction, including <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>pylons</em></span>,
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>web2py</em></span>, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>CherryPy</em></span>, and
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Webware</em></span>.</p>
<p>Many of these frameworks are based upon the now widespread
              MVC (model-view-controller) structure<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47394"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47397"></a>, and most provide state retention solutions that
              wrap database storage. Some make use of the<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47401"></a> ORM (<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>object relational
              mapping</em></span>) model we’ll meet in the next part of the
              book, which superimposes Python’s classes onto relational
              database tables, and Zope stores objects in your site in the
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>ZODB</em></span> object-oriented database we’ll study
              in the next part as well.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Rich Internet Applications (revisited)</span></dt><dd>
<p>Discussed at the <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47419"></a>start of Chapter 7, newer and emerging “rich
              Internet application” (RIA) systems such as
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Flex</em></span>, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Silverlight</em></span>,
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>JavaFX</em></span>, and <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>pyjamas</em></span>
              allow user interfaces implemented in web browsers to be much
              more dynamic and functional than HTML has traditionally allowed.
              These are client-side solutions, based generally upon AJAX and
              JavaScript, which provide widget sets that rival those of
              traditional “desktop” GUIs and provide for asynchronous
              communication with web servers. According to some observers,
              such interactivity is a major component of the “Web 2.0”
              model.</p>
<p>Ultimately, the web browser is a “desktop” GUI
              application, too, albeit one which is very widely available and
              which can be generalized with RIA techniques to serve as a
              platform for rendering other GUIs, using software layers that do
              not rely on a particular GUI library. In effect, RIAs turn web
              browsers into extendable GUIs.</p>
<p>At least that’s their goal today. Compared to traditional
              GUIs, RIAs gain some portability and deployment simplicity, in
              exchange for decreased performance and increased software stack
              complexity. Moreover, much as in the GUI realm, there are
              already competing RIA toolkits today which may add dependencies
              and impact portability. Unless a pervasive frontrunner appears,
              using a RIA application may require an install step, not unlike
              desktop applications.</p>
<p>Stay tuned, though; like the Web at large, the RIA story
              is still a work in progress. The emerging HTML5 standard, for
              instance, while likely not to become prevalent for some years to
              come, may obviate the need for RIA browser plug-ins
              eventually.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Web services: XML-RPC, SOAP</span></dt><dd>
<p>XML-RPC is a technology <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47450"></a>that provides remote procedural calls to
              components <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47454"></a>over networks. It routes requests over the HTTP
              protocol and ships data back and forth packaged as XML text. To
              clients, web servers appear to be simple functions; when
              function calls are issued, passed data is encoded as XML and
              shipped to remote servers using the Web’s HTTP transport
              mechanism. The net effect is to simplify the interface to web
              servers in client-side programs.</p>
<p>More broadly, XML-RPC fosters the notion of <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>web
              services</em></span>—reusable software components that run on the
              Web—and is supported by Python’s <code class="epub__literal">xmlrpc.client</code> module, which handles
              the client side of this protocol, and <code class="epub__literal">xmlrcp.server</code>, which provides tools
              for the server side. <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47471"></a>SOAP is a similar but generally heavier web
              services protocol, available to Python in the third-party
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>SOAPy</em></span> and <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>ZSI</em></span>
              packages, among others.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">CORBA ORBs</span></dt><dd>
<p>An earlier but comparable technology, CORBA <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47490"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47495"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47498"></a>is an architecture for distributed programming, in
              which components communicate across a network by routing calls
              through an <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Object Request Broker</em></span> (ORB).
              Python support for CORBA is available in the third-party
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>OmniORB</em></span> package, as well as the (still
              available though not recently maintained)
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>ILU</em></span> system.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Java and .NET: Jython and IronPython</span></dt><dd>
<p>We also met<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47517"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47522"></a> Jython and IronPython briefly at the start of
              Chapter 7, in the context of
              GUIs. By compiling Python script to Java bytecode,
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Jython</em></span> also allows Python scripts to be
              used in any context that Java programs can. This includes
              web-<span>oriented</span> roles, such
              as applets stored on the server but run on the client when
              referenced within web pages. The <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>IronPython</em></span>
              system also mentioned in Chapter 7 similarly offers
              Web-focused options, including access to the Silverlight RIA
              framework and its Moonlight implementation in the Mono system
              for Linux.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Screen scraping: XML and HTML parsing tools</span></dt><dd>
<p>Though not <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47548"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47551"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47556"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47561"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47566"></a>technically tied to the Internet, XML text often
              appears in such roles. Because of its other roles, though, we’ll
              study Python’s basic XML parsing support, as well as third-party
              extensions to it, in the next part of this book, when we explore
              Python’s text processing toolkit. As we’ll see,
              Python’s<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47572"></a> <code class="epub__literal">xml</code> package
              comes with support for DOM, SAX, and ElementTree style XML
              parsing, and the open source domain provides extensions for
              XPath and much more. Python’s<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47582"></a> <code class="epub__literal">html.parser</code>
              library module also provides a HTML-specific parser, with a
              model not unlike that of XML’s SAX technique. Such tools can be
              used in <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>screen scraping</em></span> roles, to extract
              content of web pages fetched with <code class="epub__literal">urllib.request</code> <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47597"></a>tools.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Windows COM and DCOM</span></dt><dd>
<p>The <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>PyWin32</em></span> package <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47612"></a>allows Python scripts to communicate via COM
              <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47618"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47623"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47626"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47631"></a>on Windows to perform feats such as editing Word
              documents and populating Excel spreadsheets (additional tools
              support Excel document processing). Though not related to the
              Internet itself (and being arguably upstaged by .NET in recent
              years), the distributed extension to COM,
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>DCOM</em></span>, offers additional options for
              distributing applications over networks.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Other tools</span></dt><dd>
<p>Other tools serve more specific roles. Among this crowd
              are<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47644"></a> <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>mod_python</em></span>—a system which
              optimizes the execution of Python server-scripts in the
              <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47651"></a>Apache web server;<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47655"></a> <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Twisted</em></span>—an asynchronous,
              event-driven, networking framework written in <span>Python</span>, with support for a large
              number of network protocols and with precoded implementations of
              common network servers;<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47668"></a> <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>HTMLgen</em></span>—a lightweight tool
              that allows HTML code to be generated from a tree of Python
              objects that describes a web page; and <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Python Server
              Pages</em></span> (PSP)—<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47678"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47681"></a>a server-side templating technology that embeds
              Python code inside HTML, runs it with request context to render
              part of a reply page, and is strongly reminiscent of PHP, ASP,
              and JSP.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>As you might expect given the prominence of the Web, there are
        more Internet tools for Python than we have space to discuss here. For
        more on this front, see the PyPI website<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47687"></a> at http://python.org/, or visit
        your favorite web search engine (some of which are implemented using
        Python’s Internet tools themselves).</p>
<p>Again, the goal of this book is to cover the fundamentals in an
        in-depth way, so that you’ll have the context needed to use tools like
        some of those above well, when you’re ready to graduate to more
        comprehensive solutions. As we’ll see, the basic model of CGI
        scripting we’ll meet here illustrates the mechanisms underlying all
        web development, whether it’s implemented by bare-bones scripts, or
        advanced frameworks.</p>
<p>Because we must walk before we can run well, though, let’s start
        at the bottom here, and get a handle on what the Internet really is.
        The Internet today rests upon a rich software stack; while tools can
        hide some of its complexity, programming it skillfully still requires
        knowledge of all its layers. As we’ll see, deploying Python on the
        Web, especially with higher-order web frameworks like those listed
        above, is only possible because we truly are “surfing on the shoulders
        of <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47697"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47699"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47701"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47703"></a>giants.”</p>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
