<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Plumbing the Internet</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Plumbing the Internet"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="plumbing_the_internet"></a>Plumbing the Internet</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Unless you’ve been living in a cave for the last decade or two,
        you are probably already familiar with the Internet, at least from a
        user’s perspective. Functionally, we use it as a communication and
        information medium, by exchanging email, browsing web pages,
        transferring files, and so on. Technically, the Internet consists of
        many layers of abstraction and devices—from the actual wires used to
        send bits across the world to the web browser that grabs and renders
        those bits into text, graphics, and audio on your computer.</p>
<p>In this book, we are primarily concerned with the programmer’s
        interface to the Internet. This, too, consists of multiple layers:
        sockets, which are programmable interfaces to the low-level
        connections between machines, and standard protocols, which add
        structure to discussions carried out over sockets. Let’s briefly look
        at each of these layers in the abstract before jumping into
        programming details.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The Socket Layer"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_socket_layer"></a>The Socket Layer</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In simple terms, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47718"></a><a id="in12.3.1"></a><a id="net12.3.1"></a>sockets are a programmable interface to connections
          between programs, possibly running on different computers of a
          network. They allow data formatted as byte strings to be passed
          between processes and machines. Sockets also form the basis and
          low-level “plumbing” of the Internet itself: all of the familiar
          higher-level Net protocols, like FTP, web pages, and email,
          ultimately occur over sockets. Sockets are also sometimes called
          communications endpoints because they are the portals through which
          programs send and receive bytes during a conversation.</p>
<p>Although often used for network conversations, sockets may
          also be used as a communication mechanism between programs running
          on the same computer, taking the form of a general Inter-Process
          Communication (IPC) <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47736"></a>mechanism. We saw this socket usage mode briefly in
          Chapter 5. Unlike some IPC devices,
          sockets are bidirectional data streams: programs may both send and
          receive data through them.</p>
<p>To programmers, sockets take the form of a handful of calls
          available in a library. These socket calls know how to send bytes
          between machines, using lower-level operations such as the TCP
          network transmission control protocol. At the bottom, TCP knows how
          to transfer bytes, but it doesn’t care what those bytes mean. For
          the purposes of this text, we will generally ignore how bytes sent
          to sockets are physically transferred. To understand sockets fully,
          though, we need to know a bit about how computers are named.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Machine identifiers"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="machine_identifiers"></a>Machine identifiers</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Suppose for just a <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47751"></a>moment that you wish to have a telephone
            conversation with someone halfway across the world. In the real
            world, you would probably need either that person’s telephone
            number or a directory that you could use to look up the number
            from her name (e.g., a telephone book). The same is true on the
            Internet: before a script can have a conversation with another
            computer somewhere in cyberspace, it must first know that other
            computer’s number or name.</p>
<p>Luckily, the Internet defines standard ways to name both a
            remote machine and a service provided by that machine. Within a
            script, the computer program to be contacted through a socket is
            identified by supplying a pair of values—the machine name and a
            specific port number on that machine:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Machine names</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>A machine name may <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47767"></a>take the form of either a string of numbers
                  separated by dots, called an IP address (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">166.93.218.100</code>), or a more legible
                  form known as a domain name (e.g.,
                  <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>starship.python.net</em></span>). Domain names are
                  automatically mapped into their dotted numeric address
                  equivalent when used, by something called a domain name
                  server—a program on the Net that serves the same purpose as
                  your local telephone directory assistance service. As a
                  special case, the machine name <code class="epub__literal">localhost</code>, and its equivalent IP
                  address <code class="epub__literal">127.0.0.1</code>, always
                  mean the same local machine; this allows us to refer to
                  servers running locally on the same computer as its
                  clients.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Port numbers</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>A port <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47790"></a>number is an agreed-upon numeric identifier
                  for a given conversation. Because computers on the Net
                  support a variety of services, port numbers are used to name
                  a particular conversation on a given machine. For two
                  machines to talk over the Net, both must associate sockets
                  with the same machine name and port number when initiating
                  network connections. As we’ll see, Internet protocols such
                  as email and the Web have standard reserved port numbers for
                  their connections, so clients can request a service
                  regardless of the machine providing it. Port number <code class="epub__literal">80</code>, for example, usually provides
                  web pages on any web server machine.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>The combination of a machine name and a port number uniquely
            identifies every dialog on the Net. For instance, an ISP’s
            computer may provide many kinds of services for customers—web
            pages, Telnet, FTP transfers, email, and so on. Each service on
            the machine is assigned a unique port number to which requests may
            be sent. To get web pages from a web server, programs need to
            specify both the web server’s Internet Protocol (IP) or domain
            name and the port number on which the server listens for web page
            requests.</p>
<p>If this sounds a bit strange, it may help to think of it in
            old-fashioned terms. To have a telephone conversation with someone
            within a company, for example, you usually need to dial both the
            company’s phone number and the extension of the person you want to
            reach. If you don’t know the company’s number, you can probably
            find it by looking up the company’s name in a phone book. It’s
            almost the same on the Net—machine names identify a collection of
            services (like a company), port numbers identify an individual
            service within a particular machine (like an extension), and
            domain names are mapped to IP numbers by domain name servers (like
            a phone book).</p>
<p>When programs use sockets to communicate in specialized ways
            with another machine (or with other processes on the same
            machine), they need to avoid using a port number reserved by a
            standard protocol—numbers in the range of 0 to 1023—but we first
            need to discuss protocols to understand <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47805"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47807"></a>why.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The Protocol Layer"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_protocol_layer"></a>The Protocol Layer</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Although sockets form the <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47815"></a><a id="in12.3.2"></a><a id="net12.3.2"></a>backbone of the Internet, much of the activity that
          happens on the Net is programmed with protocols,<sup>[43]</sup> which are higher-level message models that run on top
          of sockets. In short, the standard Internet protocols define a
          structured way to talk over sockets. They generally standardize both
          message formats and socket port numbers:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Message formats</em></span> provide structure for
              the bytes exchanged over sockets during conversations.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Port numbers</em></span> are reserved numeric
              identifiers for the underlying sockets over which messages are
              exchanged.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Raw sockets are still commonly used in many systems, but it is
          perhaps more common (and generally easier) to communicate with one
          of the standard higher-level Internet protocols. As we’ll see,
          Python provides support for standard protocols, which automates most
          of the socket and message formatting details.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Port number rules"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="port_number_rules"></a>Port number rules</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Technically <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47859"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e47864"></a>speaking, socket port numbers can be any 16-bit
            integer value between 0 and 65,535. However, to make it easier for
            programs to locate the standard protocols, port numbers in the
            range of 0 to 1023 are reserved and preassigned to the standard
            higher-level protocols. Table 12-1 lists the
            ports reserved for many of the standard protocols; each gets one
            or more preassigned numbers from the reserved range.</p><div class="epub__table"><a id="port_numbers_reserved_for_common_protoco"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Table 12-1. Port numbers reserved for common protocols</p><div class="epub__table-contents"><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; " summary="Port numbers reserved for common protocols"><colgroup><col></col><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Protocol</p></th><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Common
                    function</p></th><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Port
                    number</p></th><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Python
                    module</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>HTTP</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Web
                    pages</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>80</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">http.client</code>, <code class="epub__literal">http.server</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>NNTP</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Usenet
                    news</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>119</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">nntplib</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>FTP data
                    default</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>File
                    transfers</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>20</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">ftplib</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>FTP
                    control</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>File
                    transfers</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>21</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">ftplib</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>SMTP</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Sending
                    email</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>25</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">smtplib</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>POP3</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Fetching
                    email</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>110</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">poplib</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>IMAP4</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Fetching
                    email</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>143</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">imaplib</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Finger</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Informational</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>79</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>n/a</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>SSH</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Command
                    lines</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>22</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>n/a: third
                    party</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Telnet</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Command
                    lines</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>23</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">telnetlib</code></p></td></tr></tbody></table>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Clients and servers"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="clients_and_servers"></a>Clients and servers</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To socket programmers, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48041"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48046"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48051"></a>the standard protocols mean that port numbers 0 to
            1023 are off-limits to scripts, unless they really mean to use one
            of the higher-level protocols. This is both by standard and by
            common sense. A Telnet program, for instance, can start a dialog
            with any Telnet-capable machine by connecting to its port, 23;
            without preassigned port numbers, each server might install Telnet
            on a different port. Similarly, websites listen for page requests
            from browsers on port 80 by standard; if they did not, you might
            have to know and type the HTTP port number of every site you visit
            while surfing the Net.</p>
<p>By defining standard port numbers for services, the Net
            naturally gives rise to<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48059"></a> a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>client/server</em></span> architecture.
            On one side of a conversation, machines that support standard
            protocols perpetually run a set of programs that listen for
            connection requests on the reserved ports. On the other end of a
            dialog, other machines contact those programs to use the services
            they export.</p>
<p>We usually call the perpetually running listener program a
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>server</em></span> and the connecting program a
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>client</em></span>. Let’s use the familiar web browsing
            model as an example. As shown in Table 12-1, the HTTP
            protocol used by the Web allows clients and servers to talk over
            sockets on port 80:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Server</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>A machine that hosts websites usually runs a web
                  server program that constantly listens for incoming
                  connection requests, on a socket bound to port 80. Often,
                  the server itself does nothing but watch for requests on its
                  port perpetually; handling requests is delegated to spawned
                  processes or threads.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Clients</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Programs that wish to talk to this server specify the
                  server machine’s name and port 80 to initiate a connection.
                  For web servers, typical clients are web browsers like
                  Firefox, Internet Explorer, or Chrome, but any script can
                  open a client-side connection on port 80 to fetch web pages
                  from the server. The server’s machine name can also be
                  simply “localhost” if it’s the same as the client’s.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>In general, many clients may connect to a server over
            sockets, whether it implements a standard protocol or something
            more specific to a given application. And in some applications,
            the notion of client and server is blurred—programs can also pass
            bytes between each other more as peers than as master and
            subordinate. An agent in a peer-to-peer file transfer system, for
            instance, may at various times be both client and server for parts
            of files transferred.</p>
<p>For the purposes of this book, though, we usually call
            programs that listen on sockets <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>servers</em></span>, and
            those that connect <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>clients</em></span>. We also sometimes
            call the machines that these programs run on
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>server</em></span> and <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>client</em></span> (e.g.,
            a computer on which a web server program runs may be called a
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>web server machine</em></span>, too), but this has more
            to do with the physical than the functional.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Protocol structures"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="protocol_structures"></a>Protocol structures</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Functionally, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48117"></a>protocols may accomplish a familiar task, like
            reading email or posting a Usenet newsgroup message, but they
            ultimately consist of message bytes sent over sockets. The
            structure of those message bytes varies from protocol to protocol,
            is hidden by the Python library, and is mostly beyond the scope of
            this book, but a few general words may help demystify the protocol
            layer.</p>
<p>Some protocols may define the contents of messages sent over
            sockets; others may specify the sequence of control messages
            exchanged during conversations. By defining regular patterns of
            communication, protocols make communication more robust. They can
            also minimize deadlock conditions—machines waiting for messages
            that never arrive.</p>
<p>For example, the FTP protocol prevents deadlock by
            conversing over two sockets: one for control messages only and one
            to transfer file data. An FTP server listens for control messages
            (e.g., “send me a file”) on one port, and transfers file data over
            another. FTP clients open socket connections to the server
            machine’s control port, send requests, and send or receive file
            data over a socket connected to a data port on the server machine.
            FTP also defines standard message structures passed between client
            and server. The control message used to request a file, for
            instance, must follow a standard <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48127"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48129"></a>format.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Python’s Internet Library Modules"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="python_apostrophy_s_internet_library_mod"></a>Python’s Internet Library Modules</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>If all of this <a id="lib12.3.3"></a><a id="in12.3.3"></a><a id="net12.3.3"></a>sounds horribly complex, cheer up: Python’s standard
          protocol modules handle all the details. For example, the Python
          library’s<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48151"></a> <code class="epub__literal">ftplib</code> module
          manages all the socket and message-level handshaking implied by the
          FTP protocol. Scripts that import <code class="epub__literal">ftplib</code> have access to a much higher-level
          interface for FTPing files and can be <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48164"></a>largely ignorant of both the underlying FTP protocol
          and the sockets over which it runs.<sup>[44]</sup></p>
<p>In fact, each supported protocol is represented in Python’s
          standard library by either a module package of the same name as the
          protocol or by a module file with a name of the form
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>xxxlib.py</em></span>, where <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>xxx</em></span> is
          replaced by the protocol’s name. The last column in Table 12-1 gives the
          module name for some standard protocol modules. For instance, FTP is
          supported by the module file <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>ftplib.py</em></span> and HTTP
          by package <code class="epub__literal">http.*</code>. Moreover,
          within the protocol modules, the top-level interface object is often
          the name of the protocol. So, for instance, to start an FTP session
          in a Python script, you run <code class="epub__literal">import
          ftplib</code> and pass appropriate parameters in a call to
          <code class="epub__literal">ftplib.FTP</code>; for Telnet, create a
          <code class="epub__literal">telnetlib.Telnet</code> instance.</p>
<p>In addition to the protocol implementation modules in Table 12-1, Python’s
          standard library also contains modules for fetching replies from web
          servers for a web page request (<code class="epub__literal">urllib.request</code>), parsing and handling data
          once it has been transferred over sockets or protocols (<code class="epub__literal">html.parser</code>, the <code class="epub__literal">email.*</code> and <code class="epub__literal">xml.*</code> packages), and more. <span>Table 12-2</span> lists
          some of the more commonly used modules in this category.</p><div class="epub__table"><a id="common_internet-related_standard_modules"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Table 12-2. Common Internet-related standard modules</p><div class="epub__table-contents"><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; " summary="Common Internet-related standard modules"><colgroup><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Python
                  modules</p></th><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Utility</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">socket</code>, <code class="epub__literal">ssl</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Network and IPC
                  <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48249"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48254"></a>communications support (TCP/IP, UDP, etc.),
                  plus SSL secure sockets <span>wrapper</span></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">cgi</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Server-side
                  <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48268"></a>CGI script support: parse input stream, escape
                  HTML text, and so on</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">urllib.request</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Fetch web <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48282"></a>pages from their addresses
                  (URLs)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">urllib.parse</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Parse URL <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48296"></a>string into components, escape URL
                  text</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">http.client</code>, <code class="epub__literal">ftplib</code>, <code class="epub__literal">nntplib</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>HTTP (web),
                  <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48316"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48319"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48324"></a>FTP (file transfer), and NNTP (news) client
                  protocol modules</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">http.cookies</code>, <code class="epub__literal">http.cookiejar</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>HTTP cookies
                  <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48339"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48342"></a>support (data stored on clients by website
                  request, server- and client-side support)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">poplib</code>, <code class="epub__literal">imaplib</code>, <code class="epub__literal">smtplib</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>POP, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48360"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48365"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48368"></a>IMAP (mail fetch), and SMTP (mail send)
                  protocol modules</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">telnetlib</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Telnet protocol
                  <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48382"></a>module</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">html.parser</code>, <code class="epub__literal">xml.*</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Parse <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48397"></a>web page contents (HTML and XML
                  documents)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">xdrlib</code>, <code class="epub__literal">socket</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Encode <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48414"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48417"></a>binary data portably for
                  transmission</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">struct, pickle</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Encode <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48431"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48436"></a>Python objects as packed binary data or
                  serialized byte strings for transmission</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">email.*</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Parse and <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48451"></a>compose email messages with headers,
                  attachments, and encodings</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">mailbox</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Process on <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48465"></a>disk mailboxes and their
                  messages</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">mimetypes</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Guess file <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48477"></a>content types from names and extensions from
                  types</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">uu</code>, <code class="epub__literal">binhex</code>, <code class="epub__literal">base64</code>, <code class="epub__literal">binascii</code>, <code class="epub__literal">quopri</code>, <code class="epub__literal">email.*</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Encode and <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48506"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48509"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48512"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48515"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48518"></a>decode binary (or other) data transmitted as
                  text (automatic in <code class="epub__literal">email</code>
                  package)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">socketserver</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Framework <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48533"></a>for general Net servers</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">http.server</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Basic <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48545"></a>HTTP server implementation, with request
                  handlers for simple and CGI-aware servers</p></td></tr></tbody></table>
</div>
</div>
<p>We will meet many of the modules in this table in the next few
          chapters of this book, but not all of them. Moreover, there are
          additional Internet modules in Python not shown here. The modules
          demonstrated in this book will be representative, but as always, be
          sure to see Python’s standard Library Reference Manual for more
          complete and up-to-date lists and <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48551"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48553"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48555"></a>details.</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="more_on_protocol_standards"></a>
<p class="epub__title">More on Protocol Standards</p>
<p>If you want the full story on <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48563"></a>protocols and ports, at this writing you can find a
            comprehensive list of all ports reserved for protocols or
            registered as used by various common systems by searching the web
            pages maintained by the Internet Engineering Task Force
            (IETF)<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48569"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48572"></a> and the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority
            (IANA)<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48576"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48579"></a>. The IETF is the organization responsible for
            maintaining web protocols and standards. The IANA is the central
            coordinator for the assignment of unique parameter values for
            Internet protocols. Another standards body, the W3 (for WWW), also
            maintains relevant documents. See these web pages for more
            details:</p>
<p>http://www.ietf.org</p>
<p>http://www.iana.org/numbers.html</p>
<p>http://www.iana.org/assignments/port-numbers</p>
<p>http://www.w3.org</p>
<p>It’s not impossible that more recent repositories for
            standard protocol specifications will arise during this book’s
            shelf life, but the IETF website will likely be the main authority
            for some time to come. If you do look, though, be warned that the
            details are, well, detailed. Because Python’s protocol modules
            hide most of the socket and messaging complexity documented in the
            protocol standards, you usually don’t need to memorize these
            documents to get web work done with Python.</p>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[43] </sup>Some books also use the term <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>protocol</em></span>
              to refer to lower-level transport schemes such as TCP. In this
              book, we use <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>protocol</em></span> to refer to
              higher-level structures built on top of sockets; see a
              networking text if you are curious about what happens at lower
              levels.</p>
</div><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[44] </sup>Since Python is an open source system, you can read the
              source code of the <code class="epub__literal">ftplib</code>
              module if you are curious about how the underlying protocol
              actually works. See the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>ftplib.py</em></span> file in
              the standard source library directory in your machine. Its code
              is complex (since it must format messages and manage two
              sockets), but with the other standard Internet protocol modules,
              it is a good example of low-level socket programming.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
