<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Socket Programming</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Socket Programming"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="socket_programming"></a>Socket Programming</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Now that we’ve seen <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48599"></a><a id="net12.4"></a><a id="in12.4"></a><a id="pro12.4"></a><a id="soc12.4"></a>how sockets figure into the Internet picture, let’s move
        on to explore the tools that Python provides for programming sockets
        with Python scripts. This section shows you how to use the Python
        socket interface to perform low-level network communications. In later
        chapters, we will instead use one of the higher-level protocol modules
        that hide underlying sockets. Python’s socket interfaces can be used
        directly, though, to implement custom network dialogs and to access
        standard protocols manually.</p>
<p>As previewed in Chapter 5, the
        basic socket interface in Python is the standard library’s <code class="epub__literal">socket</code> module. Like the <code class="epub__literal">os</code> POSIX module, Python’s <code class="epub__literal">socket</code> module is just a thin wrapper
        (interface layer) over the underlying C library’s socket calls. Like
        Python files, it’s also object-based—methods of a socket object
        implemented by this module call out to the corresponding C library’s
        operations after data conversions. For instance, the C library’s
        <code class="epub__literal">send</code> and <code class="epub__literal">recv</code> function calls become methods of socket
        objects in Python.</p>
<p>Python’s <code class="epub__literal">socket</code> module
        supports socket programming on any machine that supports BSD-style
        sockets—Windows, Macs, Linux, Unix, and so on—and so provides a
        portable socket interface. In addition, this module supports all
        commonly used socket <span>types—</span>TCP/IP, UDP, datagram, and Unix
        domain—and can be used as both a network interface API and a general
        IPC mechanism between processes running on the same machine.</p>
<p>From a functional perspective, sockets are a programmer’s device
        for transferring bytes between programs, possibly running on different
        computers. Although sockets themselves transfer only byte strings, we
        can also transfer Python objects through them by using Python’s
        <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> module. Because this module
        converts Python objects such as lists, dictionaries, and class
        instances to and from byte strings, it provides the extra step needed
        to ship higher-level objects through sockets when required.</p>
<p>Python’s <code class="epub__literal">struct</code> module can
        also be used to format Python objects as packed binary data byte
        strings for transmission, but is generally limited in scope to objects
        that map to types in the C programming language. The <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> module supports transmission of
        larger object, such as dictionaries and class instances. For other
        tasks, including most standard Internet protocols, simpler formatted
        byte strings suffice. We’ll learn more about <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> later in this chapter and
        book.</p>
<p>Beyond basic data communication tasks, the <code class="epub__literal">socket</code> module also includes a variety of
        more advanced tools. For instance, it has calls for the following and
        more:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Converting bytes to a standard network ordering (<code class="epub__literal">ntohl</code>, <code class="epub__literal">htonl</code>)</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Querying machine name and address (<code class="epub__literal">gethostname</code>, <code class="epub__literal">gethostbyname</code>)</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Wrapping socket objects in a file object interface (<code class="epub__literal">sockobj.makefile</code>)</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Making socket calls nonblocking (<code class="epub__literal">sockobj.setblocking</code>)</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Setting socket timeouts (<code class="epub__literal">sockobj.settimeout</code>)</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Provided your Python was compiled with Secure Sockets Layer
        (SSL) support, the <code class="epub__literal">ssl</code> standard
        library module also supports encrypted transfers with its <code class="epub__literal">ssl.wrap_socket</code> call. This call wraps a
        socket object in SSL logic, which is used in turn by other standard
        library modules to support the HTTPS secure website protocol (<code class="epub__literal">http.client</code> and <code class="epub__literal">urllib.request</code>), secure email transfers
        (<code class="epub__literal">poplib</code> and <code class="epub__literal">smtplib</code>), and more. We’ll meet some of these
        other modules later in this part of the book, but we won’t study all
        of the <code class="epub__literal">socket</code> module’s advanced
        features in this text; see the Python library manual for usage details
        omitted here.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Socket Basics"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="socket_basics-id1"></a>Socket Basics</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Although we won’t get into <a id="soc12.4.1"></a>advanced socket use in this chapter, basic socket
          transfers are remarkably easy to code in Python. To create a
          connection between machines, Python programs import the <code class="epub__literal">socket</code> module, create a socket object, and
          call the object’s methods to establish connections and send and
          receive data.</p>
<p>Sockets are inherently bidirectional in nature, and socket
          object methods map directly to socket calls in the C library. For
          example, the script in Example 12-1 implements a program that
          simply listens for a connection on a socket and echoes back over a
          socket whatever it receives through that socket, adding <code class="epub__literal">Echo=&gt;</code> string prefixes.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 12-1. PP4E\Internet\Sockets\echo-server.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
Server side: open a TCP/IP socket on a port, listen for a message from
a client, and send an echo reply; this is a simple one-shot listen/reply
conversation per client, but it goes into an infinite loop to listen for
more clients as long as this server script runs; the client may run on
a remote machine, or on same computer if it uses 'localhost' for server
"""

from socket import *                    # get socket constructor and constants
myHost = ''                             # '' = all available interfaces on host
myPort = 50007                          # listen on a non-reserved port number

sockobj = socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM)       # make a TCP socket object
sockobj.bind((myHost, myPort))               # bind it to server port number
sockobj.listen(5)                            # listen, allow 5 pending connects

while True:                                  # listen until process killed
    connection, address = sockobj.accept()   # wait for next client connect
    print('Server connected by', address)    # connection is a new socket
    while True:
        data = connection.recv(1024)         # read next line on client socket
        if not data: break                   # send a reply line to the client
        connection.send(b'Echo=&gt;' + data)    # until eof when socket closed
    connection.close()</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>As mentioned earlier, we usually call programs like this that
          listen for incoming connections <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>servers</em></span> because
          they provide a service that can be accessed at a given machine and
          port on the Internet. Programs that connect to such a server to
          access its service are generally called
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>clients</em></span>. Example 12-2 shows a simple client
          implemented in Python.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id1"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 12-2. PP4E\Internet\Sockets\echo-client.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
Client side: use sockets to send data to the server, and print server's
reply to each message line; 'localhost' means that the server is running
on the same machine as the client, which lets us test client and server
on one machine;  to test over the Internet, run a server on a remote
machine, and set serverHost or argv[1] to machine's domain name or IP addr;
Python sockets are a portable BSD socket interface, with object methods
for the standard socket calls available in the system's C library;
"""

import sys
from socket import *              # portable socket interface plus constants
serverHost = 'localhost'          # server name, or: 'starship.python.net'
serverPort = 50007                # non-reserved port used by the server

message = [b'Hello network world']          # default text to send to server
                                            # requires bytes: b'' or str,encode()
if len(sys.argv) &gt; 1:
    serverHost = sys.argv[1]                # server from cmd line arg 1
    if len(sys.argv) &gt; 2:                   # text from cmd line args 2..n
        message = (x.encode() for x in sys.argv[2:])

sockobj = socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM)      # make a TCP/IP socket object
sockobj.connect((serverHost, serverPort))   # connect to server machine + port

for line in message:
    sockobj.send(line)                      # send line to server over socket
    data = sockobj.recv(1024)               # receive line from server: up to 1k
    print('Client received:', data)         # bytes are quoted, was `x`, repr(x)

sockobj.close()                             # close socket to send eof to server</pre>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Server socket calls"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="server_socket_calls"></a>Server socket calls</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Before we see these <a id="soc12.4.1.1"></a><a id="cl12.4.1.1"></a>programs in action, let’s take a minute to explain
            how this client and server do their stuff. Both are fairly simple
            examples of socket scripts, but they illustrate the common call
            patterns of most socket-based programs. In fact, this is
            boilerplate code: most connected socket programs generally make
            the same socket calls that our two scripts do, so let’s step
            through the important points of these scripts line by line.</p>
<p>Programs such as Example 12-1 that provide services
            for other programs with sockets generally start out by following
            this sequence of calls:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">sockobj = socket(AF_INET,
                SOCK_STREAM)</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Uses the <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48804"></a>Python socket module to create a TCP socket
                  object. The names <code class="epub__literal">AF_INET</code>
                  and <code class="epub__literal">SOCK_STREAM</code> are
                  preassigned variables defined by and imported from the
                  socket module; using them in combination means “create a
                  TCP/IP socket,” the standard communication device for the
                  Internet. More specifically, <code class="epub__literal">AF_INET</code> means the IP address
                  protocol, and <code class="epub__literal">SOCK_STREAM</code>
                  means the TCP transfer protocol. The <code class="epub__literal">AF_INET</code>/<code class="epub__literal">SOCK_STREAM</code> combination is the
                  default because it is so common, but it’s typical to make
                  this explicit.</p>
<p>If you use other names in this call, you can instead
                  create things like UDP connectionless sockets (use <code class="epub__literal">SOCK_DGRAM</code> second) and Unix domain
                  sockets on the local machine (use <code class="epub__literal">AF_UNIX</code> first), but we won’t do so
                  in this book. See the Python library manual for details on
                  these and other socket module options. Using other socket
                  types is mostly a matter of using different forms of
                  boilerplate code.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">sockobj.bind((myHost,
                myPort))</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Associates the <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48844"></a>socket object with an address—for IP
                  addresses, we pass a server machine name and port number on
                  that machine. This is where the server identifies the
                  machine and port associated with the socket. In server
                  programs, the hostname is typically an empty string (“”),
                  which means the machine that the script runs on (formally,
                  all available local and remote interfaces on the machine),
                  and the port is a number outside the range 0 to 1023 (which
                  is reserved for standard protocols, described
                  earlier).</p>
<p>Note that each unique socket dialog you support must
                  have its own port number; if you try to open a socket on a
                  port already in use, Python will raise an exception. Also
                  notice the nested parentheses in this call—for the <code class="epub__literal">AF_INET</code> address protocol socket
                  here, we pass the host/port socket address to <code class="epub__literal">bind</code> as a two-item tuple object
                  (pass a string for <code class="epub__literal">AF_UNIX</code>). Technically, <code class="epub__literal">bind</code> takes a tuple of values
                  appropriate for the type of socket created.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">sockobj.listen(5)</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Starts <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48871"></a>listening for incoming client connections and
                  allows for a backlog of up to five pending requests. The
                  value passed sets the number of incoming client requests
                  queued by the operating system before new requests are
                  denied (which happens only if a server isn’t fast enough to
                  process requests before the queues fill up). A value of 5 is
                  usually enough for most socket-based programs; the value
                  must be at least 1.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>At this point, the server is ready to accept connection
            requests from client programs running on remote machines (or the
            same machine) and falls into an infinite loop—<code class="epub__literal">while True</code> (or the equivalent <code class="epub__literal">while 1</code> for older Pythons and ex-C
            programmers)—waiting for them to arrive:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">connection, address =
                sockobj.accept()</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Waits for the next client connection request to occur;
                  when it does, the <code class="epub__literal">accept</code>
                  call returns a brand-new socket object over which data can
                  be transferred from and to the connected client. Connections
                  are accepted on <code class="epub__literal">sockobj</code>,
                  but communication with a client happens on <code class="epub__literal">connection</code>, the new socket. This
                  call actually returns a two-item tuple—<code class="epub__literal">address</code> is the connecting client’s
                  Internet address. We can call <code class="epub__literal">accept</code> more than one time, to
                  service multiple client connections; that’s why each call
                  returns a new, distinct socket for talking to a particular
                  client.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Once we have a client connection, we fall into another loop
            to receive data from the client in blocks of up to 1,024 bytes at
            a time, and echo each block back to the client:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">data =
                connection.recv(1024)</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Reads at most 1,024 more bytes of the next message
                  sent from a client (i.e., coming across the network or IPC
                  connection), and returns it to the script as a byte string.
                  We get back an empty byte string when the client has
                  finished—end-of-file is triggered when the client closes its
                  end of the socket.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">connection.send(b'Echo=&gt;' +
                data)</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Sends the latest byte string data block back to the
                  client program, prepending the string <code class="epub__literal">'Echo=&gt;'</code> to it first. The
                  client program can then <code class="epub__literal">recv</code> what we <code class="epub__literal">send</code> here—the next reply line.
                  Technically this call sends as much data as possible, and
                  returns the number of bytes actually sent. To be fully
                  robust, some programs may need to resend unsent portions or
                  use <code class="epub__literal">connection.sendall</code> to
                  force all bytes to be sent.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">connection.close()</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Shuts down the connection with this particular
                  <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48944"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48946"></a>client.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Transferring byte strings and objects"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="transferring_byte_strings_and_objects"></a>Transferring byte strings and objects</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>So far we’ve seen <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e48954"></a>calls used to transfer data in a server, but what is
            it that is actually shipped through a socket? As we learned in
            Chapter 5, sockets by themselves
            always deal in binary <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>byte strings</em></span>, not text.
            To your scripts, this means you must send and will receive
            <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> strings, not <code class="epub__literal">str</code>, though you can convert to and from
            text as needed with <code class="epub__literal">bytes.decode</code> and <code class="epub__literal">str.encode</code> methods. In our scripts, we
            use <code class="epub__literal">b'...' bytes</code> literals to
            satisfy socket data requirements. In other contexts, tools such as
            the <code class="epub__literal">struct</code> and <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> modules return the byte strings
            we need automatically, so no extra steps are needed.</p>
<p>For example, although the socket model is limited to
            transferring byte strings, you can send and receive nearly
            arbitrary Python <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>objects</em></span> with the standard
            library <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> object
            serialization module. Its <code class="epub__literal">dumps</code>
            and <code class="epub__literal">loads</code> calls convert Python
            objects to and from byte strings, ready for direct socket
            transfer:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e49001"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import pickle</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = pickle.dumps([99, 100])</code></strong>        # on sending end... convert to byte strings

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x</code></strong>                                  # string passed to send, returned by recv
b'\x80\x03]q\x00(KcKde.'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pickle.loads(x)</code></strong>                    # on receiving end... convert back to object
[99, 100]</pre>
<p>For simpler types that correspond to those in the C
            language, the <code class="epub__literal">struct</code> module
            provides the byte-string conversion we need as well:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e49020"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import struct</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = struct.pack('&gt;ii', 99, 100)</code></strong>    # convert simpler types for transmission
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x</code></strong>
b'\x00\x00\x00c\x00\x00\x00d'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>struct.unpack('&gt;ii', x)</code></strong>
(99, 100)</pre>
<p>When converted this way, Python native objects become
            candidates for socket-based transfers. See Chapter 4 for more on <code class="epub__literal">struct</code>. We previewed <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> and object serialization in Chapter 1, but we’ll learn more about it and
            its few pickleability constraints when we explore data persistence
            in Chapter 17.</p>
<p>In fact there are a variety of ways to extend the basic
            socket transfer model. For instance, much like <code class="epub__literal">os.fdopen</code> and <code class="epub__literal">open</code> for the file descriptors we studied
            in Chapter 4, the <code class="epub__literal">socket.makefile</code> method allows you to
            wrap sockets in text-mode file objects that handle text encodings
            for you automatically. This call also allows you to specify
            nondefault Unicode encodings and end-line behaviors in text mode
            with extra arguments in 3.X just like the <code class="epub__literal">open</code> built-in function. Because its
            result mimics file interfaces, the <code class="epub__literal">socket.makefile</code> call additionally allows
            the <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> module’s file-based
            calls to transfer objects over sockets implicitly. We’ll see more
            on socket file wrappers later in this chapter.</p>
<p>For our simpler scripts here, hardcoded byte strings and
            direct socket calls do the job. After talking with a given
            connected client, the server in Example 12-1 goes back to its
            infinite loop and waits for the next client connection request.
            Let’s move on to see what happened on the other side of the
            fence.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Client socket calls"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="client_socket_calls"></a>Client socket calls</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The actual socket-related <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e49080"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e49085"></a>calls in client programs like the one shown in Example 12-2 are even simpler;
            in fact, half of that script is preparation logic. The main thing
            to keep in mind is that the client and server must specify the
            same port number when opening their sockets and the client must
            identify the machine on which the server is running; in our
            scripts, server and client agree to use port number 50007 for
            their conversation, outside the standard protocol range. Here are
            the client’s socket calls:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">sockobj = socket(AF_INET,
                SOCK_STREAM)</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Creates a Python socket object in the client program,
                  just like the server.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">sockobj.connect((serverHost,
                serverPort))</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Opens a <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e49108"></a>connection to the machine and port on which
                  the server program is listening for client connections. This
                  is where the client specifies the string name of the service
                  to be contacted. In the client, we can either specify the
                  name of the remote machine as a domain name (e.g.,
                  <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>starship.python.net</em></span>) or numeric IP
                  address. We can also give the server name as <code class="epub__literal">localhost</code> (or the equivalent IP
                  address <code class="epub__literal">127.0.0.1</code>) to
                  specify that the server program is running on the same
                  machine as the client; that comes in handy for debugging
                  servers without having to connect to the Net. And again, the
                  client’s port number must match the server’s exactly. Note
                  the nested parentheses again—just as in server <code class="epub__literal">bind</code> calls, we really pass the
                  server’s host/port address to <code class="epub__literal">connect</code> in a tuple object.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Once the client establishes a connection to the server, it
            falls into a loop, sending a message one line at a time and
            printing whatever the server sends back after each line is
            sent:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">sockobj.send(line)</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Transfers <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e49140"></a>the next byte-string message line to the
                  server over the socket. Notice that the default list of
                  lines contains <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>
                  strings (<code class="epub__literal">b'...'</code>). Just as
                  on the server, data passed through the socket must be a byte
                  string, though it can be the result of a manual <code class="epub__literal">str.encode</code> encoding call or an
                  object conversion with <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> or <code class="epub__literal">struct</code> if desired. When lines to
                  be sent are given as command-line arguments instead, they
                  must be converted from <code class="epub__literal">str</code> to <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>; the client arranges this by
                  encoding in a generator expression (a call <code class="epub__literal">map(str.encode, sys.argv[2:])</code>
                  would have the same effect).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">data =
                sockobj.recv(1024)</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Reads the next reply line sent by the server program.
                  Technically, this reads up to 1,024 bytes of the next reply
                  message and returns it as a byte string.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">sockobj.close()</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Closes the <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e49185"></a>connection with the server, sending it the
                  end-of-file signal.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>And that’s it. The server exchanges one or more lines of
            text with each client that connects. The operating system takes
            care of locating remote machines, routing bytes sent between
            programs and possibly across the Internet, and (with TCP) making
            sure that our messages arrive intact. That involves a lot of
            processing, too—our strings may ultimately travel around the
            world, crossing phone wires, satellite links, and more along the
            way. But we can be happily ignorant of what goes on beneath the
            socket call layer when programming in <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e49193"></a>Python.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Running Socket Programs Locally"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="running_socket_programs_locally"></a>Running Socket Programs Locally</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Let’s put this <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e49201"></a>client and server to work. There are two ways to run
          these <span>scripts—</span>on either the
          same machine or two different machines. To run the client and the
          server on the same machine, bring up two command-line consoles on
          your computer, start the server program in one, and run the client
          repeatedly in the other. The server keeps running and responds to
          requests made each time you run the client script in the other
          window.</p>
<p>For instance, here is the text that shows up in the MS-DOS
          console window where I’ve started the server script:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e49212"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python echo-server.py</code></strong>
Server connected by ('127.0.0.1', 57666)
Server connected by ('127.0.0.1', 57667)
Server connected by ('127.0.0.1', 57668)</pre>
<p>The output here gives the address (machine IP name and port
          number) of each connecting client. Like most servers, this one runs
          perpetually, listening for client connection requests. This server
          receives three, but I have to show you the client window’s text for
          you to understand what this means:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e49219"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python echo-client.py</code></strong>
Client received: b'Echo=&gt;Hello network world'

C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python echo-client.py localhost spam Spam SPAM</code></strong>
Client received: b'Echo=&gt;spam'
Client received: b'Echo=&gt;Spam'
Client received: b'Echo=&gt;SPAM'

C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python echo-client.py localhost Shrubbery</code></strong>
Client received: b'Echo=&gt;Shrubbery'</pre>
<p>Here, I ran the client script three times, while the server
          script kept running in the other window. Each client connected to
          the server, sent it a message of one or more lines of text, and read
          back the server’s reply—an echo of each line of text sent from the
          client. And each time a client is run, a new connection message
          shows up in the server’s window (that’s why we got three). Because
          the server’s coded as an infinite loop, you may need to kill it with
          Task Manager on Windows when you’re done testing, because a Ctrl-C
          in the server’s console window is ignored; other platforms may fare
          better.</p>
<p>It’s important to notice that client and server are running on
          the same machine here (a Windows PC). The server and client agree on
          the port number, but they use the machine names <code class="epub__literal">""</code> and <code class="epub__literal">localhost</code>, respectively, to refer to the
          computer on which they are running. In fact, there is no Internet
          connection to speak of. This is just IPC, of the sort we saw in
          Chapter 5: sockets also work well as
          cross-program communications tools on a single machine.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Running Socket Programs Remotely"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="running_socket_programs_remotely"></a>Running Socket Programs Remotely</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To make these <a id="soc12.4.3"></a>scripts talk over the Internet rather than on a single
          machine and sample the broader scope of sockets, we have to do some
          extra work to run the server on a different computer. First, upload
          the server’s source file to a remote machine where you have an
          account and a Python. Here’s how I do it with FTP to a site that
          hosts a domain name of my own, <em class="epub__filename">learning-python.com</em>; most informational
          lines in the following have been removed, your server name and
          upload interface details will vary, and there are other ways to copy
          files to a computer (e.g., FTP client GUIs, email, web page post
          forms, and so on—see Tips on Using Remote Servers
          for hints on accessing remote servers):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e49259"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>ftp learning-python.com</code></strong>
Connected to learning-python.com.
User (learning-python.com:(none)): <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>xxxxxxxx</code></strong>
Password: <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>yyyyyyyy</code></strong>
ftp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mkdir scripts</code></strong>
ftp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>cd scripts</code></strong>
ftp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>put echo-server.py</code></strong>
ftp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>quit</code></strong></pre>
<p>Once you have the server program loaded on the other computer,
          you need to run it there. Connect to that computer and start the
          server program. I usually Telnet or SSH into my server machine and
          start the server program as a perpetually running process from the
          command line. The <code class="epub__literal">&amp;</code> syntax in
          Unix/Linux shells can be used to run the server script in the
          background; we could also make the server directly executable with a
          <code class="epub__literal">#!</code> line and a <code class="epub__literal">chmod</code> command (see Chapter 3 for details).</p>
<p>Here is the text that shows up in a window on my PC that is
          running a SSH session with the free PuTTY client, connected to the
          Linux server where my account is hosted (again, less a few deleted
          informational lines):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e49297"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">login as: <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>xxxxxxxx</code></strong>
XXXXXXXX@learning-python.com's password: <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>yyyyyyyy</code></strong>
Last login: Fri Apr 23 07:46:33 2010 from 72.236.109.185
[...]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>cd scripts</code></strong>
[...]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python echo-server.py &amp;</code></strong>
[1] 23016</pre>
<p>Now that the server is listening for connections on the Net,
          run the client on your local computer multiple times again. This
          time, the client runs on a different machine than the server, so we
          pass in the server’s domain or IP name as a client command-line
          argument. The server still uses a machine name of <code class="epub__literal">""</code> because it always listens on whatever
          machine it runs on. Here is what shows up in the remote <em class="epub__filename">learning-python.com</em> server’s SSH window
          on my PC:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e49319"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">[...]$ Server connected by ('72.236.109.185', 57697)
Server connected by ('72.236.109.185', 57698)
Server connected by ('72.236.109.185', 57699)
Server connected by ('72.236.109.185', 57700)</pre>
<p>And here is what appears in the Windows console window where I
          run the client. A “connected by” message appears in the server SSH
          window each time the client script is run in the client
          window:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e49323"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python echo-client.py learning-python.com</code></strong>
Client received: b'Echo=&gt;Hello network world'

C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python echo-client.py learning-python.com ni Ni NI</code></strong>
Client received: b'Echo=&gt;ni'
Client received: b'Echo=&gt;Ni'
Client received: b'Echo=&gt;NI'

C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python echo-client.py learning-python.com Shrubbery</code></strong>
Client received: b'Echo=&gt;Shrubbery'</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">ping</code> command can be
          used to get an IP address for a machine’s domain name; either
          machine name form can be used to connect in the client:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e49340"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>ping learning-python.com</code></strong>
Pinging learning-python.com [97.74.215.115] with 32 bytes of data:
Reply from 97.74.215.115: bytes=32 time=94ms TTL=47
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">Ctrl-C</span></em>

C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python echo-client.py 97.74.215.115 Brave Sir Robin</code></strong>
Client received: b'Echo=&gt;Brave'
Client received: b'Echo=&gt;Sir'
Client received: b'Echo=&gt;Robin'</pre>
<p>This output is perhaps a bit understated—a lot is happening
          under the hood. The client, running on my Windows laptop, connects
          with and talks to the server program running on a Linux machine
          perhaps thousands of miles away. It all happens about as fast as
          when client and server both run on the laptop, and it uses the same
          library calls; only the server name passed to clients
          differs.</p>
<p>Though simple, this illustrates one of the major advantages of
          using sockets for cross-program communication: they naturally
          support running the conversing programs on different machines, with
          little or no change to the scripts themselves. In the process,
          sockets make it easy to decouple and distribute parts of a system
          over a network when needed.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Socket pragmatics"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="socket_pragmatics"></a>Socket pragmatics</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Before we move on, there are <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e49360"></a>three practical usage details you should know.
            First, you can run the client and server like this on any two
            Internet-aware machines where Python is installed. Of course, to
            run the client and server on different computers, you need both a
            live Internet connection and access to another machine on which to
            run the server.</p>
<p>This need not be an expensive proposition, though; when
            sockets are opened, Python is happy to initiate and use whatever
            connectivity you have, be it a dedicated T1 line, wireless router,
            cable modem, or dial-up account. Moreover, if you don’t have a
            server account of your own like the one I’m using on <em class="epub__filename">learning-python.com</em>, simply run client
            and server examples on the same machine, <code class="epub__literal">localhost</code>, as shown earlier; all you
            need then is a computer that allows sockets, and most do.</p>
<p>Second, the socket module generally raises exceptions if you
            ask for something invalid. For instance, trying to connect to a
            nonexistent server (or unreachable servers, if you have no
            Internet link) fails:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e49376"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python echo-client.py www.nonesuch.com hello</code></strong>
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "echo-client.py", line 24, in &lt;module&gt;
    sockobj.connect((serverHost, serverPort))   # connect to server machine...
socket.error: [Errno 10060] A connection attempt failed because the connected
party did not properly respond after a period of time, or established connection
failed because connected host has failed to respond</pre>
<p>Finally, also be sure to kill the server process before
            restarting it again, or else the port number will still be in use,
            and you’ll get another exception; on my remote server <span>machine</span>:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e49386"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">[...]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>ps -x</code></strong>
  PID TTY      STAT   TIME COMMAND
 5378 pts/0    S      0:00 python echo-server.py
22017 pts/0    Ss     0:00 -bash
26805 pts/0    R+     0:00 ps –x

[...]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python echo-server.py</code></strong>
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "echo-server.py", line 14, in &lt;module&gt;
    sockobj.bind((myHost, myPort))               # bind it to server port number
socket.error: [Errno 10048] Only one usage of each socket address (protocol/
network address/port) is normally permitted</pre>
<p>A series of Ctrl-Cs will kill the server on Linux (be sure
            to type <code class="epub__literal">fg</code> to bring it to the
            foreground first if started with an <code class="epub__literal">&amp;</code>):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e49402"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">[...]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>fg</code></strong>
python echo-server.py
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "echo-server.py", line 18, in &lt;module&gt;
    connection, address = sockobj.accept()   # wait for next client connect
KeyboardInterrupt</pre>
<p>As mentioned earlier, a Ctrl-C kill key combination won’t
            kill the server on my Windows 7 machine, however. To kill the
            perpetually running server process running locally on Windows, you
            may need to start Task Manager (e.g., using a Ctrl-Alt-Delete key
            combination), and then end the Python task by selecting it in the
            process listbox that appears. Closing the window in which the
            server is running will also suffice on Windows, but you’ll lose
            that window’s command history. You can also usually kill a server
            on Linux with a <code class="epub__literal">kill −9</code>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>pid</code></em> shell command if it is running in
            another window or in the background, but Ctrl-C requires less
            <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e49415"></a>typing.</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="tips_on_using_remote_servers"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Tips on Using Remote Servers</p>
<p>Some of this <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e49423"></a>chapter’s examples run server code on a remote
              computer. Though you can also run the examples locally on
              <code class="epub__literal">localhost</code>, remote execution
              better captures the flexibility and power of sockets. To run
              remotely, you’ll need access to an Internet accessible computer
              with Python, where you can upload and run scripts. You’ll also
              need to be able to access the remote server from your PC. To
              help with this last step, here are a few hints for readers new
              to using remote servers.</p>
<p>To transfer scripts to a remote machine, the
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>FTP</em></span> command is standard on Windows machines
              and most others. On Windows, simply type it in a console window
              to connect to an FTP server or start your favorite FTP client
              GUI program; on Linux, type the FTP command in an xterm window.
              You’ll need to supply your account name and password to connect
              to a nonanonymous FTP site. For anonymous FTP, use “anonymous”
              for the username and your email address for the password.</p>
<p>To run scripts remotely from a command line,
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Telnet</em></span> is a standard command on some
              Unix-like machines, too. On Windows, it’s often run as a client
              GUI. For some server machines, you’ll need to use
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>SSH</em></span><a name="secure shell"></a> secure shell rather than Telnet to
              access a shell prompt. There are a variety of SSH utilities
              available on the Web, including PuTTY, used for this book.
              Python itself comes with a <code class="epub__literal">telnetlib</code> telnet module, and a web
              search will reveals current SSH options for Python scripts,
              including <code class="epub__literal">ssh.py</code>,
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>paramiko</em></span>, <span class="epub__keep-together">Twisted</span>,
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Pexpect</em></span>, and even <code class="epub__literal">subprocess.Popen</code>.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Spawning Clients in Parallel"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="spawning_clients_in_parallel"></a>Spawning Clients in Parallel</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>So far, we’ve run a <a id="so12.4.4"></a><a id="sp12.4.4"></a><a id="cl12.4.4"></a><a id="pa12.4.4"></a>server locally and remotely, and run individual
          clients manually, one after another. Realistic servers are generally
          intended to handle many clients, of course, and possibly at the same
          time. To see how our echo server handles the load, let’s fire up
          eight copies of the client script in parallel using the script in
          Example 12-3; see the end of
          Chapter 5 for details on the <code class="epub__literal">launchmodes</code> module used here to spawn
          clients and alternatives such as the <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code> and <code class="epub__literal">subprocess</code> modules.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id2"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 12-3. PP4E\Internet\Sockets\testecho.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import sys
from PP4E.launchmodes import QuietPortableLauncher

numclients = 8
def start(cmdline):
    QuietPortableLauncher(cmdline, cmdline)()

# start('echo-server.py')              # spawn server locally if not yet started

args = ' '.join(sys.argv[1:])          # pass server name if running remotely
for i in range(numclients):
    start('echo-client.py %s' % args)  # spawn 8? clients to test the server</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>To run this script, pass no arguments to talk to a server
          listening on port 50007 on the local machine; pass a real machine
          name to talk to a server running remotely. Three console windows
          come into play in this scheme—the client, a local server, and a
          remote server. On Windows, the clients’ output is discarded when
          spawned from this script, but it would be similar to what we’ve
          already seen. Here’s the client window <span>interaction—</span>8 clients are spawned
          locally to talk to both a local and a remote server:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e49514"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>set PYTHONPATH=C:\...\dev\Examples</code></strong>

C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python testecho.py</code></strong>

C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python testecho.py learning-python.com</code></strong></pre>
<p>If the spawned clients connect to a server run locally (the
          first run of the script on the client), connection messages show up
          in the server’s window on the local machine:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e49526"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python echo-server.py</code></strong>
Server connected by ('127.0.0.1', 57721)
Server connected by ('127.0.0.1', 57722)
Server connected by ('127.0.0.1', 57723)
Server connected by ('127.0.0.1', 57724)
Server connected by ('127.0.0.1', 57725)
Server connected by ('127.0.0.1', 57726)
Server connected by ('127.0.0.1', 57727)
Server connected by ('127.0.0.1', 57728)</pre>
<p>If the server is running remotely, the client connection
          messages instead appear in the window displaying the SSH (or other)
          connection to the remote computer, here, <em class="epub__filename">learning-python.com</em>:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e49536"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">[...]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python echo-server.py</code></strong>
Server connected by ('72.236.109.185', 57729)
Server connected by ('72.236.109.185', 57730)
Server connected by ('72.236.109.185', 57731)
Server connected by ('72.236.109.185', 57732)
Server connected by ('72.236.109.185', 57733)
Server connected by ('72.236.109.185', 57734)
Server connected by ('72.236.109.185', 57735)
Server connected by ('72.236.109.185', 57736)</pre>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Preview: Denied client connections"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="preview_colon_denied_client_connections"></a>Preview: Denied client connections</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The net effect is that our echo server converses with
            multiple clients, whether running locally or remotely. Keep in
            mind, however, that this works for our simple scripts only because
            the server doesn’t take a long time to respond to each client’s
            requests—it can get back to the top of the server script’s outer
            <code class="epub__literal">while</code> loop in time to process
            the next incoming client. If it could not, we would probably need
            to change the server to handle each client in parallel, or some
            might be denied a connection.</p>
<p>Technically, client connections would fail after 5 clients
            are already waiting for the server’s attention, as specified in
            the server’s <code class="epub__literal">listen</code> call. To
            prove this to yourself, add a <code class="epub__literal">time.sleep</code> call somewhere inside the
            echo server’s main loop in Example 12-1 after a connection is
            accepted, to simulate a long-running task (this is from file
            <em class="epub__filename">echo-server-sleep.py</em> in the
            examples package if you wish to experiment):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e49562"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">while True:                                  # listen until process killed
    connection, address = sockobj.accept()   # wait for next client connect
    while True:
        data = connection.recv(1024)         # read next line on client socket
        time.sleep(3)                        # take time to process request
        ...</pre>
<p>If you then run this server and the <code class="epub__literal">testecho</code> clients script, you’ll notice
            that not all 8 clients wind up receiving a connection, because the
            server is too busy to empty its pending-connections queue in time.
            Only 6 clients are served when I run this on Windows—one accepted
            initially, and 5 in the pending-requests <code class="epub__literal">listen</code> queue. The other two clients are
            denied connections and fail.</p>
<p>The following shows the server and client messages produced
            when the server is stalled this way, including the error messages
            that the two denied clients receive. To see the clients’ messages
            on Windows, you can change <code class="epub__literal">testecho</code> to use the <code class="epub__literal">StartArgs</code> launcher with a <code class="epub__literal">/B</code> switch at the front of the command
            line to route messages to the persistent console window (see file
            <em class="epub__filename">testecho-messages.py</em> in the
            examples package):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e49586"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\dev\Examples\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>echo-server-sleep.py</code></strong>
Server connected by ('127.0.0.1', 59625)
Server connected by ('127.0.0.1', 59626)
Server connected by ('127.0.0.1', 59627)
Server connected by ('127.0.0.1', 59628)
Server connected by ('127.0.0.1', 59629)
Server connected by ('127.0.0.1', 59630)

C:\...\PP4E\dev\Examples\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>testecho-messages.py</code></strong>
/B echo-client.py
/B echo-client.py
/B echo-client.py
/B echo-client.py
/B echo-client.py
/B echo-client.py
/B echo-client.py
/B echo-client.py
Client received: b'Echo=&gt;Hello network world'

Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets\echo-client.py", line 24, in &lt;module&gt;
    sockobj.connect((serverHost, serverPort))   # connect to server machine...
socket.error: [Errno 10061] No connection could be made because the target
machine actively refused it

Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets\echo-client.py", line 24, in &lt;module&gt;
    sockobj.connect((serverHost, serverPort))   # connect to server machine...
socket.error: [Errno 10061] No connection could be made because the target
machine actively refused it

Client received: b'Echo=&gt;Hello network world'
Client received: b'Echo=&gt;Hello network world'
Client received: b'Echo=&gt;Hello network world'
Client received: b'Echo=&gt;Hello network world'
Client received: b'Echo=&gt;Hello network world'</pre>
<p>As you can see, with such a sleepy server, 8 clients are
            spawned, but only 6 receive service, and 2 fail with exceptions.
            Unless clients require very little of the server’s attention, to
            handle multiple requests overlapping in time we need to somehow
            service clients in parallel. We’ll see how servers can handle
            multiple clients more robustly in a moment; first, though, let’s
            experiment with some special <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e49598"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e49600"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e49602"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e49604"></a>ports.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Talking to Reserved Ports"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="talking_to_reserved_ports"></a>Talking to Reserved Ports</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>It’s also <a id="soc12.4.5"></a><a id="port12.4.5"></a><a id="re12.4.5"></a>important to know that this client and server engage
          in a proprietary sort of discussion, and so use the port number
          50007 outside the range reserved for standard protocols (0 to 1023).
          There’s nothing preventing a client from opening a socket on one of
          these special ports, however. For instance, the following
          client-side code connects to programs listening on the standard
          email, FTP, and HTTP web server ports on three different server
          machines:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e49626"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from socket import *</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sock = socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sock.connect(('pop.secureserver.net', 110))</code></strong>    # talk to POP email server
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(sock.recv(70))</code></strong>
b'+OK &lt;14654.1272040794@p3pop01-09.prod.phx3.gdg&gt;\r\n'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sock.close()</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sock = socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sock.connect(('learning-python.com', 21))</code></strong>      # talk to FTP server
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(sock.recv(70))</code></strong>
b'220---------- Welcome to Pure-FTPd [privsep] [TLS] ----------\r\n220-You'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sock.close()</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sock = socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sock.connect(('www.python.net', 80))</code></strong>           # talk to Python's HTTP server

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sock.send(b'GET /\r\n')</code></strong>                        # fetch root page reply
7
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sock.recv(70)</code></strong>
b'&lt;!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN"\r\n    "http://'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sock.recv(70)</code></strong>
b'www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd"&gt;\r\n&lt;html xmlns="http://www.'</pre>
<p>If we know how to interpret the output returned by these
          ports’ servers, we could use raw sockets like this to fetch email,
          transfer files, and grab web pages and invoke server-side scripts.
          Fortunately, though, we don’t have to worry about all the underlying
          details—Python’s <code class="epub__literal">poplib</code>, <code class="epub__literal">ftplib</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">http.client</code> and <code class="epub__literal">urllib.request</code> modules provide
          higher-level interfaces for talking to servers on these ports. Other
          Python protocol modules do the same for other standard ports (e.g.,
          NNTP, Telnet, and so on). We’ll meet some of these client-side
          protocol modules in the next chapter.<sup>[45]</sup></p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Binding reserved port servers"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="binding_reserved_port_servers"></a>Binding reserved port servers</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Speaking of reserved <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e49699"></a>ports, it’s all right to open client-side
            connections on reserved ports as in the prior section, but you
            can’t install your own server-side scripts for these ports unless
            you have special permission. On the server I use to host <em class="epub__filename">learning-</em><em class="epub__filename">python.com</em>, for
            instance, the web server port 80 is off limits (presumably, unless
            I shell out for a virtual or dedicated hosting account):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e49710"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">[...]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from socket import *</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sock = socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM)</code></strong>    # try to bind web port on general server
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sock.bind(('', 80))</code></strong>                    # learning-python.com is a shared machine
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "&lt;stdin&gt;", line 1, in
  File "&lt;string&gt;", line 1, in bind
socket.error: (13, 'Permission denied')</pre>
<p>Even if run by a user with the required permission, you’ll
            get the different exception we saw earlier if the port is already
            being used by a real web server. On computers being used as
            general servers, these ports really are reserved. This is one
            reason we’ll run a web server of our own locally for testing when
            we start writing server-side scripts later in this book—the above
            code works on a Windows PC, which allows us to experiment with
            websites locally, on a self-contained machine:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e49726"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from socket import *</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sock = socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM)</code></strong>      # can bind port 80 on Windows
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sock.bind(('', 80))</code></strong>                      # allows running server on localhost
&gt;&gt;&gt;</pre>
<p>We’ll learn more about installing web servers later in Chapter 15. For the purposes of this
            chapter, we need to get realistic about how our socket servers
            handle their <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e49744"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e49746"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e49748"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e49750"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e49752"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e49754"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e49756"></a>clients.</p>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[45] </sup>You might be interested to know that the last part of this
              example, talking to port 80, is exactly what your web browser
              does as you surf the Web: followed links direct it to download
              web pages over this port. In fact, this lowly port is the
              primary basis of the Web. In Chapter 15, we will meet an entire
              application environment based upon sending formatted data over
              port 80—CGI server-side scripting. At the bottom, though, the
              Web is just bytes over sockets, with a user interface. The
              wizard behind the curtain is not as impressive as he may
              seem!</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
