<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Handling Multiple Clients</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Handling Multiple Clients"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="handling_multiple_clients"></a>Handling Multiple Clients</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">echo</code> client and
        <a id="cl12.5"></a><a id="net12.5"></a><a id="in12.5"></a>server programs shown previously serve to illustrate
        socket fundamentals. But the server model used suffers from a fairly
        major flaw. As described earlier, if multiple clients try to connect
        to the server, and it takes a long time to process a given client’s
        request, the server will fail. More accurately, if the cost of
        handling a given request prevents the server from returning to the
        code that checks for new clients in a timely manner, it won’t be able
        to keep up with all the requests, and some clients will eventually be
        denied connections.</p>
<p>In real-world client/server programs, it’s far more typical to
        code a server so as to avoid blocking new requests while handling a
        current client’s request. Perhaps the easiest way to do so is to
        service each client’s request in parallel—in a new process, in a new
        thread, or by manually switching (multiplexing) between clients in an
        event loop. This isn’t a socket issue per se, and we already learned
        how to start processes and threads in Chapter 5. But since these schemes are so
        typical of socket server programming, let’s explore all three ways to
        handle client requests in parallel here.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Forking Servers"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="forking_servers"></a>Forking Servers</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The script in Example 12-4 works like <a id="se12.5.1"></a><a id="fork12.5.1"></a>the original <code class="epub__literal">echo</code>
          server, but instead forks a new process to handle each new client
          connection. Because the <code class="epub__literal">handleClient</code> function runs in a new
          process, the <code class="epub__literal">dispatcher</code> function
          can immediately resume its main loop in order to detect and service
          a new incoming request.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id3"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 12-4. PP4E\Internet\Sockets\fork-server.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
Server side: open a socket on a port, listen for a message from a client,
and send an echo reply; forks a process to handle each client connection;
child processes share parent's socket descriptors; fork is less portable
than threads--not yet on Windows, unless Cygwin or similar installed;
"""

import os, time, sys
from socket import *                      # get socket constructor and constants
myHost = ''                               # server machine, '' means local host
myPort = 50007                            # listen on a non-reserved port number

sockobj = socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM)           # make a TCP socket object
sockobj.bind((myHost, myPort))                   # bind it to server port number
sockobj.listen(5)                                # allow 5 pending connects

def now():                                       # current time on server
    return time.ctime(time.time())

activeChildren = []
def reapChildren():                              # reap any dead child processes
    while activeChildren:                        # else may fill up system table
        pid, stat = os.waitpid(0, os.WNOHANG)    # don't hang if no child exited
        if not pid: break
        activeChildren.remove(pid)

def handleClient(connection):                    # child process: reply, exit
    time.sleep(5)                                # simulate a blocking activity
    while True:                                  # read, write a client socket
        data = connection.recv(1024)             # till eof when socket closed
        if not data: break
        reply = 'Echo=&gt;%s at %s' % (data, now())
        connection.send(reply.encode())
    connection.close()
    os._exit(0)

def dispatcher():                                # listen until process killed
    while True:                                  # wait for next connection,
        connection, address = sockobj.accept()   # pass to process for service
        print('Server connected by', address, end=' ')
        print('at', now())
        reapChildren()                           # clean up exited children now
        childPid = os.fork()                     # copy this process
        if childPid == 0:                        # if in child process: handle
            handleClient(connection)
        else:                                    # else: go accept next connect
            activeChildren.append(childPid)      # add to active child pid list

dispatcher()</pre>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Running the forking server"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="running_the_forking_server"></a>Running the forking server</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Parts of this script are a bit tricky, and most of its
            library calls work only on Unix-like platforms. Crucially, it runs
            on <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e49824"></a>Cygwin Python on Windows, but not standard Windows
            Python. Before we get into too many forking details, though, let’s
            focus on how this server arranges to handle multiple client
            requests.</p>
<p>First, notice that to simulate a long-running operation
            (e.g., database updates, other network traffic), this server adds
            a five-second <code class="epub__literal">time.sleep</code> delay
            in its client handler function, <code class="epub__literal">handleClient</code>. After the delay, the
            original echo reply action is performed. That means that when we
            run a server and clients this time, clients won’t receive the echo
            reply until five seconds after they’ve sent their requests to the
            server.</p>
<p>To help keep track of requests and replies, the server
            prints its system time each time a client connect request is
            received, and adds its system time to the reply. Clients print the
            reply time sent back from the server, not their own—clocks on the
            server and client may differ radically, so to compare apples to
            apples, all times are server times. Because of the simulated
            delays, we also must usually start each client in its own console
            window on Windows (clients will hang in a blocked state while
            waiting for their reply).</p>
<p>But the grander story here is that this script runs one main
            parent process on the server machine, which does nothing but watch
            for connections (in <code class="epub__literal">dispatcher</code>), plus one child process per
            active client connection, running in parallel with both the main
            parent process and the other client processes (in <code class="epub__literal">handleClient</code>). In principle, the server
            can handle any number of clients without bogging down.</p>
<p>To test, let’s first start the server remotely in a SSH or
            Telnet window, and start three clients locally in three distinct
            console windows. As we’ll see in a moment, this server can also be
            run under Cygwin locally if you have Cygwin but don’t have a
            remote server account like the one on <em class="epub__filename">learning-python.com</em> used here:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e49853"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">[server window (SSH or Telnet)]</span></em>
[...]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>uname -p -o</code></strong>
i686 GNU/Linux
[...]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python fork-server.py</code></strong>
Server connected by ('72.236.109.185', 58395) at Sat Apr 24 06:46:45 2010
Server connected by ('72.236.109.185', 58396) at Sat Apr 24 06:46:49 2010
Server connected by ('72.236.109.185', 58397) at Sat Apr 24 06:46:51 2010

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">[client window 1]</span></em>
C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python echo-client.py learning-python.com</code></strong>
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'Hello network world' at Sat Apr 24 06:46:50 2010"

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">[client window 2]</span></em>
C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python echo-client.py learning-python.com Bruce</code></strong>
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'Bruce' at Sat Apr 24 06:46:54 2010"

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">[client window 3]</span></em>
C:\...\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python echo-client.py learning-python.com The Meaning of Life</code></strong>
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'The' at Sat Apr 24 06:46:56 2010"
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'Meaning' at Sat Apr 24 06:46:56 2010"
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'of' at Sat Apr 24 06:46:56 2010"
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'Life' at Sat Apr 24 06:46:57 2010"</pre>
<p>Again, all times here are on the server machine. This may be
            a little confusing because four windows are involved. In plain
            English, the test proceeds as follows:</p><div class="epub__orderedlist"><ol class="epub__orderedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The server starts running remotely.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>All three clients are started and connect to the server
                a few seconds apart.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>On the server, the client requests trigger three forked
                child processes, which all immediately go to sleep for five
                seconds (to simulate being busy doing something
                useful).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Each client waits until the server replies, which
                happens five seconds after their initial requests.</p></li></ol>
</div>
<p>In other words, clients are serviced at the same time by
            forked processes, while the main parent process continues
            listening for new client requests. If clients were not handled in
            parallel like this, no client could connect until the currently
            connected client’s five-second delay expired.</p>
<p>In a more realistic application, that delay could be fatal
            if many clients were trying to connect at once—the server would be
            stuck in the action we’re simulating with <code class="epub__literal">time.sleep</code>, and not get back to the main
            loop to <code class="epub__literal">accept</code> new client
            requests. With process forks per request, clients can be serviced
            in parallel.</p>
<p>Notice that we’re using the same client script here
            (<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>echo-client.py</em></span>, from Example 12-2), just a different
            server; clients simply send and receive data to a machine and port
            and don’t care how their requests are handled on the server. The
            result displayed shows a byte string within a byte string, because
            the client sends one to the server and the server sends one back;
            because the server uses string formatting and manual <span>encoding</span> instead of byte string
            concatenation, the client’s message is shown as byte string
            explicitly here.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Other run modes: Local servers with Cygwin and remote clients"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="other_run_modes_colon_local_servers_with"></a>Other run modes: Local servers with Cygwin and remote
            clients</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Also note that the server is running remotely on a Linux
            machine in the preceding section. As we learned in Chapter 5, the <code class="epub__literal">fork</code> call is not supported on Windows in
            standard Python at the time this book was written. It does run on
            Cygwin Python, though, which allows us to start this server
            locally on <code class="epub__literal">localhost</code>, on the
            same machine as its clients:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e49931"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">[Cygwin shell window]</span></em>
[C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Socekts]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python fork-server.py</code></strong>
Server connected by ('127.0.0.1', 58258) at Sat Apr 24 07:50:15 2010
Server connected by ('127.0.0.1', 58259) at Sat Apr 24 07:50:17 2010

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">[Windows console, same machine]</span></em>
C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python echo-client.py localhost bright side of life</code></strong>
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'bright' at Sat Apr 24 07:50:20 2010"
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'side' at Sat Apr 24 07:50:20 2010"
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'of' at Sat Apr 24 07:50:20 2010"
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'life' at Sat Apr 24 07:50:20 2010"

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">[Windows console, same machine]</span></em>
C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python echo-client.py</code></strong>
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'Hello network world' at Sat Apr 24 07:50:22 2010"</pre>
<p>We can also run this test on the remote Linux server
            entirely, with two SSH or Telnet windows. It works about the same
            as when clients are started locally, in a DOS console window, but
            here “local” actually means a remote machine you’re using locally.
            Just for fun, let’s also contact the remote server from a locally
            running client to show how the server is also available to the
            Internet at large—when servers are coded with sockets and forks
            this way, clients can connect from arbitrary machines, and can
            overlap arbitrarily in time:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e49952"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">[one SSH (or Telnet) window]</span></em>
[...]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python fork-server.py</code></strong>
Server connected by ('127.0.0.1', 55743) at Sat Apr 24 07:15:14 2010
Server connected by ('127.0.0.1', 55854) at Sat Apr 24 07:15:26 2010
Server connected by ('127.0.0.1', 55950) at Sat Apr 24 07:15:36 2010
Server connected by ('72.236.109.185', 58414) at Sat Apr 24 07:19:50 2010

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">[another SSH window, same machine]</span></em>
[...]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python echo-client.py</code></strong>
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'Hello network world' at Sat Apr 24 07:15:19 2010"
[...]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python echo-client.py localhost niNiNI!</code></strong>
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'niNiNI!' at Sat Apr 24 07:15:31 2010"
[...]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python echo-client.py localhost Say no more!</code></strong>
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'Say' at Sat Apr 24 07:15:41 2010"
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'no' at Sat Apr 24 07:15:41 2010"
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'more!' at Sat Apr 24 07:15:41 2010"

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">[Windows console, local machine]</span></em>
C:\...\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python echo-client.py learning-python.com Blue, no yellow!</code></strong>
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'Blue,' at Sat Apr 24 07:19:55 2010"
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'no' at Sat Apr 24 07:19:55 2010"
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'yellow!' at Sat Apr 24 07:19:55 2010"</pre>
<p>Now that we have a handle on the basic model, let’s move on
            to the tricky bits. This server script is fairly straightforward
            as forking code goes, but a few words about the library tools it
            employs are in order.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Forked processes and sockets"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="forked_processes_and_sockets"></a>Forked processes and sockets</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>We met <code class="epub__literal">os.fork</code> in Chapter 5, but <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e49990"></a>recall that forked processes are essentially a copy
            of the process that forks them, and so they inherit file and
            socket descriptors from their parent process. As a result, the new
            child process that runs the <code class="epub__literal">handleClient</code> function has access to the
            connection socket created in the parent process. Really, this is
            why the child process works at all—when conversing on the
            connected socket, it’s using the same socket that parent’s
            <code class="epub__literal">accept</code> call returns. Programs
            know they are in a forked child process if the fork call returns
            0; otherwise, the original parent process gets back the new
            child’s ID.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Exiting from children"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="exiting_from_children"></a>Exiting from children</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In earlier fork examples, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e50007"></a>child processes usually call one of the <code class="epub__literal">exec</code> variants to start a new program in
            the child process. Here, instead, the child process simply calls a
            function in the same program and exits with <code class="epub__literal">os._exit</code>. It’s imperative to call
            <code class="epub__literal">os._exit</code> <span>here—</span>if we did not, each child would
            live on after <code class="epub__literal">handleClient</code>
            returns, and compete for accepting new client requests.</p>
<p>In fact, without the exit call, we’d wind up with as many
            perpetual server processes as requests served—remove the exit call
            and do a <code class="epub__literal">ps</code> shell command after
            running a few clients, and you’ll see what I mean. With the call,
            only the single parent process listens for new requests. <code class="epub__literal">os._exit</code> is like <code class="epub__literal">sys.exit</code>, but it exits the calling
            process immediately without cleanup actions. It’s normally used
            only in child processes, and <code class="epub__literal">sys.exit</code> is used everywhere else.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Killing the zombies: Don’t fear the reaper!"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="killing_the_zombies_colon_don_apostrophy"></a>Killing the zombies: Don’t fear the reaper!</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Note, however, <a id="zom12.5.1.5"></a>that it’s not quite enough to make sure that child
            processes exit and die. On systems like Linux, though not on
            Cygwin, parents must also be sure to issue a <code class="epub__literal">wait</code> system call to remove the entries
            for dead child processes from the system’s process table. If we
            don’t do this, the child processes will no longer run, but they
            will consume an entry in the system process table. For
            long-running servers, these bogus entries may become
            problematic.</p>
<p>It’s common to call such dead-but-listed child processes
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>zombies</em></span>: they continue to use system
            resources even though they’ve already passed over to the great
            operating system beyond. To clean up after child processes are
            gone, this server keeps a list, <code class="epub__literal">active</code><code class="epub__literal">Children</code>, of the process IDs of all
            child processes it spawns. Whenever a new incoming client request
            is received, the server runs its <code class="epub__literal">reapChildren</code> to issue a <code class="epub__literal">wait</code> for any dead children by issuing
            the standard Python <code class="epub__literal">os.waitpid(0,os.WNOHANG)</code> call.</p>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">os.waitpid</code> call
            attempts to wait for a child process to exit and returns its
            process ID and exit status. With a <code class="epub__literal">0</code> for its first argument, it waits for
            any child process. With the <code class="epub__literal">WNOHANG</code> parameter for its second, it
            does nothing if no child process has exited (i.e., it does not
            block or pause the caller). The net effect is that this call
            simply asks the operating system for the process ID of any child
            that has exited. If any have, the process ID returned is removed
            both from the system process table and from this script’s <code class="epub__literal">activeChildren</code> list.</p>
<p>To see why all this complexity is needed, comment out the
            <code class="epub__literal">reapChildren</code> call in this
            script, run it on a platform where this is an issue, and then run
            a few clients. On my Linux server, a <code class="epub__literal">ps
            -f</code> full process listing command shows that all the dead
            child processes stay in the system process table (show as <code class="epub__literal">&lt;defunct&gt;</code>):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e50099"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">[...]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>ps –f</code></strong>
UID        PID  PPID  C STIME TTY          TIME CMD
5693094   9990 30778  0 04:34 pts/0    00:00:00 python fork-server.py
5693094  10844  9990  0 04:35 pts/0    00:00:00 [python] &lt;defunct&gt;
5693094  10869  9990  0 04:35 pts/0    00:00:00 [python] &lt;defunct&gt;
5693094  11130  9990  0 04:36 pts/0    00:00:00 [python] &lt;defunct&gt;
5693094  11151  9990  0 04:36 pts/0    00:00:00 [python] &lt;defunct&gt;
5693094  11482 30778  0 04:36 pts/0    00:00:00 ps -f
5693094  30778 30772  0 04:23 pts/0    00:00:00 -bash</pre>
<p>When the <code class="epub__literal">reapChildren</code>
            command is reactivated, dead child zombie entries are cleaned up
            each time the server gets a new client connection request, by
            calling the Python <code class="epub__literal">os.waitpid</code>
            function. A few zombies may accumulate if the server is heavily
            loaded, but they will remain only until the next client connection
            is received (you get only as many zombies as processes served in
            parallel since the last <code class="epub__literal">accept</code>):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e50115"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">[...]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python fork-server.py &amp;</code></strong>
[1] 20515
[...]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>ps -f</code></strong>
UID        PID  PPID  C STIME TTY          TIME CMD
5693094  20515 30778  0 04:43 pts/0    00:00:00 python fork-server.py
5693094  20777 30778  0 04:43 pts/0    00:00:00 ps -f
5693094  30778 30772  0 04:23 pts/0    00:00:00 -bash
[...]$
Server connected by ('72.236.109.185', 58672) at Sun Apr 25 04:43:51 2010
Server connected by ('72.236.109.185', 58673) at Sun Apr 25 04:43:54 2010
[...]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>ps -f</code></strong>
UID        PID  PPID  C STIME TTY          TIME CMD
5693094  20515 30778  0 04:43 pts/0    00:00:00 python fork-server.py
5693094  21339 20515  0 04:43 pts/0    00:00:00 [python] &lt;defunct&gt;
5693094  21398 20515  0 04:43 pts/0    00:00:00 [python] &lt;defunct&gt;
5693094  21573 30778  0 04:44 pts/0    00:00:00 ps -f
5693094  30778 30772  0 04:23 pts/0    00:00:00 -bash
[...]$
Server connected by ('72.236.109.185', 58674) at Sun Apr 25 04:44:07 2010
[...]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>ps -f</code></strong>
UID        PID  PPID  C STIME TTY          TIME CMD
5693094  20515 30778  0 04:43 pts/0    00:00:00 python fork-server.py
5693094  21646 20515  0 04:44 pts/0    00:00:00 [python] &lt;defunct&gt;
5693094  21813 30778  0 04:44 pts/0    00:00:00 ps -f
5693094  30778 30772  0 04:23 pts/0    00:00:00 -bash</pre>
<p>In fact, if you type fast enough, you can actually see a
            child process morph from a real running program into a zombie.
            Here, for example, a child spawned to handle a new request changes
            to <code class="epub__literal">&lt;defunct&gt;</code> on exit. Its
            connection cleans up lingering zombies, and its own process entry
            will be removed completely when the next request is
            received:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e50134"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">[...]$
Server connected by ('72.236.109.185', 58676) at Sun Apr 25 04:48:22 2010
[...] <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>ps -f</code></strong>
UID        PID  PPID  C STIME TTY          TIME CMD
5693094  20515 30778  0 04:43 pts/0    00:00:00 python fork-server.py
5693094  27120 20515  0 04:48 pts/0    00:00:00 python fork-server.py
5693094  27174 30778  0 04:48 pts/0    00:00:00 ps -f
5693094  30778 30772  0 04:23 pts/0    00:00:00 -bash
[...]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>ps -f</code></strong>
UID        PID  PPID  C STIME TTY          TIME CMD
5693094  20515 30778  0 04:43 pts/0    00:00:00 python fork-server.py
5693094  27120 20515  0 04:48 pts/0    00:00:00 [python] &lt;defunct&gt;
5693094  27234 30778  0 04:48 pts/0    00:00:00 ps -f
5693094  30778 30772  0 04:23 pts/0    00:00:00 -bash</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Preventing zombies with signal handlers on Linux"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="preventing_zombies_with_signal_handlers"></a>Preventing zombies with signal handlers on Linux</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>On some systems, <a id="sig12.5.1.6"></a><a id="unix12.5.1.6"></a>it’s also possible to clean up zombie child
            processes by resetting the signal handler for the <code class="epub__literal">SIGCHLD</code> signal delivered to a parent
            process by the operating system when a child process stops or
            exits. If a Python script assigns the <code class="epub__literal">SIG_IGN</code> (ignore) action as the <code class="epub__literal">SIGCHLD</code> signal handler, zombies will be
            removed automatically and immediately by the operating system as
            child processes exit; the parent need not issue wait calls to
            clean up after them. Because of that, this scheme is a simpler
            alternative to manually reaping zombies on platforms where it is
            supported.</p>
<p>If you’ve already read Chapter 5, you know that Python’s
            standard <code class="epub__literal">signal</code> module lets
            scripts install handlers for signals—software-generated events. By
            way of review, here is a brief bit of background to show how this
            pans out for zombies. The program in Example 12-5 installs a
            Python-coded signal handler function to respond to whatever signal
            number you type on the command line.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id4"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 12-5. PP4E\Internet\Sockets\signal-demo.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
Demo Python's signal module; pass signal number as a command-line arg, and use
a "kill -N pid" shell command to send this process a signal; on my Linux machine,
SIGUSR1=10, SIGUSR2=12, SIGCHLD=17, and SIGCHLD handler stays in effect even if
not restored: all other handlers are restored by Python after caught, but SIGCHLD
behavior is left to the platform's implementation; signal works on Windows too,
but defines only a few signal types; signals are not very portable in general;
"""

import sys, signal, time

def now():
    return time.asctime()

def onSignal(signum, stackframe):                # Python signal handler
    print('Got signal', signum, 'at', now())     # most handlers stay in effect
    if signum == signal.SIGCHLD:                 # but sigchld handler is not
        print('sigchld caught')
        #signal.signal(signal.SIGCHLD, onSignal)

signum = int(sys.argv[1])
signal.signal(signum, onSignal)                  # install signal handler
while True: signal.pause()                       # sleep waiting for signals</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>To run this script, simply put it in the background and send
            it signals by typing the<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e50181"></a> <code class="epub__literal">kill
            -</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>signal-number</code></em>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>process-id</code></em> shell command line; this is
            the shell’s equivalent of Python’s<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e50193"></a> <code class="epub__literal">os.kill</code> function
            available on Unix-like platforms only. Process IDs are listed in
            the PID column of <code class="epub__literal">ps</code> command
            results. Here is this script in action catching signal numbers 10
            (reserved for general use) and 9 (the unavoidable terminate
            signal):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e50206"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">[...]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python signal-demo.py 10 &amp;</code></strong>
[1] 10141
[...]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>ps -f</code></strong>
UID        PID  PPID  C STIME TTY          TIME CMD
5693094  10141 30778  0 05:00 pts/0    00:00:00 python signal-demo.py 10
5693094  10228 30778  0 05:00 pts/0    00:00:00 ps -f
5693094  30778 30772  0 04:23 pts/0    00:00:00 -bash

[...]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>kill −10 10141</code></strong>
Got signal 10 at Sun Apr 25 05:00:31 2010

[...]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>kill −10 10141</code></strong>
Got signal 10 at Sun Apr 25 05:00:34 2010

[...]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>kill −9 10141</code></strong>
[1]+  Killed                  python signal-demo.py 10</pre>
<p>And in the following the script catches signal 17, which
            happens to be <code class="epub__literal">SIGCHLD</code> on my
            Linux server. Signal numbers vary from machine to machine, so you
            should normally use their names, not their numbers. <code class="epub__literal">SIGCHLD</code> behavior may vary per platform
            as well. On my Cygwin install, for example, signal 10 can have
            different meaning, and signal 20 is SIGCHLD—on Cygwin, the script
            works as shown on Linux here for signal 10, but generates an
            exception if it tries to install on handler for signal 17 (and
            Cygwin doesn’t require reaping in any event). See the <code class="epub__literal">signal</code> module’s library manual entry for
            more details:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e50234"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">[...]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python signal-demo.py 17 &amp;</code></strong>
[1] 11592
[...]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>ps -f</code></strong>
UID        PID  PPID  C STIME TTY          TIME CMD
5693094  11592 30778  0 05:00 pts/0    00:00:00 python signal-demo.py 17
5693094  11728 30778  0 05:01 pts/0    00:00:00 ps -f
5693094  30778 30772  0 04:23 pts/0    00:00:00 -bash

[...]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>kill −17 11592</code></strong>
Got signal 17 at Sun Apr 25 05:01:28 2010
sigchld caught

[...]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>kill −17 11592</code></strong>
Got signal 17 at Sun Apr 25 05:01:35 2010
sigchld caught

[...]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>kill −9 11592</code></strong>
[1]+  Killed                  python signal-demo.py 17</pre>
<p>Now, to apply all of this signal knowledge to killing
            zombies, simply set the <code class="epub__literal">SIGCHLD</code>
            signal handler to the <code class="epub__literal">SIG_IGN</code>
            ignore handler action; on systems where this assignment is
            supported, child processes will be cleaned up when they exit. The
            forking server variant shown in Example 12-6 uses this trick to
            manage its children.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id5"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 12-6. PP4E\Internet\Sockets\fork-server-signal.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
Same as fork-server.py, but use the Python signal module to avoid keeping
child zombie processes after they terminate, instead of an explicit reaper
loop before each new connection; SIG_IGN means ignore, and may not work with
SIG_CHLD child exit signal on all platforms; see Linux documentation for more
about the restartability of a socket.accept call interrupted with a signal;
"""

import os, time, sys, signal, signal
from socket import *                      # get socket constructor and constants
myHost = ''                               # server machine, '' means local host
myPort = 50007                            # listen on a non-reserved port number

sockobj = socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM)           # make a TCP socket object
sockobj.bind((myHost, myPort))                   # bind it to server port number
sockobj.listen(5)                                # up to 5 pending connects
<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>signal.signal(signal.SIGCHLD, signal.SIG_IGN)</code></strong>    # avoid child zombie processes

def now():                                       # time on server machine
    return time.ctime(time.time())

def handleClient(connection):                    # child process replies, exits
    time.sleep(5)                                # simulate a blocking activity
    while True:                                  # read, write a client socket
        data = connection.recv(1024)
        if not data: break
        reply = 'Echo=&gt;%s at %s' % (data, now())
        connection.send(reply.encode())
    connection.close()
    os._exit(0)

def dispatcher():                                # listen until process killed
    while True:                                  # wait for next connection,
        connection, address = sockobj.accept()   # pass to process for service
        print('Server connected by', address, end=' ')
        print('at', now())
        childPid = os.fork()                     # copy this process
        if childPid == 0:                        # if in child process: handle
            handleClient(connection)             # else: go accept next connect

dispatcher()</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Where applicable, this technique is:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Much simpler; we don’t need to manually track or reap
                child processes.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>More accurate; it leaves no zombies temporarily between
                client requests.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>In fact, only one line is dedicated to handling zombies
            here: the <code class="epub__literal">signal.signal</code> call
            near the top, to set the handler. Unfortunately, this version is
            also even less portable than using <code class="epub__literal">os.fork</code> in the first place, because
            signals may work slightly differently from platform to platform,
            even among Unix variants. For instance, some Unix platforms may
            not allow <code class="epub__literal">SIG_IGN</code> to be used as
            the <code class="epub__literal">SIGCHLD</code> action at all. On
            Linux systems, though, this simpler forking server variant works
            like a charm:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e50293"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">[...]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python fork-server-signal.py &amp;</code></strong>
[1] 3837
Server connected by ('72.236.109.185', 58817) at Sun Apr 25 08:11:12 2010

[...] <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>ps -f</code></strong>
UID        PID  PPID  C STIME TTY          TIME CMD
5693094   3837 30778  0 08:10 pts/0    00:00:00 python fork-server-signal.py
5693094   4378  3837  0 08:11 pts/0    00:00:00 python fork-server-signal.py
5693094   4413 30778  0 08:11 pts/0    00:00:00 ps -f
5693094  30778 30772  0 04:23 pts/0    00:00:00 -bash

[...]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>ps -f</code></strong>
UID        PID  PPID  C STIME TTY          TIME CMD
5693094   3837 30778  0 08:10 pts/0    00:00:00 python fork-server-signal.py
5693094   4584 30778  0 08:11 pts/0    00:00:00 ps -f
5693094  30778 30772  0 04:23 pts/0    00:00:00 –bash</pre>
<p>Notice how in this version the child process’s entry goes
            away as soon as it exits, even before a new client request is
            received; no “defunct” zombie ever appears. More dramatically, if
            we now start up the script we wrote earlier that spawns
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>eight</em></span> clients in parallel
            (<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>testecho.py</em></span>) to talk to this server
            remotely, all appear on the server while running, but are removed
            immediately as they exit:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e50312"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">[client window]</span></em>
C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>testecho.py learning-python.com</code></strong>

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">[server window]</span></em>
[...]$
Server connected by ('72.236.109.185', 58829) at Sun Apr 25 08:16:34 2010
Server connected by ('72.236.109.185', 58830) at Sun Apr 25 08:16:34 2010
Server connected by ('72.236.109.185', 58831) at Sun Apr 25 08:16:34 2010
Server connected by ('72.236.109.185', 58832) at Sun Apr 25 08:16:34 2010
Server connected by ('72.236.109.185', 58833) at Sun Apr 25 08:16:34 2010
Server connected by ('72.236.109.185', 58834) at Sun Apr 25 08:16:34 2010
Server connected by ('72.236.109.185', 58835) at Sun Apr 25 08:16:34 2010
Server connected by ('72.236.109.185', 58836) at Sun Apr 25 08:16:34 2010

[...]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>ps -f</code></strong>
UID        PID  PPID  C STIME TTY          TIME CMD
5693094   3837 30778  0 08:10 pts/0    00:00:00 python fork-server-signal.py
5693094   9666  3837  0 08:16 pts/0    00:00:00 python fork-server-signal.py
5693094   9667  3837  0 08:16 pts/0    00:00:00 python fork-server-signal.py
5693094   9668  3837  0 08:16 pts/0    00:00:00 python fork-server-signal.py
5693094   9670  3837  0 08:16 pts/0    00:00:00 python fork-server-signal.py
5693094   9674  3837  0 08:16 pts/0    00:00:00 python fork-server-signal.py
5693094   9678  3837  0 08:16 pts/0    00:00:00 python fork-server-signal.py
5693094   9681  3837  0 08:16 pts/0    00:00:00 python fork-server-signal.py
5693094   9682  3837  0 08:16 pts/0    00:00:00 python fork-server-signal.py
5693094   9722 30778  0 08:16 pts/0    00:00:00 ps -f
5693094  30778 30772  0 04:23 pts/0    00:00:00 -bash

[...]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>ps -f</code></strong>
UID        PID  PPID  C STIME TTY          TIME CMD
5693094   3837 30778  0 08:10 pts/0    00:00:00 python fork-server-signal.py
5693094  10045 30778  0 08:16 pts/0    00:00:00 ps -f
5693094  30778 30772  0 04:23 pts/0    00:00:00 –bash</pre>
<p>And now that I’ve shown you how to use signal handling to
            reap children automatically on Linux, I should underscore that
            this technique is not universally supported across all flavors of
            Unix. If you care about portability, manually reaping children as
            we did in Example 12-4 may
            still be <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e50332"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e50334"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e50336"></a>desirable.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Why multiprocessing doesn’t help with socket server portability"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="why_multiprocessing_doesn_apostrophy_t_h"></a>Why multiprocessing doesn’t help with socket server
            portability</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In Chapter 5, we <a id="pa12.5.1.7"></a>l<a id="multi12.5.1.7"></a>earned about Python’s new <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code> module. As we saw, it
            provides a way to start function calls in new processes that is
            more portable than the <code class="epub__literal">os.fork</code>
            call used in this section’s server code, and it runs processes
            instead of threads to work around the thread GIL in some
            scenarios. In particular, <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code> works on standard
            Windows Python too, unlike direct <code class="epub__literal">os.fork</code> calls.</p>
<p>I experimented with a server variant based upon this module
            to see if its portability might help for socket servers. Its full
            source code is in the examples package in file <em class="epub__filename">multi-server.py</em>, but here are its
            important bits that differ:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e50376"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...rest unchanged from fork-server.py...</span></em>
from multiprocessing import Process

def handleClient(connection):
    print('Child:', os.getpid())                 # child process: reply, exit
    time.sleep(5)                                # simulate a blocking activity
    while True:                                  # read, write a client socket
        data = connection.recv(1024)             # till eof when socket closed
        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...rest unchanged...</span></em>

def dispatcher():                                # listen until process killed
    while True:                                  # wait for next connection,
        connection, address = sockobj.accept()   # pass to process for service
        print('Server connected by', address, end=' ')
        print('at', now())
        Process(target=handleClient, args=(connection,)).start()

if __name__ == '__main__':
    print('Parent:', os.getpid())
    sockobj = socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM)           # make a TCP socket object
    sockobj.bind((myHost, myPort))                   # bind it to server port number
    sockobj.listen(5)                                # allow 5 pending connects
    dispatcher()</pre>
<p>This server variant is noticeably simpler too. Like the
            forking server it’s derived from, this server works fine under
            Cygwin Python on Windows running as <code class="epub__literal">localhost</code>, and would probably work on
            other Unix-like platforms as well, because <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code> forks a process on such
            systems, and file and socket descriptors are inherited by child
            processes as usual. Hence, the child process uses the same
            connected socket as the parent. Here’s the scene in a Cygwin
            server window and two Windows client windows:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e50391"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">[server window]</span></em>
[C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python multi-server.py</code></strong>
Parent: 8388
Server connected by ('127.0.0.1', 58271) at Sat Apr 24 08:13:27 2010
Child: 8144
Server connected by ('127.0.0.1', 58272) at Sat Apr 24 08:13:29 2010
Child: 8036

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">[two client windows]</span></em>
C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python echo-client.py</code></strong>
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'Hello network world' at Sat Apr 24 08:13:33 2010"

C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python echo-client.py localhost Brave Sir Robin</code></strong>
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'Brave' at Sat Apr 24 08:13:35 2010"
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'Sir' at Sat Apr 24 08:13:35 2010"
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'Robin' at Sat Apr 24 08:13:35 2010"</pre>
<p>However, this server does <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>not</em></span> work on
            standard Windows Python—the whole point of trying to use <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code> in this context—because
            open sockets are not correctly pickled when passed as arguments
            into the new process. Here’s what occurs in the server windows on
            Windows 7 with Python 3.1:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e50415"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python multi-server.py</code></strong>
Parent: 9140
Server connected by ('127.0.0.1', 58276) at Sat Apr 24 08:17:41 2010
Child: 9628
Process Process-1:
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "C:\Python31\lib\multiprocessing\process.py", line 233, in _bootstrap
    self.run()
  File "C:\Python31\lib\multiprocessing\process.py", line 88, in run
    self._target(*self._args, **self._kwargs)
  File "C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets\multi-server.py", line 38, in handleClient
    data = connection.recv(1024)             # till eof when socket closed
socket.error: [Errno 10038] An operation was attempted on something that is not
a socket</pre>
<p>Recall from Chapter 5 that on
            Windows <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code> passes
            context to a new <span>Python</span>
            interpreter process by pickling it, and that <code class="epub__literal">Process</code> arguments must all be pickleable
            for Windows. Sockets in Python 3.1 don’t trigger errors when
            pickled thanks to the class they are an instance of, but they are
            not really pickled correctly:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e50433"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from pickle import *</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from socket import *</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>s = socket()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = dumps(s)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>s</code></strong>
&lt;socket.socket object, fd=180, family=2, type=1, proto=0&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>loads(x)</code></strong>
&lt;socket.socket object, fd=-1, family=0, type=0, proto=0&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x</code></strong>
b'\x80\x03csocket\nsocket\nq\x00)\x81q\x01N}q\x02(X\x08\x00\x00\x00_io_refsq\x03
K\x00X\x07\x00\x00\x00_closedq\x04\x89u\x86q\x05b.'</pre>
<p>As we saw in Chapter 5,
            <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code> has other IPC
            tools such as its own pipes and queues that might be used instead
            of sockets to work around this issue, but clients would then have
            to use them, too—the resulting server would not be as broadly
            accessible as one based upon general Internet sockets.</p>
<p>Even if <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code>
            did work on Windows, though, its need to start a new Python
            interpreter would likely make it much slower than the more
            traditional technique of spawning threads to talk to clients.
            Coincidentally, that brings us to <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e50470"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e50472"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e50474"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e50476"></a>our next topic.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Threading Servers"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="threading_servers"></a>Threading Servers</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The forking model <a id="se12.5.2"></a><a id="th12.5.2"></a>just described works well on Unix-like platforms in
          general, but it suffers from some potentially significant
          limitations:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Performance</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>On some machines, starting a new process can be fairly
                expensive in terms of time and space resources.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Portability</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Forking processes is a Unix technique; as we’ve learned,
                the <code class="epub__literal">os.fork</code> call currently
                doesn’t work on non-Unix platforms such as Windows under
                standard Python. As we’ve also learned, forks can be used in
                the Cygwin version of Python on Windows, but they may be
                inefficient and not exactly the same as Unix forks. And as we
                just discovered, <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code> won’t help on
                Windows, because connected sockets are not pickleable across
                process boundaries.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Complexity</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>If you think that forking servers can be complicated,
                you’re not alone. As we just saw, forking also brings with it
                all the shenanigans of managing and reaping zombies—cleaning
                up after child processes that live shorter lives than their
                parents.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>If you read Chapter 5, you know
          that one solution to all of these dilemmas is to use
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>threads</em></span> rather than processes. Threads run in
          parallel and share global (i.e., module and interpreter)
          memory.</p>
<p>Because threads all run in the same process and memory space,
          they automatically share sockets passed between them, similar in
          spirit to the way that child processes inherit socket descriptors.
          Unlike processes, though, threads are usually less expensive to
          start, and work on both Unix-like machines and Windows under
          standard Python today. Furthermore, many (though not all) see
          threads as simpler to program—child threads die silently on exit,
          without leaving behind zombies to haunt the server.</p>
<p>To illustrate, Example 12-7 is another mutation
          of the echo server that handles client requests in parallel by
          running them in threads rather than in processes.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id6"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 12-7. PP4E\Internet\Sockets\thread-server.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
Server side: open a socket on a port, listen for a message from a client,
and send an echo reply; echoes lines until eof when client closes socket;
spawns a thread to handle each client connection; threads share global
memory space with main thread; this is more portable than fork: threads
work on standard Windows systems, but process forks do not;
"""

import time, _thread as thread           # or use threading.Thread().start()
from socket import *                     # get socket constructor and constants
myHost = ''                              # server machine, '' means local host
myPort = 50007                           # listen on a non-reserved port number

sockobj = socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM)           # make a TCP socket object
sockobj.bind((myHost, myPort))                   # bind it to server port number
sockobj.listen(5)                                # allow up to 5 pending connects

def now():
    return time.ctime(time.time())               # current time on the server

def handleClient(connection):                    # in spawned thread: reply
    time.sleep(5)                                # simulate a blocking activity
    while True:                                  # read, write a client socket
        data = connection.recv(1024)
        if not data: break
        reply = 'Echo=&gt;%s at %s' % (data, now())
        connection.send(reply.encode())
    connection.close()

def dispatcher():                                # listen until process killed
    while True:                                  # wait for next connection,
        connection, address = sockobj.accept()   # pass to thread for service
        print('Server connected by', address, end=' ')
        print('at', now())
        thread.start_new_thread(handleClient, (connection,))

dispatcher()</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>This <code class="epub__literal">dispatcher</code> delegates
          each incoming client connection request to a newly spawned thread
          running the <code class="epub__literal">handleClient</code>
          function. As a result, this server can process multiple clients at
          once, and the main dispatcher loop can get quickly back to the top
          to check for newly arrived requests. The net effect is that new
          clients won’t be denied service due to a busy server.</p>
<p>Functionally, this version is similar to the <code class="epub__literal">fork</code> solution (clients are handled in
          parallel), but it will work on any machine that supports threads,
          including Windows and Linux. Let’s test it on both. First, start the
          server on a Linux machine and run clients on both Linux and
          Windows:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e50554"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">[window 1: thread-based server process, server keeps accepting</span></em>
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">client connections while threads are servicing prior requests]</span></em>
[...]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python thread-server.py</code></strong>
Server connected by ('127.0.0.1', 37335) at Sun Apr 25 08:59:05 2010
Server connected by ('72.236.109.185', 58866) at Sun Apr 25 08:59:54 2010
Server connected by ('72.236.109.185', 58867) at Sun Apr 25 08:59:56 2010
Server connected by ('72.236.109.185', 58868) at Sun Apr 25 08:59:58 2010

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">[window 2: client, but on same remote server machine]</span></em>
[...]$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python echo-client.py</code></strong>
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'Hello network world' at Sun Apr 25 08:59:10 2010"

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">[windows 3-5: local clients, PC]</span></em>
C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python echo-client.py learning-python.com</code></strong>
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'Hello network world' at Sun Apr 25 08:59:59 2010"

C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python echo-client.py learning-python.com Bruce</code></strong>
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'Bruce' at Sun Apr 25 09:00:01 2010"

C:\...\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python echo-client.py learning-python.com The Meaning of life</code></strong>
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'The' at Sun Apr 25 09:00:03 2010"
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'Meaning' at Sun Apr 25 09:00:03 2010"
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'of' at Sun Apr 25 09:00:03 2010"
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'life' at Sun Apr 25 09:00:03 2010"</pre>
<p>Because this server uses threads rather than forked processes,
          we can run it portably on both Linux and a Windows PC. Here it is at
          work again, running on the same local Windows PC as its clients;
          again, the main point to notice is that new clients are accepted
          while prior clients are being processed in parallel with other
          clients and the main thread (in the five-second sleep delay):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e50586"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">[window 1: server, on local PC]</span></em>
C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python thread-server.py</code></strong>
Server connected by ('127.0.0.1', 58987) at Sun Apr 25 12:41:46 2010
Server connected by ('127.0.0.1', 58988) at Sun Apr 25 12:41:47 2010
Server connected by ('127.0.0.1', 58989) at Sun Apr 25 12:41:49 2010

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">[windows 2-4: clients, on local</span></em> PC]
C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python echo-client.py</code></strong>
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'Hello network world' at Sun Apr 25 12:41:51 2010"

C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python echo-client.py localhost Brian</code></strong>
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'Brian' at Sun Apr 25 12:41:52 2010"

C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python echo-client.py localhost Bright side of life</code></strong>
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'Bright' at Sun Apr 25 12:41:54 2010"
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'side' at Sun Apr 25 12:41:54 2010"
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'of' at Sun Apr 25 12:41:54 2010"
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'life' at Sun Apr 25 12:41:54 2010"</pre>
<p>Remember that a thread silently exits when the function it is
          running returns; unlike the process <code class="epub__literal">fork</code> version, we don’t call anything like
          <code class="epub__literal">os</code>.<code class="epub__literal">_exit</code> in the client handler function (and
          we shouldn’t—it may kill all threads in the process, including the
          main loop watching for new connections!). Because of this, the
          thread version is not only more portable, but also <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e50616"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e50618"></a>simpler.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Standard Library Server Classes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="standard_library_server_classes"></a>Standard Library Server Classes</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Now that I’ve <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e50626"></a>shown you how to write forking and threading servers
          to process clients without blocking incoming requests, I should also
          tell you that there are standard tools in the Python standard
          library to make this process even easier. In particular, the
          <code class="epub__literal">socketserver</code> module defines
          classes that implement all flavors of forking and threading servers
          that you are likely to be interested in.</p>
<p>Like the manually-coded servers we’ve just studied, this
          module’s primary classes implement servers which process clients in
          parallel (a.k.a. asynchronously) to avoid denying service to new
          requests during long-running transactions. Their net effect is to
          automate the top-levels of common server code. To use this module,
          simply create the desired kind of imported server object, passing in
          a handler object with a callback method of your own, as demonstrated
          in the threaded TCP server of Example 12-8.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id7"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 12-8. PP4E\Internet\Sockets\class-server.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
Server side: open a socket on a port, listen for a message from a client, and
send an echo reply; this version uses the standard library module socketserver to
do its work; socketserver provides TCPServer, ThreadingTCPServer, ForkingTCPServer,
UDP variants of these, and more, and routes each client connect request to a new
instance of a passed-in request handler object's handle method; socketserver also
supports Unix domain sockets, but only on Unixen; see the Python library manual.
"""

import socketserver, time               # get socket server, handler objects
myHost = ''                             # server machine, '' means local host
myPort = 50007                          # listen on a non-reserved port number
def now():
    return time.ctime(time.time())

class MyClientHandler(socketserver.BaseRequestHandler):
    def handle(self):                           # on each client connect
        print(self.client_address, now())       # show this client's address
        time.sleep(5)                           # simulate a blocking activity
        while True:                             # self.request is client socket
            data = self.request.recv(1024)      # read, write a client socket
            if not data: break
            reply = 'Echo=&gt;%s at %s' % (data, now())
            self.request.send(reply.encode())
        self.request.close()

# make a threaded server, listen/handle clients forever
myaddr = (myHost, myPort)
server = socketserver.ThreadingTCPServer(myaddr, MyClientHandler)
server.serve_forever()</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>This server works the same as the threading server we wrote by
          hand in the previous section, but instead focuses on service
          implementation (the customized <code class="epub__literal">handle</code> method), not on threading details.
          It is run the same way, too—here it is processing three clients
          started by hand, plus eight spawned by the <code class="epub__literal">testecho</code> script shown we wrote in Example 12-3:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e50652"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">[window 1: server, serverHost='localhost' in echo-client.py]</span></em>
C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python class-server.py</code></strong>
('127.0.0.1', 59036) Sun Apr 25 13:50:23 2010
('127.0.0.1', 59037) Sun Apr 25 13:50:25 2010
('127.0.0.1', 59038) Sun Apr 25 13:50:26 2010
('127.0.0.1', 59039) Sun Apr 25 13:51:05 2010
('127.0.0.1', 59040) Sun Apr 25 13:51:05 2010
('127.0.0.1', 59041) Sun Apr 25 13:51:06 2010
('127.0.0.1', 59042) Sun Apr 25 13:51:06 2010
('127.0.0.1', 59043) Sun Apr 25 13:51:06 2010
('127.0.0.1', 59044) Sun Apr 25 13:51:06 2010
('127.0.0.1', 59045) Sun Apr 25 13:51:06 2010
('127.0.0.1', 59046) Sun Apr 25 13:51:06 2010

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">[windows 2-4: client, same machine]</span></em>
C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python echo-client.py</code></strong>
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'Hello network world' at Sun Apr 25 13:50:28 2010"

C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python echo-client.py localhost Arthur</code></strong>
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'Arthur' at Sun Apr 25 13:50:30 2010"

C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python echo-client.py localhost Brave Sir Robin</code></strong>
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'Brave' at Sun Apr 25 13:50:31 2010"
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'Sir' at Sun Apr 25 13:50:31 2010"
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'Robin' at Sun Apr 25 13:50:31 2010"

C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python testecho.py</code></strong></pre>
<p>To build a forking server instead, just use the class name
          <code class="epub__literal">ForkingTCPServer</code> when creating
          the server object. The <code class="epub__literal">socketserver</code> module has more power than
          shown by this example; it also supports nonparallel (a.k.a. serial
          or synchronous) servers, UDP and Unix domain sockets, and Ctrl-C
          server interrupts on Windows. See Python’s library manual for more
          details.</p>
<p>For more advanced server needs, Python also comes with
          standard library tools that use those shown here, and allow you to
          implement in just a few lines of Python code a simple but
          fully-functional HTTP (web) server that knows how to run server-side
          CGI scripts. We’ll explore those larger server tools in Chapter 15.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Multiplexing Servers with select"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="multiplexing_servers_with_select"></a>Multiplexing Servers with select</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>So far we’ve seen <a id="server12.5.4"></a><a id="multi12.5.4"></a><a id="sel12.5.4"></a>how to handle multiple clients at once with both
          forked processes and spawned threads, and we’ve looked at a library
          class that encapsulates both schemes. Under both approaches, all
          client handlers seem to run in parallel with one another and with
          the main dispatch loop that continues watching for new incoming
          requests. Because all of these tasks run in parallel (i.e., at the
          same time), the server doesn’t get blocked when accepting new
          requests or when processing a long-running client handler.</p>
<p>Technically, though, threads and processes don’t really run in
          parallel, unless you’re lucky enough to have a machine with many
          CPUs. Instead, your operating system performs a juggling act—it
          divides the computer’s processing power among all active tasks. It
          runs part of one, then part of another, and so on. All the tasks
          appear to run in parallel, but only because the operating system
          switches focus between tasks so fast that you don’t usually notice.
          This process of switching between tasks is sometimes called
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>time-slicing</em></span> when done by an operating system;
          it is more generally known as
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>multiplexing</em></span>.</p>
<p>When we spawn threads and processes, we rely on the operating
          system to juggle the active tasks so that none are starved of
          computing resources, especially the main server dispatcher loop.
          However, there’s no reason that a Python script can’t do so as well.
          For instance, a script might divide tasks into multiple steps—run a
          step of one task, then one of another, and so on, until all are
          completed. The script need only know how to divide its attention
          among the multiple active tasks to multiplex on its own.</p>
<p>Servers can apply this technique to yield yet another way to
          handle multiple clients at once, a way that requires neither threads
          nor forks. By multiplexing client connections and the main
          dispatcher with the <code class="epub__literal">select</code> system
          call, a single event loop can process multiple clients and accept
          new ones in parallel (or at least close enough to avoid stalling).
          Such servers are sometimes called <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>asynchronous</em></span>,
          because they service clients in spurts, as each becomes ready to
          communicate. In asynchronous servers, a single main loop run in a
          single process and thread decides which clients should get a bit of
          attention each time through. Client requests and the main dispatcher
          loop are each given a small slice of the server’s attention if they
          are ready to converse.</p>
<p>Most of the magic behind this server structure is the
          operating system <code class="epub__literal">select</code> call,
          available in Python’s standard <code class="epub__literal">select</code> module on all major platforms.
          Roughly, <code class="epub__literal">select</code> is asked to
          monitor a list of input sources, output sources, and exceptional
          condition sources and tells us which sources are ready for
          processing. It can be made to simply poll all the sources to see
          which are ready; wait for a maximum time period for sources to
          become ready; or wait indefinitely until one or more sources are
          ready for processing.</p>
<p>However used, <code class="epub__literal">select</code> lets
          us direct attention to sockets ready to communicate, so as to avoid
          blocking on calls to ones that are not. That is, when the sources
          passed to <code class="epub__literal">select</code> are sockets, we
          can be sure that socket calls like <code class="epub__literal">accept</code>, <code class="epub__literal">recv</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">send</code> will not block (pause) the server
          when applied to objects returned by <code class="epub__literal">select</code>. Because of that, a single-loop
          server that uses <code class="epub__literal">select</code> need not
          get stuck communicating with one client or waiting for new ones
          while other clients are starved for the server’s attention.</p>
<p>Because this type of server does not need to start threads or
          processes, it can be efficient when transactions with clients are
          relatively short-lived. However, it also requires that these
          transactions be quick; if they are not, it still runs the risk of
          becoming bogged down waiting for a dialog with a particular client
          to end, unless augmented with threads or forks for long-running
          transactions.<sup>[46]</sup></p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="A select-based echo server"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="a_select-based_echo_server"></a>A select-based echo server</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Let’s see how all of this translates into code. The script
            in Example 12-9 implements
            another <code class="epub__literal">echo</code> server, one that
            can handle multiple clients without ever starting new processes or
            threads.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id8"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 12-9. PP4E\Internet\Sockets\select-server.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
Server: handle multiple clients in parallel with select. use the select
module to manually multiplex among a set of sockets: main sockets which
accept new client connections, and input sockets connected to accepted
clients; select can take an optional 4th arg--0 to poll, n.m to wait n.m
seconds, or omitted to wait till any socket is ready for processing.
"""

import sys, time
from select import select
from socket import socket, AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM
def now(): return time.ctime(time.time())

myHost = ''                             # server machine, '' means local host
myPort = 50007                          # listen on a non-reserved port number
if len(sys.argv) == 3:                  # allow host/port as cmdline args too
    myHost, myPort = sys.argv[1:]
numPortSocks = 2                        # number of ports for client connects

# make main sockets for accepting new client requests
mainsocks, readsocks, writesocks = [], [], []
for i in range(numPortSocks):
    portsock = socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM)   # make a TCP/IP socket object
    portsock.bind((myHost, myPort))           # bind it to server port number
    portsock.listen(5)                        # listen, allow 5 pending connects
    mainsocks.append(portsock)                # add to main list to identify
    readsocks.append(portsock)                # add to select inputs list
    myPort += 1                               # bind on consecutive ports

# event loop: listen and multiplex until server process killed
print('select-server loop starting')
while True:
    #print(readsocks)
    readables, writeables, exceptions = select(readsocks, writesocks, [])
    for sockobj in readables:
        if sockobj in mainsocks:                     # for ready input sockets
            # port socket: accept new client
            newsock, address = sockobj.accept()      # accept should not block
            print('Connect:', address, id(newsock))  # newsock is a new socket
            readsocks.append(newsock)                # add to select list, wait
        else:
            # client socket: read next line
            data = sockobj.recv(1024)                # recv should not block
            print('\tgot', data, 'on', id(sockobj))
            if not data:                             # if closed by the clients
                sockobj.close()                      # close here and remv from
                readsocks.remove(sockobj)            # del list else reselected
            else:
                # this may block: should really select for writes too
                reply = 'Echo=&gt;%s at %s' % (data, now())
                sockobj.send(reply.encode())</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>The bulk of this script is its <code class="epub__literal">while</code> event loop at the end that calls
            <code class="epub__literal">select</code> to find out which
            sockets are ready for processing; these include both main port
            sockets on which clients can connect and open client connections.
            It then loops over all such ready sockets, accepting connections
            on main port sockets and reading and echoing input on any client
            sockets ready for input. Both the <code class="epub__literal">accept</code> and <code class="epub__literal">recv</code> calls in this code are guaranteed
            to not block the server process after <code class="epub__literal">select</code> returns; as a result, this server
            can quickly get back to the top of the loop to process newly
            arrived client requests and already connected clients’ inputs. The
            net effect is that all new requests and clients are serviced in
            pseudoparallel fashion.</p>
<p>To make this process work, the server appends the connected
            socket for each client to the <code class="epub__literal">readables</code> list passed to <code class="epub__literal">select</code>, and simply waits for the socket
            to show up in the selected inputs list. For illustration purposes,
            this server also listens for new clients on more than one port—on
            ports 50007 and 50008, in our examples. Because these main port
            sockets are also interrogated with <code class="epub__literal">select</code>, connection requests on either
            port can be accepted without blocking either already connected
            clients or new connection requests appearing on the other port.
            The <code class="epub__literal">select</code> call returns
            whatever sockets in <code class="epub__literal">readables</code> are ready for
            processing—both main port sockets and sockets connected to clients
            currently being processed.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Running the select server"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="running_the_select_server"></a>Running the select server</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Let’s run this script locally to see how it does its stuff
            (the client and server can also be run on different machines, as
            in prior socket examples). First, we’ll assume we’ve already
            started this server script on the local machine in one window, and
            run a few clients to talk to it. The following listing gives the
            interaction in two such client console windows running on Windows.
            The first client simply runs the <code class="epub__literal">echo-client</code> script twice to contact the
            server, and the second also kicks off the <code class="epub__literal">testecho</code> script to spawn eight <code class="epub__literal">echo-client</code> programs running in
            parallel.</p>
<p>As before, the server simply echoes back whatever text that
            client sends, though without a sleep pause here (more on this in a
            moment). Notice how the second client window really runs a script
            called <code class="epub__literal">echo-client-50008</code> so as
            to connect to the second port socket in the server; it’s the same
            as <code class="epub__literal">echo-client</code>, with a
            different hardcoded port number; alas, the original script wasn’t
            designed to input a port number:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e50843"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">[client window 1]</span></em>
C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python echo-client.py</code></strong>
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'Hello network world' at Sun Apr 25 14:51:21 2010"

C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python echo-client.py</code></strong>
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'Hello network world' at Sun Apr 25 14:51:27 2010"

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">[client window 2]</span></em>
C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python echo-client-5008.py localhost Sir Galahad</code></strong>
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'Sir' at Sun Apr 25 14:51:22 2010"
Client received: b"Echo=&gt;b'Galahad' at Sun Apr 25 14:51:22 2010"

C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python testecho.py</code></strong></pre>
<p>The next listing is the sort of output that show up in the
            window where the server has been started. The first three
            connections come from <code class="epub__literal">echo-client</code> runs; the rest is the result
            of the eight programs spawned by <code class="epub__literal">testecho</code> in the second client window. We
            can run this server on Windows, too, because <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>select</code></strong> is available on this platform.
            Correlate this output with the server’s code to see how it
            runs.</p>
<p>Notice that for <code class="epub__literal">testecho</code>,
            new client connections and client inputs are multiplexed together.
            If you study the output closely, you’ll see that they overlap in
            time, because all activity is dispatched by the single event loop
            in the server. In fact, the trace output on the server will
            probably look a bit different nearly every time it runs. Clients
            and new connections are interleaved almost at random due to timing
            differences on the host machines. This happens in the earlier
            forking and treading servers, too, but the operating system
            automatically switches between the execution paths of the
            dispatcher loop and client transactions.</p>
<p>Also note that the server gets an empty string when the
            client has closed its socket. We take care to close and delete
            these sockets at the server right away, or else they would be
            needlessly reselected again and again, each time through the main
            loop:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e50879"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">[server window]</span></em>
C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python select-server.py</code></strong>
C:\Users\mark\Stuff\Books\4E\PP4E\dev\Examples\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt;python sele
ct-server.py
select-server loop starting
Connect: ('127.0.0.1', 59080) 21339352
        got b'Hello network world' on 21339352
        got b'' on 21339352
Connect: ('127.0.0.1', 59081) 21338128
        got b'Sir' on 21338128
        got b'Galahad' on 21338128
        got b'' on 21338128
Connect: ('127.0.0.1', 59082) 21339352
        got b'Hello network world' on 21339352
        got b'' on 21339352

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">[testecho results]</span></em>
Connect: ('127.0.0.1', 59083) 21338128
        got b'Hello network world' on 21338128
        got b'' on 21338128
Connect: ('127.0.0.1', 59084) 21339352
        got b'Hello network world' on 21339352
        got b'' on 21339352
Connect: ('127.0.0.1', 59085) 21338128
        got b'Hello network world' on 21338128
        got b'' on 21338128
Connect: ('127.0.0.1', 59086) 21339352
        got b'Hello network world' on 21339352
        got b'' on 21339352
Connect: ('127.0.0.1', 59087) 21338128
        got b'Hello network world' on 21338128
        got b'' on 21338128
Connect: ('127.0.0.1', 59088) 21339352
Connect: ('127.0.0.1', 59089) 21338128
        got b'Hello network world' on 21339352
        got b'Hello network world' on 21338128
Connect: ('127.0.0.1', 59090) 21338056
        got b'' on 21339352
        got b'' on 21338128
        got b'Hello network world' on 21338056
        got b'' on 21338056</pre>
<p>Besides this more verbose output, there’s another subtle but
            crucial difference to <span>notice—</span>a <code class="epub__literal">time.sleep</code> call to simulate a
            long-running task doesn’t make sense in the server here. Because
            all clients are handled by the same single loop, sleeping would
            pause <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>everything</em></span>, and defeat the whole point
            of a multiplexing server. Again, manual multiplexing servers like
            this one work well when transactions are short, but also generally
            require them to either be so, or be handled specially.</p>
<p>Before we move on, here are a few additional notes and
            options:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">select</code> <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>call
                details</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Formally, <code class="epub__literal">select</code> is
                  called with three lists of selectable objects (input
                  sources, output sources, and exceptional condition sources),
                  plus an optional timeout. The timeout argument may be a real
                  wait expiration value in seconds (use floating-point numbers
                  to express fractions of a second), a zero value to mean
                  simply poll and return immediately, or omitted to mean wait
                  until at least one object is ready (as done in our server
                  script). The call returns a triple of ready objects—subsets
                  of the first three arguments—any or all of which may be
                  empty if the timeout expired before sources became
                  ready.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">select</code>
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>portability</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Like threading, but unlike forking, this server works
                  in standard Windows Python, too. Technically, the <code class="epub__literal">select</code> call works only for sockets
                  on Windows, but also works for things like files and pipes
                  on Unix and Macintosh. For servers running over the
                  Internet, of course, the primary devices we are interested
                  in are sockets.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Nonblocking sockets</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p><code class="epub__literal">select</code> lets us be
                  sure that socket calls like <code class="epub__literal">accept</code> and <code class="epub__literal">recv</code> won’t block (pause) the
                  caller, but it’s also possible to make Python <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e50944"></a>sockets nonblocking in general. Call the
                  <code class="epub__literal">setblocking</code> method of
                  socket objects to set the socket to blocking or nonblocking
                  mode. For example, given a call like <code class="epub__literal">sock.setblocking(flag)</code>, the socket
                  <code class="epub__literal">sock</code> is set to
                  nonblocking mode if the flag is zero and to blocking mode
                  otherwise. All sockets start out in blocking mode initially,
                  so socket calls may always make the caller wait.</p>
<p>However, when in nonblocking mode, a <code class="epub__literal">socket.error</code> exception is raised
                  if a <code class="epub__literal">recv</code> socket call
                  doesn’t find any data, or if a <code class="epub__literal">send</code> call can’t immediately
                  transfer data. A script can catch this exception to
                  determine whether the socket is ready for processing. In
                  blocking mode, these calls always block until they can
                  proceed. Of course, there may be much more to processing
                  client requests than data transfers (requests may also
                  require long-running computations), so nonblocking sockets
                  don’t guarantee that servers won’t stall in general. They
                  are simply another way to code multiplexing servers. Like
                  <code class="epub__literal">select</code>, they are better
                  suited when client requests can be serviced quickly.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>The</em></span> <code class="epub__literal">asyncore</code> <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>module
                framework</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>If you’re interested in using <code class="epub__literal">select</code>, you will probably also be
                  interested in checking out the<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e50990"></a> <code class="epub__literal">asyncore.py</code> module in the standard
                  Python library. It implements a class-based callback model,
                  where input and output callbacks are dispatched to class
                  methods by a precoded <code class="epub__literal">select</code> event loop. As such, it
                  allows servers to be constructed without threads or forks,
                  and it is a <code class="epub__literal">select</code>-based
                  alternative to the <code class="epub__literal">socketserver</code> module’s threading
                  and forking module we met in the prior sections. As for this
                  type of server in general, <code class="epub__literal">asyncore</code> is best when transactions
                  are short—what it describes as “I/O bound” instead of “CPU
                  bound” programs, the latter of which still require threads
                  or forks. See the Python library manual for details and a
                  usage example.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Twisted</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>For other <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e51017"></a>server options, see also the open source
                  Twisted system (http://twistedmatrix.com). Twisted is an
                  asynchronous networking framework written in Python that
                  supports TCP, UDP, multicast, SSL/TLS, serial communication,
                  and more. It supports both clients and servers and includes
                  implementations of a number of commonly used network
                  services such as a web server, an IRC chat server, a mail
                  server, a relational database interface, and an object
                  broker.</p>
<p>Although Twisted supports processes and threads for
                  longer-running actions, it also uses an asynchronous,
                  event-driven model to handle clients, which is similar to
                  the event loop of GUI libraries like tkinter. It abstracts
                  an event loop, which multiplexes among open socket
                  connections, automates many of the details inherent in an
                  asynchronous server, and provides an event-driven framework
                  for scripts to use to accomplish application tasks.
                  Twisted’s internal event engine is similar in spirit to our
                  <code class="epub__literal">select</code>-based server and
                  the <code class="epub__literal">asyncore</code> module, but
                  it is regarded as much more advanced. Twisted is a
                  third-party system, not a standard library tool; see its
                  website and documentation for more details.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Summary: Choosing a Server Scheme"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="summary_colon_choosing_a_server_scheme"></a>Summary: Choosing a Server Scheme</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>So when should you use <code class="epub__literal">select</code> to build a server, instead of
          threads or forks? Needs vary per application, of course, but as
          mentioned, servers based on the <code class="epub__literal">select</code> call generally perform very well
          when client transactions are relatively short and are not CPU-bound.
          If they are not short, threads or forks may be a better way to split
          processing among multiple clients. Threads and forks are especially
          useful if clients require long-running processing above and beyond
          the socket calls used to pass data. However, combinations are
          possible too—nothing is stopping a select-based polling loop from
          using threads, too.</p>
<p>It’s important to remember that schemes based on <code class="epub__literal">select</code> (and nonblocking sockets) are not
          completely immune to blocking. In Example 12-9, for instance, the
          <code class="epub__literal">send</code> call that echoes text back
          to a client might block, too, and hence stall the entire server. We
          could work around that blocking potential by using <code class="epub__literal">select</code> to make sure that the output
          operation is ready before we attempt it (e.g., use the <code class="epub__literal">writesocks</code> list and add another loop to
          send replies to ready output sockets), albeit at a noticeable cost
          in program clarity.</p>
<p>In general, though, if we cannot split up the processing of a
          client’s request in such a way that it can be multiplexed with other
          requests and not block the server’s main loop, <code class="epub__literal">select</code> may not be the best way to
          construct a server by itself. While some network servers can satisfy
          this constraint, many cannot.</p>
<p>Moreover, <code class="epub__literal">select</code> also seems
          more complex than spawning either processes or threads, because we
          need to manually transfer control among all tasks (for instance,
          compare the threaded and <code class="epub__literal">select</code>
          versions of our echo server, even without write selects). As usual,
          though, the degree of that complexity varies per application. The
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>asyncore</em></span> standard library module mentioned
          earlier simplifies some of the tasks of implementing a <code class="epub__literal">select</code>-based event-loop socket server, and
          Twisted offers additional hybrid <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e51079"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e51081"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e51084"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e51086"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e51088"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e51090"></a><span>solutions</span>.</p>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[46] </sup>Confusingly, <code class="epub__literal">select</code>-based servers are often called
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>asynchronous</em></span>, to describe their
              multiplexing of short-lived transactions. Really, though, the
              classic forking and threading servers we met earlier are
              asynchronous, too, as they do not wait for completion of a given
              client’s request. There is a clearer distinction between serial
              and parallel servers—the former process one transaction at a
              time and the latter do not—and “synchronous” and “asynchronous”
              are essentially synonyms for “serial” and “parallel.” By this
              definition, forking, threading, and <code class="epub__literal">select</code> loops are three alternative
              ways to implement parallel, asynchronous servers.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
