<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Making Sockets Look Like Files and Streams</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Making Sockets Look Like Files and Streams"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="making_sockets_look_like_files_and_strea"></a>Making Sockets Look Like Files and Streams</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>So far in this chapter, <a id="in12.6"></a><a id="soc12.6"></a><a id="file12.6"></a><a id="input12.6"></a><a id="net12.6"></a>we’ve focused on the role of sockets in the classic
        client/server networking model. That’s one of their primary roles, but
        they have other common use cases as well.</p>
<p>In Chapter 5, for instance, we
        saw sockets as a basic IPC device between processes and threads on a
        single machine. And in Chapter 10’s
        exploration of linking non-GUI scripts to GUIs, we wrote a utility
        module (Example 10-23)
        which connected a caller’s standard output stream to a socket, on
        which a GUI could listen for output to be displayed. There, I promised
        that we’d flesh out that module with additional transfer modes once we
        had a chance to explore sockets in more depth. Now that we have, this
        section takes a brief detour from the world of remote network servers
        to tell the rest of this story.</p>
<p>Although some programs can be written or rewritten to converse
        over sockets explicitly, this isn’t always an option; it may be too
        expensive an effort for existing scripts, and might preclude desirable
        nonsocket usage modes for others. In some cases, it’s better to allow
        a script to use standard stream tools such as the <code class="epub__literal">print</code> and <code class="epub__literal">input</code> built-in functions and <code class="epub__literal">sys</code> module file calls (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout.write</code>), and connect them to
        sockets only when needed.</p>
<p>Because such stream tools are designed to operate on text-mode
        files, though, probably the biggest trick here is fooling them into
        operating on the inherently binary mode and very different method
        interface of sockets. Luckily, sockets come with a method that
        achieves all the forgery we need.</p>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e51152"></a>socket object <code class="epub__literal">makefile</code> method comes in handy anytime you
        wish to process a socket with normal file object methods or need to
        pass a socket to an existing interface or program that expects a file.
        The socket wrapper object returned allows your scripts to transfer
        data over the underlying socket with <code class="epub__literal">read</code> and <code class="epub__literal">write</code> calls, rather than <code class="epub__literal">recv</code> and <code class="epub__literal">send</code>. Since <code class="epub__literal">input</code> and <code class="epub__literal">print</code> built-in functions use the former
        methods set, they will happily interact with sockets wrapped by this
        call, too.</p>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">makefile</code> method also
        allows us to treat normally binary socket data as text instead of byte
        strings, and has additional arguments such as <code class="epub__literal">encoding</code> that let us specify nondefault
        Unicode encodings for the transferred text—much like the built-in
        <code class="epub__literal">open</code> and <code class="epub__literal">os.fdopen</code> calls we met in Chapter 4 do for file descriptors.
        Although text can always be encoded and decoded with manual calls
        after binary mode socket transfers, <code class="epub__literal">makefile</code> shifts the burden of text encodings
        from your code to the file wrapper object.</p>
<p>This equivalence to files comes in handy any time we want to use
        software that supports file interfaces. For example, the Python
        <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> module’s <code class="epub__literal">load</code> and <code class="epub__literal">dump</code> methods expect an object with a
        file-like interface (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">read</code> and
        <code class="epub__literal">write</code> methods), but they don’t
        require a physical file. Passing a TCP/IP socket wrapped with the
        <code class="epub__literal">makefile</code> call to the pickler allows
        us to ship serialized Python objects over the Internet, without having
        to pickle to byte strings ourselves and call raw socket methods
        manually. This is an alternative to using the <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> module’s string-based calls (<code class="epub__literal">dumps</code>, <code class="epub__literal">loads</code>) with socket <code class="epub__literal">send</code> and <code class="epub__literal">recv</code> calls, and might offer more flexibility
        for software that must support a variety of transport mechanisms. See
        Chapter 17 for more details on
        object serialization <span>interfaces</span>.</p>
<p>More generally, any component that expects a file-like method
        protocol will gladly accept a socket wrapped with a socket object
        <code class="epub__literal">makefile</code> call. Such interfaces will
        also accept strings wrapped with the built-in <code class="epub__literal">io.StringIO</code> class, and any other sort of
        object that supports the same kinds of method calls as built-in file
        objects. As always in Python, we code to protocols—object
        interfaces—not to specific datatypes.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="A Stream Redirection Utility"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="a_stream_redirection_utility"></a>A Stream Redirection Utility</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To illustrate the <code class="epub__literal">makefile</code>
          method’s <a id="in12.6.1"></a>operation, Example 12-10 implements a variety
          of redirection schemes, which redirect the caller’s streams to a
          socket that can be used by another process for communication. The
          first of its functions connects output, and is what we used in Chapter 10; the others connect input, and
          both input and output in three different modes.</p>
<p>Naturally, the wrapper object returned by <code class="epub__literal">socket.makefile</code> can also be used with
          direct file interface <code class="epub__literal">read</code> and
          <code class="epub__literal">write</code> method calls and
          independently of standard streams. This example uses those methods,
          too, albeit in most cases indirectly and implicitly through the
          <code class="epub__literal">print</code> and <code class="epub__literal">input</code> stream access built-ins, and
          reflects a common use case for the tool.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id9"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 12-10. PP4E\Internet\Sockets\socket_stream_redirect.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
###############################################################################
Tools for connecting standard streams of non-GUI programs to sockets that
a GUI (or other) program can use to interact with the non-GUI program.
###############################################################################
"""

import sys
from socket import *
port = 50008            # pass in different port if multiple dialogs on machine
host = 'localhost'      # pass in different host to connect to remote listeners

def initListenerSocket(port=port):
    """
    initialize connected socket for callers that listen in server mode
    """
    sock = socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM)
    sock.bind(('', port))                     # listen on this port number
    sock.listen(5)                            # set pending queue length
    conn, addr = sock.accept()                # wait for client to connect
    return conn                               # return connected socket

def redirectOut(port=port, host=host):
    """
    connect caller's standard output stream to a socket for GUI to listen
    start caller after listener started, else connect fails before accept
    """
    sock = socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM)
    sock.connect((host, port))                # caller operates in client mode
    file = sock.makefile('w')                 # file interface: text, buffered
    sys.stdout = file                         # make prints go to sock.send
    return sock                               # if caller needs to access it raw

def redirectIn(port=port, host=host):
    """
    connect caller's standard input stream to a socket for GUI to provide
    """
    sock = socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM)
    sock.connect((host, port))
    file = sock.makefile('r')                 # file interface wrapper
    sys.stdin = file                          # make input come from sock.recv
    return sock                               # return value can be ignored

def redirectBothAsClient(port=port, host=host):
    """
    connect caller's standard input and output stream to same socket
    in this mode, caller is client to a server: sends msg, receives reply
    """
    sock = socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM)
    sock.connect((host, port))                # or open in 'rw' mode
    ofile = sock.makefile('w')                # file interface: text, buffered
    ifile = sock.makefile('r')                # two file objects wrap same socket
    sys.stdout = ofile                        # make prints go to sock.send
    sys.stdin  = ifile                        # make input come from sock.recv
    return sock

def redirectBothAsServer(port=port, host=host):
    """
    connect caller's standard input and output stream to same socket
    in this mode, caller is server to a client: receives msg, send reply
    """
    sock = socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM)
    sock.bind((host, port))                   # caller is listener here
    sock.listen(5)
    conn, addr = sock.accept()
    ofile = conn.makefile('w')                # file interface wrapper
    ifile = conn.makefile('r')                # two file objects wrap same socket
    sys.stdout = ofile                        # make prints go to sock.send
    sys.stdin  = ifile                        # make input come from sock.recv
    return conn</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>To test, the script in Example 12-11 defines five sets of
          client/server functions. It runs the client’s code in process, but
          deploys the Python <code class="epub__literal">multiprocessing</code> module we met in Chapter 5 to portably spawn the server
          function’s side of the dialog in a separate process. In the end, the
          client and server test functions run in different processes, but
          converse over a socket that is connected to standard streams within
          the test script’s process.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id10"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 12-11. PP4E\Internet\Sockets\test-socket_stream_redirect.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
###############################################################################
test the socket_stream_redirection.py modes
###############################################################################
"""

import sys, os, multiprocessing
from socket_stream_redirect import *

###############################################################################
# redirected client output
###############################################################################

def server1():
    mypid = os.getpid()
    conn  = initListenerSocket()                     # block till client connect
    file  = conn.makefile('r')
    for i in range(3):                               # read/recv client's prints
        data = file.readline().rstrip()              # block till data ready
        print('server %s got [%s]' % (mypid, data))  # print normally to terminal

def client1():
    mypid = os.getpid()
    redirectOut()
    for i in range(3):
        print('client %s: %s' % (mypid, i))          # print to socket
        sys.stdout.flush()                           # else buffered till exits!

###############################################################################
# redirected client input
###############################################################################

def server2():
    mypid = os.getpid()                              # raw socket not buffered
    conn  = initListenerSocket()                     # send to client's input
    for i in range(3):
        conn.send(('server %s: %s\n' % (mypid, i)).encode())

def client2():
    mypid = os.getpid()
    redirectIn()
    for i in range(3):
        data = input()                               # input from socket
        print('client %s got [%s]' % (mypid, data))  # print normally to terminal

###############################################################################
# redirect client input + output, client is socket client
###############################################################################

def server3():
    mypid = os.getpid()
    conn  = initListenerSocket()                     # wait for client connect
    file  = conn.makefile('r')                       # recv print(), send input()
    for i in range(3):                               # readline blocks till data
        data = file.readline().rstrip()
        conn.send(('server %s got [%s]\n' % (mypid, data)).encode())

def client3():
    mypid = os.getpid()
    redirectBothAsClient()
    for i in range(3):
        print('client %s: %s' % (mypid, i))          # print to socket
        data = input()                               # input from socket: flushes!
        sys.stderr.write('client %s got [%s]\n' % (mypid, data))  # not redirected

###############################################################################
# redirect client input + output, client is socket server
###############################################################################

def server4():
    mypid = os.getpid()
    sock  = socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM)
    sock.connect((host, port))
    file  = sock.makefile('r')
    for i in range(3):
        sock.send(('server %s: %s\n' % (mypid, i)).encode())   # send to input()
        data = file.readline().rstrip()                        # recv from print()
        print('server %s got [%s]' % (mypid, data))            # result to terminal

def client4():
    mypid = os.getpid()
    redirectBothAsServer()         # I'm actually the socket server in this mode
    for i in range(3):
        data = input()                               # input from socket: flushes!
        print('client %s got [%s]' % (mypid, data))  # print to socket
        sys.stdout.flush()                           # else last buffered till exit!

###############################################################################
# redirect client input + output, client is socket client, server xfers first
###############################################################################

def server5():
    mypid = os.getpid()                              # test 4, but server accepts
    conn  = initListenerSocket()                     # wait for client connect
    file  = conn.makefile('r')                       # send input(), recv print()
    for i in range(3):
        conn.send(('server %s: %s\n' % (mypid, i)).encode())
        data = file.readline().rstrip()
        print('server %s got [%s]' % (mypid, data))

def client5():
    mypid = os.getpid()
    s = redirectBothAsClient()     # I'm the socket client in this mode
    for i in range(3):
        data = input()                               # input from socket: flushes!
        print('client %s got [%s]' % (mypid, data))  # print to socket
        sys.stdout.flush()                           # else last buffered till exit!

###############################################################################
# test by number on command-line
###############################################################################

if __name__ == '__main__':
    server = eval('server' + sys.argv[1])
    client = eval('client' + sys.argv[1])               # client in this process
    multiprocessing.Process(target=server).start()      # server in new process
    client()                                            # reset streams in client
    #import time; time.sleep(5)                         # test effect of exit flush</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Run the test script with a client and server number on the
          command line to test the module’s tools; messages display process ID
          numbers, and those within square brackets reflect a transfer across
          streams connected to sockets (twice, when nested):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e51306"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>test-socket_stream_redirect.py 1</code></strong>
server 3844 got [client 1112: 0]
server 3844 got [client 1112: 1]
server 3844 got [client 1112: 2]

C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>test-socket_stream_redirect.py 2</code></strong>
client 5188 got [server 2020: 0]
client 5188 got [server 2020: 1]
client 5188 got [server 2020: 2]

C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>test-socket_stream_redirect.py 3</code></strong>
client 7796 got [server 2780 got [client 7796: 0]]
client 7796 got [server 2780 got [client 7796: 1]]
client 7796 got [server 2780 got [client 7796: 2]]

C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>test-socket_stream_redirect.py 4</code></strong>
server 4288 got [client 3852 got [server 4288: 0]]
server 4288 got [client 3852 got [server 4288: 1]]
server 4288 got [client 3852 got [server 4288: 2]]

C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>test-socket_stream_redirect.py 5</code></strong>
server 6040 got [client 7728 got [server 6040: 0]]
server 6040 got [client 7728 got [server 6040: 1]]
server 6040 got [client 7728 got [server 6040: 2]]</pre>
<p>If you correlate this script’s output with its code to see how
          messages are passed between client and server, you’ll find that
          <code class="epub__literal">print</code> and <code class="epub__literal">input</code> calls in client functions are
          ultimately routed over sockets to another process. To the client
          functions, the socket linkage is largely invisible.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Text-mode files and buffered output streams"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="text_mode_files_and_buffered_output_stre"></a>Text-mode files and buffered output streams</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Before we <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e51336"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e51341"></a>move on, there are two remarkably subtle aspects of
            the example’s code worth highlighting:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Binary to text translations</span></dt><dd>
<p>Raw sockets transfer binary byte strings, but by
                  opening the wrapper files in text mode, their content is
                  automatically translated to text strings on input and
                  output. Text-mode file wrappers are required if accessed
                  through standard stream tools such as the <code class="epub__literal">print</code> built-in that writes text
                  strings (as we’ve learned, binary mode files require byte
                  strings instead). When dealing with the raw socket directly,
                  though, text must still be manually encoded to byte strings,
                  as shown in most of Example 12-11’s
                  tests.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Buffered streams, program output, and deadlock</span></dt><dd>
<p>As we learned in Chapters 5 and 10, standard streams are
                  normally buffered, and printed text may need to be flushed
                  so that it appears on a socket connected to a process’s
                  output stream. Indeed, some of this example’s tests require
                  explicit or implicit flush calls to work properly at all;
                  otherwise their output is either incomplete or absent
                  altogether until program exit. In pathological cases, this
                  can lead to deadlock, with a process waiting for output from
                  another that never appears. In other configurations, we may
                  also get socket errors in a reader if a writer exits too
                  soon, especially in two-way dialogs.</p>
<p>For example, if <code class="epub__literal">client1</code> and <code class="epub__literal">client4</code> did not flush periodically
                  as they do, the only reason that they would work is because
                  output streams are automatically flushed when their process
                  exits. Without manual flushes, <code class="epub__literal">client1</code> transfers no data until
                  process exit (at which point all its output is sent at once
                  in a single message), and <code class="epub__literal">client4</code>’s data is incomplete till
                  exit (its last printed message is delayed).</p>
<p>Even more subtly, both <code class="epub__literal">client3</code> and <code class="epub__literal">client4</code> rely on the fact that the
                  <code class="epub__literal">input</code> built-in first
                  automatically flushes <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code> internally for its
                  prompt option, thereby sending data from preceding <code class="epub__literal">print</code> calls. Without this implicit
                  flush (or the addition of manual flushes), <code class="epub__literal">client3</code> would experience
                  <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>deadlock</em></span> immediately, as would <code class="epub__literal">client4</code> if its manual flush call
                  was removed (even with <code class="epub__literal">input</code>’s flush, removing <code class="epub__literal">client4</code>’s manual flush causes its
                  final <code class="epub__literal">print</code> message to
                  not be transferred until process exit). <code class="epub__literal">client5</code> has this same behavior as
                  <code class="epub__literal">client4</code>, because it
                  simply swaps which process binds and accepts and which
                  connects.</p>
<p>In the general case, if we wish to read a program’s
                  output as it is produced, instead of all at once when it
                  exits or as its buffers fill, the program must either call
                  <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout.flush</code>
                  periodically, or be run with unbuffered streams by using
                  <span>Python’s</span> <code class="epub__literal">-u</code> command-line argument of Chapter 5 if applicable.</p>
<p>Although we can open socket wrapper files in
                  <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>unbuffered mode</em></span><a name="second"></a> with a second <code class="epub__literal">makefile</code> argument of zero (like
                  normal <code class="epub__literal">open</code>), this does
                  not allow the wrapper to run in the text mode required for
                  <code class="epub__literal">print</code> and desired for
                  <code class="epub__literal">input</code>. In fact,
                  attempting to make a socket wrapper file both text mode and
                  unbuffered this way fails with an exception, because Python
                  3.X no longer supports unbuffered mode for text files (it is
                  allowed for binary mode only today). In other words, because
                  <code class="epub__literal">print</code> requires text mode,
                  buffered mode is also implied for output stream files.
                  Moreover, attempting to open a socket file wrapper in
                  <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>line-buffered</em></span> mode appears to not be
                  supported in Python 3.X (more on this ahead).</p>
<p>While some buffering behavior may be library and
                  platform dependent, manual flush calls or direct socket
                  access might sometimes still be required. Note that sockets
                  can also be made nonblocking with the <code class="epub__literal">setblocking(0)</code> method, but this
                  only avoids wait states for transfer calls and does not
                  address the data producer’s failure to send buffered
                  output.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Stream requirements"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="stream_requirements"></a>Stream requirements</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To make some of this more concrete, Example 12-12 illustrates how
            some of these complexities apply to redirected standard streams,
            by attempting to connect them to both text and binary mode files
            produced by <code class="epub__literal">open</code> and accessing
            them with <code class="epub__literal">print</code> and <code class="epub__literal">input</code> built-ins much as redirected
            script might.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id11"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 12-12. PP4E\Internet\Sockets\test-stream-modes.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
test effect of connecting standard streams to text and binary mode files
same holds true for socket.makefile: print requires text mode, but text
mode precludes unbuffered mode -- use -u or sys.stdout.flush() calls
"""

import sys

def reader(F):
    tmp, sys.stdin = sys.stdin, F
    line = input()
    print(line)
    sys.stdin = tmp

reader( open('test-stream-modes.py') )         # works: input() returns text
reader( open('test-stream-modes.py', 'rb') )   # works: but input() returns bytes

def writer(F):
    tmp, sys.stdout = sys.stdout, F
    print(99, 'spam')
    sys.stdout = tmp

writer( open('temp', 'w') )             # works: print() passes text str to .write()
print(open('temp').read())

writer( open('temp', 'wb') )            # FAILS on print: binary mode requires bytes
writer( open('temp', 'w', 0) )          # FAILS on open: text must be unbuffered</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>When run, the last two lines in this script both fail—the
            second to last fails because <code class="epub__literal">print</code> passes text strings to a
            binary-mode file (never allowed for files in general), and the
            last fails because we cannot open text-mode files in unbuffered
            mode in Python 3.X (text mode implies Unicode encodings). Here are
            the errors we get when this script is run: the first run uses the
            script as shown, and the second shows what happens if the second
            to last line is commented out (I edited the exception text
            slightly for <span>presentation</span>):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e51497"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>test-stream-modes.py</code></strong>
"""
b'"""\r'
99 spam

Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets\test-stream-modes.py", line 26, in &lt;module&gt;
    writer( open('temp', 'wb') )            # FAILS on print: binary mode...
  File "C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets\test-stream-modes.py", line 20, in writer
    print(99, 'spam')
TypeError: must be bytes or buffer, not str

C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>test-streams-binary.py</code></strong>
"""
b'"""\r'
99 spam

Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets\test-stream-modes.py", line 27, in &lt;module&gt;
    writer( open('temp', 'w', 0) )          # FAILS on open: text must be...
ValueError: can't have unbuffered text I/O</pre>
<p>The same rules apply to socket wrapper file objects created
            with a socket’s <code class="epub__literal">makefile</code>
            method—they must be opened in text mode for <code class="epub__literal">print</code> and should be opened in text mode
            for <code class="epub__literal">input</code> if we wish to receive
            text strings, but text mode prevents us from using fully
            unbuffered file mode altogether:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e51516"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from socket import *</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>s = socket()</code></strong>                       # defaults to tcp/ip (AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>s.makefile('w', 0)</code></strong>                 # this used to work in Python 2.X
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "C:\Python31\lib\socket.py", line 151, in makefile
ValueError: unbuffered streams must be binary</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Line buffering"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="line_buffering"></a>Line buffering</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Text-mode socket wrappers <a id="line12.6.1.3"></a><a id="buff12.6.1.3"></a>also accept a buffering-mode argument of <code class="epub__literal">1</code> to specify
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>line-buffering</em></span> instead of the default full
            buffering:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e51548"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from socket import *</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>s = socket()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f = s.makefile('w', 1)</code></strong>    # same as buffering=1, but acts as fully buffered!</pre>
<p>This appears to be no different than full buffering, and
            still requires the resulting file to be flushed manually to
            transfer lines as they are produced. Consider the simple socket
            server and client scripts in Examples 12-13 and 12-14. The server simply reads three
            messages using the raw socket interface.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id12"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 12-13. PP4E\Internet\Sockets\socket-unbuff-server.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from socket import *           # read three messages over a raw socket
sock = socket()
sock.bind(('', 60000))
sock.listen(5)
print('accepting...')
conn, id = sock.accept()       # blocks till client connect

for i in range(3):
    print('receiving...')
    msg = conn.recv(1024)      # blocks till data received
    print(msg)                 # gets all print lines at once unless flushed</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>The client in Example 12-14 sends three
            messages; the first two over a socket wrapper file, and the last
            using the raw socket; the manual flush calls in this are commented
            out but retained so you can experiment with turning them on, and
            sleep calls make the server wait for data.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4_reverse_solidus_internet_reverse_sol"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 12-14. PP4\Internet\Sockets\socket-unbuff-client.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import time                            # send three msgs over wrapped and raw socket
from socket import *
sock = socket()                        # default=AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM (tcp/ip)
sock.connect(('localhost', 60000))
file = sock.makefile('w', buffering=1) # default=full buff, 0=error, 1 not linebuff!

print('sending data1')
file.write('spam\n')
time.sleep(5)               # must follow with flush() to truly send now
#file.flush()               # uncomment flush lines to see the difference

print('sending data2')
print('eggs', file=file)    # adding more file prints does not flush buffer either
time.sleep(5)
#file.flush()               # output appears at server recv only upon flush or exit

print('sending data3')
sock.send(b'ham\n')         # low-level byte string interface sends immediately
time.sleep(5)               # received first if don't flush other two!</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Run the server in one window first and the client in another
            (or run the server first in the background in Unix-like
            platforms). The output in the server window follows—the messages
            sent with the socket wrapper are deferred until program exit, but
            the raw socket call transfers data immediately:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e51581"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>socket-unbuff-server.py</code></strong>
accepting...
receiving...
b'ham\n'
receiving...
b'spam\r\neggs\r\n'
receiving...
b''</pre>
<p><a name="seconds
            apart"></a>The client window simply displays “sending” lines 5 seconds
            apart; its third message appears at the server in 10 seconds, but
            the first and second messages it sends using the wrapper file are
            deferred until exit (for 15 seconds) because the socket wrapper is
            still fully buffered. If the manual flush calls in the client are
            uncommented, each of the three sent messages is delivered in
            serial, 5 seconds apart (the third appears immediately after the
            second):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e51590"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>socket-unbuff-server.py</code></strong>
accepting...
receiving...
b'spam\r\n'
receiving...
b'eggs\r\n'
receiving...
b'ham\n'</pre>
<p>In other words, even when line buffering is requested,
            socket wrapper file writes (and by association, prints) are
            buffered until the program exits, manual flushes are requested, or
            the buffer becomes <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e51597"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e51599"></a>full.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Solutions"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="solutions"></a>Solutions</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The short story here is this: to avoid delayed outputs or
            deadlock, scripts that might send data to waiting programs by
            printing to wrapped sockets (or for that matter, by using <code class="epub__literal">print</code> or <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout.write</code> in general) should do
            one of the following:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Call <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout.flush</code>
                periodically to flush their printed output so it becomes
                available as produced, as shown in Example 12-11.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Be run with the <code class="epub__literal">-u</code>
                Python command-line flag, if possible, to force the output
                stream to be unbuffered. This works for unmodified programs
                spawned by pipe tools such as <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code>. It will
                <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>not</em></span> help with the use case here, though,
                because we manually reset the stream files to buffered text
                socket wrappers after a process starts. To prove this,
                uncomment Example 12-11’s manual flush
                calls and the sleep call at its end, and run with <code class="epub__literal">-u</code>: the first test’s output is still
                delayed for 5 seconds.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Use <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>threads</em></span> to read from sockets to
                avoid blocking, especially if the receiving program is a GUI
                and it cannot depend upon the client to flush. See Chapter 10 for pointers. This doesn’t
                really fix the problem—the spawned reader thread may be
                blocked or deadlocked, too—but at least the GUI remains active
                during waits.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Implement their own <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>custom</em></span> socket
                wrapper objects which intercept text <code class="epub__literal">write</code> calls, encode to binary, and
                route to a socket with <code class="epub__literal">send</code>
                calls; <code class="epub__literal">socket.makefile</code> is
                really just a convenience tool, and we can always code a
                wrapper of our own for more specific roles. For hints, see
                Chapter 10’s <code class="epub__literal">GuiOutput</code> class, the stream
                redirection class in Chapter 3, and the classes of the
                <code class="epub__literal">io</code> standard library module
                (upon which Python’s input/output tools are based, and which
                you can mix in custom ways).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Skip <code class="epub__literal">print</code> altogether
                and communicate directly with the native interfaces of IPC
                devices, such as socket objects’ raw <code class="epub__literal">send</code> and <code class="epub__literal">recv</code> methods—these transfer data
                immediately and do not buffer data as file methods can. We can
                either transfer simple byte strings this way or use the
                <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> module’s <code class="epub__literal">dumps</code> and <code class="epub__literal">loads</code> tools to convert Python
                objects to and from byte strings for such direct socket
                transfer (more on <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> in
                Chapter 17).</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>The latter option may be more direct (and the redirection
            utility module also returns the raw socket in support of such
            usage), but it isn’t viable in all scenarios, especially for
            existing or multimode scripts. In many cases, it may be most
            straightforward to use manual flush calls in shell-oriented
            programs whose streams might be linked to other programs through
            sockets.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Buffering in other contexts: Command pipes revisited"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="buffering_in_other_contexts_colon_comman"></a>Buffering in other contexts: Command pipes
            revisited</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Also keep in mind that <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e51707"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e51712"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e51717"></a>buffered streams and deadlock are general issues
            that go beyond socket wrapper files. We explored this topic in
            Chapter 5; as a quick review, the
            nonsocket Example 12-15
            does not fully buffer its output when it is connected to a
            terminal (output is only line buffered when run from a shell
            command prompt), but does if connected to something else
            (including a socket or pipe).</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id13"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 12-15. PP4E\Internet\Sockets\pipe-unbuff-writer.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting"># output line buffered (unbuffered) if stdout is a terminal, buffered by default for
# other devices: use -u or sys.stdout.flush() to avoid delayed output on pipe/socket

import time, sys
for i in range(5):
    print(time.asctime())                 # print transfers per stream buffering
    sys.stdout.write('spam\n')            # ditto for direct stream file access
    time.sleep(2)                         # unles sys.stdout reset to other file</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Although text-mode files are required for Python 3.X’s
            <code class="epub__literal">print</code> in general, the <code class="epub__literal">-u</code> flag still works in 3.X to suppress
            full output stream buffering. In Example 12-16, using this flag
            makes the spawned script’s printed output appear every 2 seconds,
            as it is produced. Not using this flag defers all output for 10
            seconds, until the spawned script exits, unless the spawned script
            calls <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code>.<code class="epub__literal">flush</code> on each iteration.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id14"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 12-16. PP4E\Internet\Sockets\pipe-unbuff-reader.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting"># no output for 10 seconds unless Python -u flag used or sys.stdout.flush()
# but writer's output appears here every 2 seconds when either option is used

import os
for line in os.popen('python -u pipe-unbuff-writer.py'):    # iterator reads lines
    print(line, end='')                                     # blocks without -u!</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Following is the reader script’s output; unlike the socket
            examples, it spawns the writer automatically, so we don’t need
            separate windows to test. Recall from Chapter 5 that <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code> also accepts a buffering
            argument much like <code class="epub__literal">socket.makefile</code>, but it does not apply
            to the spawned program’s stream, and so would not prevent output
            buffering in this case.</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e51763"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Sockets&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pipe-unbuff-reader.py</code></strong>
Wed Apr 07 09:32:28 2010
spam
Wed Apr 07 09:32:30 2010
spam
Wed Apr 07 09:32:32 2010
spam
Wed Apr 07 09:32:34 2010
spam
Wed Apr 07 09:32:36 2010
spam</pre>
<p>The net effect is that <code class="epub__literal">-u</code>
            still works around the steam buffering issue for connected
            programs in 3.X, as long as you don’t reset the streams to other
            objects in the spawned program as we did for socket redirection in
            Example 12-11. For socket
            redirections, manual flush calls or replacement socket wrappers
            may be required.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Sockets versus command pipes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="sockets_versus_command_pipes"></a>Sockets versus command pipes</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>So why use <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e51780"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e51785"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e51790"></a>sockets in this redirection role at all? In short,
            for server independence and networked use cases. Notice how for
            command pipes it’s not clear who should be called “server” and
            “client,” since neither script runs perpetually. In fact, this is
            one of the major downsides of using command pipes like this
            instead of sockets—because the programs require a direct
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>spawning relationship</em></span>, command pipes do not
            support longer-lived or remotely running servers the way that
            sockets do.</p>
<p>With sockets, we can start client and server independently,
            and the server may continue running perpetually to serve multiple
            clients (albeit with some changes to our utility module’s listener
            initialization code). Moreover, passing in remote machine names to
            our socket redirection tools would allow a client to connect to a
            server running on a completely different machine. As we learned in
            Chapter 5, named pipes (fifos)
            accessed with the <code class="epub__literal">open</code> call
            support stronger independence of client and server, too, but
            unlike sockets, they are usually limited to the local machine, and
            are not supported on all platforms.</p>
<p>Experiment with this code on your own for more insight. Also
            try changing Example 12-11
            to run the client function in a spawned process instead of or in
            addition to the server, with and without flush calls and <code class="epub__literal">time.sleep</code> calls to defer exits; the
            spawning structure might have some impact on the soundness of a
            given socket dialog structure as well, which we’ll finesse here in
            the interest of space.</p>
<p>Despite the care that must be taken with text encodings and
            stream buffering, the utility provided by Example 12-10 is still arguably
            impressive—prints and input calls are routed over network or
            local-machine socket connections in a largely automatic fashion,
            and with minimal changes to the nonsocket code that uses the
            module. In many cases, the technique can extend a script’s
            applicability.</p>
<p>In the next section, we’ll use the <code class="epub__literal">makefile</code> method again to wrap the socket
            in a file-like object, so that it can be read by lines using
            normal text-file method calls and techniques. This isn’t strictly
            required in the example—we could read lines as byte strings with
            the socket <code class="epub__literal">recv</code> call, too. In
            general, though, the <code class="epub__literal">makefile</code>
            method comes in handy any time you wish to treat sockets as though
            they were simple files. To see this at work, let’s <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e51828"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e51830"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e51832"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e51834"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e51837"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e51839"></a>move on.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
