<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 13. Client-Side Scripting</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 13. Client-Side Scripting"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="client-side_scripting"></a>Chapter 13. Client-Side Scripting</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="“Socket to Me!”"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="quotation_mark_socket_to_me_exclamation"></a>“Socket to Me!”</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The preceding chapter introduced Internet fundamentals and
        explored sockets—the underlying communications mechanism over which
        bytes flow on the Net. In this chapter, we climb the encapsulation
        hierarchy one level and shift our focus to Python tools that support
        the client-side interfaces of common Internet protocols.</p>
<p>We talked about the Internet’s higher-level protocols in the
        abstract at the start of the preceding chapter, and you should
        probably review that material if you skipped over it the first time
        around. In short, protocols define the structure of the conversations
        that take place to accomplish most of the Internet tasks we’re all
        familiar with—reading email, transferring files by FTP, fetching web
        pages, and so on.</p>
<p>At the most basic level, all of these protocol dialogs happen
        over sockets using fixed and standard message structures and ports, so
        in some sense this chapter builds upon the last. But as we’ll see,
        Python’s protocol modules hide most of the underlying <span>details—</span>scripts generally need to deal
        only with simple objects and methods, and Python automates the socket
        and messaging logic required by the protocol.</p>
<p>In this chapter, we’ll concentrate on the FTP and email protocol
        modules in Python, and we’ll peek at a few others along the way (NNTP
        news, HTTP web pages, and so on). Because it is so prevalent, we will
        especially focus on email in much of this chapter, as well as in the
        two to follow—we’ll use tools and techniques introduced here in the
        larger PyMailGUI and PyMailCGI client and server-side programs of
        <span>Chapters <span>14 and
        16.</span></span></p>
<p>All of the tools employed in examples here are in the standard
        Python library and come with the Python system. All of the examples
        here are also designed to run on the client side of a network
        connection—these scripts connect to an already running server to
        request interaction and can be run from a basic PC or other client
        device (they require only a server to converse with). And as usual,
        all the code here is also designed to teach us something about Python
        programming in general—we’ll refactor FTP examples and package email
        code to show object-oriented programming (OOP) in action.</p>
<p>In the next chapter, we’ll look at a complete client-side
        program example before moving on to explore scripts designed to be run
        on the server side instead. Python programs can also produce pages on
        a web server, and there is support in the Python world for
        implementing the <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e52364"></a>server side of things like HTTP, email, and FTP. For
        now, let’s focus on the client.<sup>[48]</sup></p>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[48] </sup>There is also support in the Python world for other
            technologies that some might classify as “client-side scripting,”
            too, such as Jython/Java applets; XML-RPC and SOAP web services;
            and Rich Internet Application tools like Flex, Silverlight,
            pyjamas, and AJAX. These were all introduced early in Chapter 12. Such tools are generally bound up
            with the notion of web-based interactions—they either extend the
            functionality of a web browser running on a client machine, or
            simplify web server access in clients. We’ll study browser-based
            techniques in Chapters 15 and 16;
            here, client-side scripting means the client side of common
            Internet protocols such as FTP and email, independent of the Web
            or web browsers. At the bottom, web browsers are really just
            desktop GUI applications that make use of client-side protocols,
            including those we’ll study here, such as HTTP and FTP. See Chapter 12 as well as the end of this chapter
            for more on other client-side techniques.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
