<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>FTP: Transferring Files over the Net</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="FTP: Transferring Files over the Net"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="ftp_colon_transferring_files_over_the_ne"></a>FTP: Transferring Files over the Net</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As we saw in the <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e52386"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e52391"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e52396"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e52401"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e52406"></a>preceding chapter, sockets see plenty of action on the
        Net. For instance, the last chapter’s <code class="epub__literal">getfile</code> example allowed us to transfer
        entire files between machines. In practice, though, higher-level
        protocols are behind much of what happens on the Net. Protocols run on
        top of sockets, but they hide much of the complexity of the network
        scripting examples of the prior chapter.</p>
<p>FTP—the File Transfer Protocol—is one of the more commonly used
        Internet protocols. It defines a higher-level conversation model that
        is based on exchanging command strings and file contents over sockets.
        By using FTP, we can accomplish the same task as the prior chapter’s
        <code class="epub__literal">getfile</code> script, but the interface
        is simpler, standard and more general—FTP lets us ask for files from
        any server machine that supports FTP, without requiring that it run
        our custom <code class="epub__literal">getfile</code> script<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e52423"></a>. FTP also supports more advanced operations such as
        uploading files to the server, getting remote directory listings, and
        more.</p>
<p>Really, FTP runs on top of two sockets: one for passing control
        commands between client and server (port 21), and another for
        transferring bytes. By using a two-socket model, FTP avoids the
        possibility of deadlocks (i.e., transfers on the data socket do not
        block dialogs on the control socket). Ultimately, though, Python’s
        <code class="epub__literal">ftplib</code> support module allows us to
        upload and download files at a remote server machine by FTP, without
        dealing in raw socket calls or FTP protocol details.</p>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
