<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Transferring Directories with ftplib</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Transferring Directories with ftplib"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="transferring_directories_with_ftplib"></a>Transferring Directories with ftplib</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Once upon a time, <a id="client13.4"></a><a id="ftp13.4"></a><a id="dir13.4"></a><a id="tran13.4"></a>I used Telnet to manage my website at my <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e53523"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e53526"></a>Internet Service Provider (ISP). I logged in to the web
        server in a shell window, and performed all my edits directly on the
        remote machine. There was only one copy of a site’s files—on the
        machine that hosted it. Moreover, content updates could be performed
        from any machine that ran a <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e53530"></a>Telnet client—ideal for people with travel-based
        careers.<sup>[49]</sup></p>
<p>Of course, times have changed. Like most personal websites,
        today mine are maintained on my laptop and I transfer their files to
        and from my ISP as needed. Often, this is a simple matter of one or
        two files, and it can be accomplished with a command-line FTP client.
        Sometimes, though, I need an easy way to transfer the entire site.
        Maybe I need to download to detect files that have become out of sync.
        Occasionally, the changes are so involved that it’s easier to upload
        the entire site in a single step.</p>
<p>Although there are a variety of ways to approach this task
        (including options in site-builder tools), Python can help here, too:
        writing Python scripts to automate the upload and download tasks
        associated with maintaining my website on my laptop provides a
        portable and mobile solution. Because Python FTP scripts will work on
        any machine with sockets, they can be run on my laptop and on nearly
        any other computer where Python is installed. Furthermore, the same
        scripts used to transfer page files to and from my PC can be used to
        copy my site to another web server as a backup copy, should my ISP
        experience an outage. The effect is sometimes called a
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>mirror</em></span>—a copy of a remote site.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Downloading Site Directories"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="downloading_site_directories"></a>Downloading Site Directories</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The following two scripts <a id="remote13.4.1"></a>address these needs. The first,
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>downloadflat.py</em></span>, automatically downloads (i.e.,
          copies) by FTP all the files in a directory at a remote site to a
          directory on the local machine. I keep the main copy of my website
          files on my PC these days, but I use this script in two ways:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>To download my website to client machines where I want to
              make edits, I fetch the contents of my web directory of my
              account on my ISP’s machine.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>To mirror my site to my account on another server, I run
              this script periodically on the target machine if it supports
              Telnet or SSH secure shell; if it does not, I simply download to
              one machine and upload from there to the target server.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>More generally, this script (shown in Example 13-10) will download a
          directory full of files to any machine with Python and sockets, from
          any machine running an FTP server.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id29"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 13-10. PP4E\Internet\Ftp\Mirror\downloadflat.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">#!/bin/env python
"""
###############################################################################
use FTP to copy (download) all files from a single directory at a remote
site to a directory on the local machine; run me periodically to mirror
a flat FTP site directory to your ISP account;  set user to 'anonymous'
to do anonymous FTP;  we could use try to skip file failures, but the FTP
connection is likely closed if any files fail;  we could also try to
reconnect with a new FTP instance before each transfer: connects once now;
if failures, try setting nonpassive for active FTP, or disable firewalls;
this also depends on a working FTP server, and possibly its load policies.
###############################################################################
"""

import os, sys, ftplib
from getpass   import getpass
from mimetypes import guess_type

nonpassive = False                        # passive FTP on by default in 2.1+
remotesite = 'home.rmi.net'               # download from this site
remotedir  = '.'                          # and this dir (e.g., public_html)
remoteuser = 'lutz'
remotepass = getpass('Password for %s on %s: ' % (remoteuser, remotesite))
localdir   = (len(sys.argv) &gt; 1 and sys.argv[1]) or '.'
cleanall   = input('Clean local directory first? ')[:1] in ['y', 'Y']

print('connecting...')
connection = ftplib.FTP(remotesite)                 # connect to FTP site
connection.login(remoteuser, remotepass)            # login as user/password
connection.cwd(remotedir)                           # cd to directory to copy
if nonpassive:                                      # force active mode FTP
    connection.set_pasv(False)                      # most servers do passive

if cleanall:
    for localname in os.listdir(localdir):          # try to delete all locals
        try:                                        # first, to remove old files
            print('deleting local', localname)      # os.listdir omits . and ..
            os.remove(os.path.join(localdir, localname))
        except:
            print('cannot delete local', localname)

count = 0                                           # download all remote files
remotefiles = connection.nlst()                     # nlst() gives files list
                                                    # dir()  gives full details
for remotename in remotefiles:
    if remotename in ('.', '..'): continue          # some servers include . and ..
    mimetype, encoding = guess_type(remotename)     # e.g., ('text/plain', 'gzip')
    mimetype  = mimetype or '?/?'                   # may be (None, None)
    maintype  = mimetype.split('/')[0]              # .jpg ('image/jpeg', None')

    localpath = os.path.join(localdir, remotename)
    print('downloading', remotename, 'to', localpath, end=' ')
    print('as', maintype, encoding or '')

    if maintype == 'text' and encoding == None:
        # use ascii mode xfer and text file
        # use encoding compatible wth ftplib's
        localfile = open(localpath, 'w', encoding=connection.encoding)
        callback  = lambda line: localfile.write(line + '\n')
        connection.retrlines('RETR ' + remotename, callback)

    else:
        # use binary mode xfer and bytes file
        localfile = open(localpath, 'wb')
        connection.retrbinary('RETR ' + remotename, localfile.write)

    localfile.close()
    count += 1

connection.quit()
print('Done:', count, 'files downloaded.')</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>There’s not much that is new to speak of in this script,
          compared to other FTP examples we’ve seen thus far. We open a
          connection with the remote FTP server, log in with a username and
          password for the desired account (this script never uses anonymous
          FTP), and go to the desired remote directory. New here, though, are
          loops to iterate over all the files in local and remote directories,
          text-based retrievals, and file deletions:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Deleting all local files</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>This script has a <code class="epub__literal">cleanall</code> option, enabled by an
                interactive prompt. If selected, the script first deletes all
                the files in the local directory before downloading, to make
                sure there are no extra files that aren’t also on the server
                (there may be junk here from a prior download). To delete
                local files, the script calls <code class="epub__literal">os.listdir</code> to get a list of
                filenames in the directory, and <code class="epub__literal">os.remove</code> to delete each; see Chapter 4 (or the Python library
                manual) for more details if you’ve forgotten what these calls
                do.</p>
<p>Notice the use of <code class="epub__literal">os.path.join</code> to concatenate a
                directory path and filename according to the host platform’s
                conventions; <code class="epub__literal">os.listdir</code>
                returns filenames without their directory paths, and this
                script is not necessarily run in the local directory where
                downloads will be placed. The local directory defaults to the
                current directory (“.”), but can be set differently with a
                command-line argument to the script.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Fetching all remote files</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>To grab all the files in a <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e53611"></a>remote directory, we first need a list of their
                names. The FTP object’s <code class="epub__literal">nlst</code> method <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e53622"></a>is the remote equivalent of <code class="epub__literal">os.listdir</code>: <code class="epub__literal">nlst</code> returns a list of the string
                names of all files in the current remote directory. Once we
                have this list, we simply step through it in a loop, running
                FTP retrieval commands for each filename in turn (more on this
                in a minute).</p>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">nlst</code> method is,
                more or less, like requesting a directory listing with an
                <code class="epub__literal">ls</code> command in typical
                interactive FTP programs, but Python automatically splits up
                the listing’s text into a list of filenames. We can pass it a
                remote directory to be listed; by default it lists the current
                server directory. A related FTP method, <code class="epub__literal">dir</code>, returns the list of line
                strings produced by an FTP <code class="epub__literal">LIST</code> command<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e53648"></a>; its result is like typing a <code class="epub__literal">dir</code> command in an FTP session, and
                its lines contain complete file information, unlike <code class="epub__literal">nlst</code>. If you need to know more about
                all the remote files, parse the result of a <code class="epub__literal">dir</code> method call (we’ll see how in a
                later example).</p>
<p>Notice how we skip “.” and “..” current and parent
                directory indicators if present in remote directory listings;
                unlike <code class="epub__literal">os.listdir</code>, some
                (but not all) servers include these, so we need to either skip
                these or catch the exceptions they may trigger (more on this
                later when we start using <code class="epub__literal">dir</code>, too).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Selecting transfer modes with
              mimetypes</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>We discussed output file modes for FTP earlier, but
                <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e53677"></a>now that we’ve started transferring text, too, I
                can fill in the rest of this story. To handle Unicode
                encodings and to keep line-ends in sync with the machines that
                my web files live on, this script distinguishes between binary
                and text file transfers. It uses the Python <code class="epub__literal">mimetypes</code> module to choose between
                text and binary transfer modes for each file.</p>
<p>We met <code class="epub__literal">mimetypes</code> in
                Chapter 6 near Example 6-23, where we used
                it to play media files (see the examples and description there
                for an introduction). Here, <code class="epub__literal">mimetypes</code> is used to decide whether
                a file is text or binary by guessing from its filename
                extension. For instance, HTML web pages and simple text files
                are transferred as text with automatic line-end mappings, and
                images and <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>tar</em></span> archives are transferred
                in raw binary mode.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Downloading: text versus
              binary</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>For <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>binary files</em></span> data is pulled
                <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e53711"></a>down with the <code class="epub__literal">retrbinary</code> method we met earlier,
                and stored in a local file with binary open mode of <code class="epub__literal">wb</code>. This file open mode is required
                to allow for the <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>
                strings passed to the <code class="epub__literal">write</code>
                method by <code class="epub__literal">retrbinary</code>, but
                it also suppresses line-end byte mapping and Unicode encodings
                in the process. Again, text mode requires encodable text in
                Python 3.X, and this fails for binary data like images. This
                script may also be run on Windows or Unix-like platforms, and
                we don’t want a <code class="epub__literal">\n</code> byte
                embedded in an image to get expanded to <code class="epub__literal">\r\n</code> on Windows. We don’t use a
                chunk-size third argument for binary transfers here, though—it
                defaults to a reasonable size if omitted.</p>
<p>For <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>text files</em></span>, the script instead
                uses the <code class="epub__literal">retrlines</code> method,
                passing in a function to be called for each line in the text
                file downloaded. The text line handler function receives lines
                in <code class="epub__literal">str</code> string form, and
                mostly just writes the line to a local text file. But notice
                that the handler function created by the <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code> here also adds a <code class="epub__literal">\n</code> line-end character to the end of
                the line it is passed. Python’s <code class="epub__literal">retrlines</code> <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e53760"></a>method strips all line-feed characters from
                lines to sidestep platform differences. By adding a <code class="epub__literal">\n</code>, the script ensures the proper
                line-end marker character sequence for the local platform on
                which this script runs when written to the file (<code class="epub__literal">\n</code> or <code class="epub__literal">\r\n</code>).</p>
<p>For this auto-mapping of the <code class="epub__literal">\n</code> in the script to work, of course,
                we must also open text output files in <code class="epub__literal">w</code> text mode, not in <code class="epub__literal">wb</code>—the mapping from <code class="epub__literal">\n</code> to <code class="epub__literal">\r\n</code> on <span>Windows</span> happens when data is
                written to the file. As discussed earlier, text mode also
                means that the file’s <code class="epub__literal">write</code>
                method will allow for the <code class="epub__literal">str</code> string passed in by <code class="epub__literal">retrlines</code>, and that text will be
                encoded per Unicode when written.</p>
<p>Subtly, though, we also explicitly use the FTP <code class="epub__literal">connection</code> object’s Unicode
                <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>encoding scheme</em></span> for our text output file
                in <code class="epub__literal">open</code>, instead of the
                default. Without this encoding option, the script aborted with
                a <code class="epub__literal">UnicodeEncodeError</code>
                exception for some files in my site. In <code class="epub__literal">retrlines</code>, the FTP object itself
                reads the remote file data over a socket with a text-mode file
                wrapper and an explicit encoding scheme for decoding; since
                the FTP object can do no better than this encoding anyhow, we
                use its encoding for our output file as well.</p>
<p>By default, FTP objects use the <code class="epub__literal">latin1</code> scheme for decoding text
                fetched (as well as for encoding text sent), but this can be
                specialized by assigning to their <code class="epub__literal">encoding</code> attribute. Our
                script’s local text output file will inherit whatever encoding
                <code class="epub__literal">ftplib</code> uses and so be
                compatible with the encoded text data that it produces and
                passes.</p>
<p>We could try to also catch Unicode exceptions for files
                outside the Unicode encoding used by the FTP object, but
                exceptions leave the FTP object in an unrecoverable state in
                tests I’ve run in Python 3.1. Alternatively, we could use
                <code class="epub__literal">wb</code> binary mode for the
                local text output file and manually encode line strings with
                <code class="epub__literal">line.encode</code>, or simply use
                <code class="epub__literal">retrbinary</code> and binary mode
                files in all cases, but both of these would fail to map
                end-lines portably—the whole point of making text distinct in
                this context.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>All of this is simpler in action than in words. Here is the
          command I use to download my entire book support website from my ISP
          server account to my Windows laptop PC, in a single step:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e53846"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Ftp\Mirror&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>downloadflat.py test</code></strong>
Password for lutz on home.rmi.net:
Clean local directory first? <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y</code></strong>
connecting...
deleting local 2004-longmont-classes.html
deleting local 2005-longmont-classes.html
deleting local 2006-longmont-classes.html
deleting local about-hopl.html
deleting local about-lp.html
deleting local about-lp2e.html
deleting local about-pp-japan.html

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...lines omitted...</span></em>

downloading 2004-longmont-classes.html to test\2004-longmont-classes.html as text
downloading 2005-longmont-classes.html to test\2005-longmont-classes.html as text
downloading 2006-longmont-classes.html to test\2006-longmont-classes.html as text
downloading about-hopl.html to test\about-hopl.html as text
downloading about-lp.html to test\about-lp.html as text
downloading about-lp2e.html to test\about-lp2e.html as text
downloading about-pp-japan.html to test\about-pp-japan.html as text

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...lines omitted...</span></em>

downloading ora-pyref4e.gif to test\ora-pyref4e.gif as image
downloading ora-lp4e-big.jpg to test\ora-lp4e-big.jpg as image
downloading ora-lp4e.gif to test\ora-lp4e.gif as image
downloading pyref4e-updates.html to test\pyref4e-updates.html as text
downloading lp4e-updates.html to test\lp4e-updates.html as text
downloading lp4e-examples.html to test\lp4e-examples.html as text
downloading LP4E-examples.zip to test\LP4E-examples.zip as application
Done: 297 files downloaded.</pre>
<p>This may take a few moments to complete, depending on your
          site’s size and your connection speed (it’s bound by network speed
          constraints, and it usually takes roughly two to three minutes for
          my site on my current laptop and wireless broadband connection). It
          is much more accurate and easier than downloading files by hand,
          though. The script simply iterates over all the remote files
          returned by the <code class="epub__literal">nlst</code> method, and
          downloads each with the FTP protocol (i.e., over sockets) in turn.
          It uses text transfer mode for names that imply text data, and
          binary mode for others.</p>
<p>With the script running this way, I make sure the initial
          assignments in it reflect the machines involved, and then run the
          script from the local directory where I want <span>the site copy</span> to be stored. Because
          the target download directory is often not where the script lives, I
          may need to give Python the full path to the script file. When run
          on a server in a Telnet or SSH session window, for instance, the
          execution and script directory paths are different, but the script
          works the same way.</p>
<p>If you elect to delete local files in the download directory,
          you may also see a batch of “deleting local…” messages scroll by on
          the screen before any “downloading…” lines appear: this
          automatically cleans out any garbage lingering from a prior
          download. And if you botch the input of the remote site password, a
          Python exception is raised; I sometimes need to run it again (and
          type more slowly):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e53873"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Ftp\Mirror&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>downloadflat.py test</code></strong>
Password for lutz on home.rmi.net:
Clean local directory first?
connecting...
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Ftp\Mirror\downloadflat.py", line 29, in &lt;module&gt;
    connection.login(remoteuser, remotepass)            # login as user/password
  File "C:\Python31\lib\ftplib.py", line 375, in login
    if resp[0] == '3': resp = self.sendcmd('PASS ' + passwd)
  File "C:\Python31\lib\ftplib.py", line 245, in sendcmd
    return self.getresp()
  File "C:\Python31\lib\ftplib.py", line 220, in getresp
    raise error_perm(resp)
ftplib.error_perm: 530 Login incorrect.</pre>
<p>It’s worth noting that this script is at least partially
          configured by assignments near the top of the file. In addition, the
          password and deletion options are given by interactive inputs, and
          one command-line argument is allowed—the local directory name to
          store the downloaded files (it defaults to “.”, the directory where
          the script is run). <span>Command</span>-line arguments could be
          employed to universally configure all the other download parameters
          and options, too, but because of Python’s simplicity and lack of
          compile/link steps, changing settings in the text of Python scripts
          is usually just as easy as typing words on a command <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e53883"></a>line.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note"><h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p>To check for version skew after a batch of downloads and
            uploads, you can run the <code class="epub__literal">diffall</code> script we wrote in Chapter 6, Example 6-12. For instance, I
            find files that have diverged over time due to updates on multiple
            platforms by comparing the download to a local copy of my website
            using a shell command line such as <code class="epub__literal">C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Ftp&gt;
            ..\..\System\Filetools\diffall.py Mirror\test
            C:\...\Websites\public_html</code>. See Chapter 6 for more details on this
            tool, and file <em class="epub__filename">diffall.out.txt</em> in the <em class="epub__filename">diffs</em> subdirectory of the examples
            distribution for a sample run; its text file differences stem from
            either final line newline characters or newline differences
            reflecting binary transfers that Windows <code class="epub__literal">fc</code> commands and FTP servers do not
            notice.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Uploading Site Directories"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="uploading_site_directories"></a>Uploading Site Directories</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Uploading a full directory is <a id="remote13.4.2"></a>symmetric to downloading: it’s mostly a matter of
          swapping the local and remote machines and operations in the program
          we just met. The script in Example 13-11 uses FTP to copy all
          files in a directory on the local machine on which it runs up to a
          directory on a remote machine.</p>
<p>I really use this script, too, most often to upload all of the
          files maintained on my laptop PC to my ISP account in one fell
          swoop. I also sometimes use it to copy my site from my PC to a
          mirror machine or from the mirror machine back to my ISP. Because
          this script runs on any computer with Python and sockets, it happily
          transfers a directory from any machine on the Net to any machine
          running an FTP server. Simply change the initial setting in this
          module as appropriate for the transfer you have in mind.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id30"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 13-11. PP4E\Internet\Ftp\Mirror\uploadflat.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">#!/bin/env python
"""
##############################################################################
use FTP to upload all files from one local dir to a remote site/directory;
e.g., run me to copy a web/FTP site's files from your PC to your ISP;
assumes a flat directory upload: uploadall.py does nested directories.
see downloadflat.py comments for more notes: this script is symmetric.
##############################################################################
"""

import os, sys, ftplib
from getpass import getpass
from mimetypes import guess_type

nonpassive = False                                  # passive FTP by default
remotesite = 'learning-python.com'                  # upload to this site
remotedir  = 'books'                                # from machine running on
remoteuser = 'lutz'
remotepass = getpass('Password for %s on %s: ' % (remoteuser, remotesite))
localdir   = (len(sys.argv) &gt; 1 and sys.argv[1]) or '.'
cleanall   = input('Clean remote directory first? ')[:1] in ['y', 'Y']

print('connecting...')
connection = ftplib.FTP(remotesite)                 # connect to FTP site
connection.login(remoteuser, remotepass)            # log in as user/password
connection.cwd(remotedir)                           # cd to directory to copy
if nonpassive:                                      # force active mode FTP
    connection.set_pasv(False)                      # most servers do passive

if cleanall:
    for remotename in connection.nlst():            # try to delete all remotes
        try:                                        # first, to remove old files
            print('deleting remote', remotename)
            connection.delete(remotename)           # skips . and .. if attempted
        except:
            print('cannot delete remote', remotename)

count = 0                                           # upload all local files
localfiles = os.listdir(localdir)                   # listdir() strips dir path
                                                    # any failure ends script
for localname in localfiles:
    mimetype, encoding = guess_type(localname)      # e.g., ('text/plain', 'gzip')
    mimetype  = mimetype or '?/?'                   # may be (None, None)
    maintype  = mimetype.split('/')[0]              # .jpg ('image/jpeg', None')

    localpath = os.path.join(localdir, localname)
    print('uploading', localpath, 'to', localname, end=' ')
    print('as', maintype, encoding or '')

    if maintype == 'text' and encoding == None:
        # use ascii mode xfer and bytes file
        # need rb mode for ftplib's crlf logic
        localfile = open(localpath, 'rb')
        connection.storlines('STOR ' + localname, localfile)

    else:
        # use binary mode xfer and bytes file
        localfile = open(localpath, 'rb')
        connection.storbinary('STOR ' + localname, localfile)

    localfile.close()
    count += 1

connection.quit()
print('Done:', count, 'files uploaded.')</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Similar to the mirror download script, this program
          illustrates a handful of new FTP interfaces and a set of FTP
          scripting techniques:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Deleting all remote files</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Just like the mirror script, the upload begins by asking
                whether we want to delete all the files in the remote target
                directory before copying any files there. This <code class="epub__literal">cleanall</code> option is useful if we’ve
                deleted files in the local copy of the directory in the
                client—the deleted files would remain on the server-side copy
                unless we delete all files there first.</p>
<p>To implement the remote cleanup, this script simply gets
                a listing of all the files in the remote directory with the
                FTP <code class="epub__literal">nlst</code> method, and
                deletes each in turn with the<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e53952"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e53957"></a> FTP <code class="epub__literal">delete</code>
                method. Assuming we have delete permission, the directory will
                be emptied (file permissions depend on the account we logged
                into when connecting to the server). We’ve already moved to
                the target remote directory when deletions occur, so no
                directory paths need to be prepended to filenames here. Note
                that <code class="epub__literal">nlst</code> may raise an
                exception for some servers if the remote directory is empty;
                we don’t catch the exception here, but you can simply not
                select a cleaning if one fails for you. We do catch deletion
                exceptions, because directory names like “.” and “..” may be
                returned in the listing by some servers.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Storing all local files</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>To apply the upload operation to each file in the local
                directory, we get a list of local filenames with the standard
                <code class="epub__literal">os.listdir</code> call, and
                <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e53979"></a>take care to prepend the local source directory
                path to each filename with the <code class="epub__literal">os.path.join</code> call. Recall that
                <code class="epub__literal">os.listdir</code> returns
                filenames without directory paths, and the source directory
                may not be the same as the script’s execution directory if
                passed on the command line.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Uploading: Text versus binary</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>This script may also be run on both Windows and
                Unix-like clients, so we need to handle text files specially.
                Like the mirror download, this script picks text or binary
                transfer modes by using Python’s<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54000"></a> <code class="epub__literal">mimetypes</code>
                module to guess a file’s type from its filename extension;
                HTML and text files are moved in FTP text mode, for instance.
                We already met the <code class="epub__literal">storbinary</code> FTP object method used to
                upload files in binary mode—an exact, byte-for-byte copy
                appears at the remote site.</p>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Text-mode transfers</em></span> work <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54016"></a>almost identically: the <code class="epub__literal">storlines</code> method accepts an FTP
                command string and a local file (or file-like) object, and
                simply copies each line read from the local file to a
                same-named file on the remote machine.</p>
<p>Notice, though, that the local text input file must be
                opened in <code class="epub__literal">rb</code>
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>binary mode</em></span> in Python3.X. Text input
                files are normally opened in <code class="epub__literal">r</code> text mode to perform Unicode
                decoding and to convert any <code class="epub__literal">\r\n</code> end-of-line sequences on
                Windows to the <code class="epub__literal">\n</code>
                platform-neutral character as lines are read. However,
                <code class="epub__literal">ftplib</code> in Python 3.1
                requires that the text file be opened in <code class="epub__literal">rb</code> binary mode, because it converts
                all end-lines to the <code class="epub__literal">\r\n</code>
                sequence for transmission; to do so, it must read lines as raw
                bytes with <code class="epub__literal">readlines</code> and
                perform <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> string
                processing, which implies binary mode files.</p>
<p>This <code class="epub__literal">ftplib</code> string
                processing worked with text-mode files in Python 2.X, but only
                because there was no separate <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> type; <code class="epub__literal">\n</code> was expanded to <code class="epub__literal">\r\n</code>. Opening the local file in
                binary mode for <code class="epub__literal">ftplib</code> to
                read also means no Unicode decoding will occur: the text is
                sent over sockets as a byte string in already encoded form.
                All of which is, of course, a prime lesson on the impacts of
                Unicode encodings; consult the module <em class="epub__filename">ftplib.py</em> in the Python source
                library directory for more details.</p>
<p>For <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>binary mode transfers</em></span>, things
                <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54082"></a>are simpler—we open the local file in <code class="epub__literal">rb</code> binary mode to suppress Unicode
                decoding and automatic mapping everywhere, and return the
                <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> strings expected by
                <code class="epub__literal">ftplib</code> on read. Binary data
                is not Unicode text, and we don’t want bytes in an audio file
                that happen to have the same value as <code class="epub__literal">\r</code> to magically disappear when read
                on Windows.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>As for the mirror download script, this program simply
          iterates over all files to be transferred (files in the local
          directory listing this time), and transfers each in turn—in either
          text or binary mode, depending on the files’ names. Here is the
          command I use to upload my entire website from my laptop Windows PC
          to a remote Linux server at my ISP, in a single step:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e54101"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Ftp\Mirror&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>uploadflat.py test</code></strong>
Password for lutz on learning-python.com:
Clean remote directory first? y
connecting...
deleting remote .
cannot delete remote .
deleting remote ..
cannot delete remote ..
deleting remote 2004-longmont-classes.html
deleting remote 2005-longmont-classes.html
deleting remote 2006-longmont-classes.html
deleting remote about-lp1e.html
deleting remote about-lp2e.html
deleting remote about-lp3e.html
deleting remote about-lp4e.html

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...lines omitted...</span></em>

uploading test\2004-longmont-classes.html to 2004-longmont-classes.html as text
uploading test\2005-longmont-classes.html to 2005-longmont-classes.html as text
uploading test\2006-longmont-classes.html to 2006-longmont-classes.html as text
uploading test\about-lp1e.html to about-lp1e.html as text
uploading test\about-lp2e.html to about-lp2e.html as text
uploading test\about-lp3e.html to about-lp3e.html as text
uploading test\about-lp4e.html to about-lp4e.html as text
uploading test\about-pp-japan.html to about-pp-japan.html as text

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...lines omitted...</span></em>

uploading test\whatsnew.html to whatsnew.html as text
uploading test\whatsold.html to whatsold.html as text
uploading test\wxPython.doc.tgz to wxPython.doc.tgz as application gzip
uploading test\xlate-lp.html to xlate-lp.html as text
uploading test\zaurus0.jpg to zaurus0.jpg as image
uploading test\zaurus1.jpg to zaurus1.jpg as image
uploading test\zaurus2.jpg to zaurus2.jpg as image
uploading test\zoo-jan-03.jpg to zoo-jan-03.jpg as image
uploading test\zopeoutline.htm to zopeoutline.htm as text
Done: 297 files uploaded.</pre>
<p>For my site and on my current laptop and wireless broadband
          connection, this process typically takes six minutes, depending on
          server load. As with the download script, I often run this command
          from the local directory where my web files are kept, and I pass
          Python the full path to the script. When I run this on a Linux
          server, it works in the same way, but the paths to the script and my
          web files directory <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54114"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54116"></a>differ.<sup>[50]</sup></p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Refactoring Uploads and Downloads for Reuse"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="refactoring_uploads_and_downloads_for_re"></a>Refactoring Uploads and Downloads for Reuse</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The directory upload and download scripts of the prior two
          sections work as advertised and, apart from the <code class="epub__literal">mimetypes</code> logic, were the only FTP
          examples that were included in the second edition of this book. If
          you look at these two scripts long enough, though, their
          similarities will pop out at you eventually. In fact, they are
          largely the same—they use identical code to configure transfer
          parameters, connect to the FTP server, and determine file type. The
          exact details have been lost to time, but some of this code was
          certainly copied from one file to the other.</p>
<p>Although such redundancy isn’t a cause for alarm if we never
          plan on changing these scripts, it can be a killer in software
          projects in general. When you have two copies of identical bits of
          code, not only is there a danger of them becoming out of sync over
          time (you’ll lose uniformity in user interface and behavior), but
          you also effectively double your effort when it comes time to change
          code that appears in both places. Unless you’re a big fan of extra
          work, it pays to avoid redundancy wherever possible.</p>
<p>This redundancy is especially glaring when we look at the
          complex code that uses <code class="epub__literal">mimetypes</code>
          to determine file types. Repeating magic like this in more than one
          place is almost always a bad idea—not only do we have to remember
          how it works every time we need the same utility, but it is a recipe
          for errors.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Refactoring with functions"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="refactoring_with_functions"></a>Refactoring with functions</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As originally coded, <a id="fun13.4.3.1"></a><a id="sc13.4.3.1"></a><a id="re13.4.3.1"></a>our download and upload scripts comprise top-level
            script code that relies on global variables. Such a structure is
            difficult to reuse—code runs immediately on imports, and it’s
            difficult to generalize for varying contexts. Worse, it’s
            difficult to maintain—when you program by cut-and-paste of
            existing code, you increase the cost of future changes every time
            you click the Paste button.</p>
<p>To demonstrate how we might do better, Example 13-12 shows one way to
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>refactor</em></span> (reorganize) the download script. By
            wrapping its parts in functions, they become reusable in other
            modules, including our upload program.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id31"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 13-12. PP4E\Internet\Ftp\Mirror\downloadflat_modular.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">#!/bin/env python
"""
##############################################################################
use FTP to copy (download) all files from a remote site and directory
to a directory on the local machine; this version works the same, but has
been refactored to wrap up its code in functions that can be reused by the
uploader, and possibly other programs in the future - else code redundancy,
which may make the two diverge over time, and can double maintenance costs.
##############################################################################
"""

import os, sys, ftplib
from getpass   import getpass
from mimetypes import guess_type, add_type

defaultSite = 'home.rmi.net'
defaultRdir = '.'
defaultUser = 'lutz'

def configTransfer(site=defaultSite, rdir=defaultRdir, user=defaultUser):
    """
    get upload or download parameters
    uses a class due to the large number
    """
    class cf: pass
    cf.nonpassive = False                 # passive FTP on by default in 2.1+
    cf.remotesite = site                  # transfer to/from this site
    cf.remotedir  = rdir                  # and this dir ('.' means acct root)
    cf.remoteuser = user
    cf.localdir   = (len(sys.argv) &gt; 1 and sys.argv[1]) or '.'
    cf.cleanall   = input('Clean target directory first? ')[:1] in ['y','Y']
    cf.remotepass = getpass(
                    'Password for %s on %s:' % (cf.remoteuser, cf.remotesite))
    return cf

def isTextKind(remotename, trace=True):
    """
    use mimetype to guess if filename means text or binary
    for 'f.html,   guess is ('text/html', None): text
    for 'f.jpeg'   guess is ('image/jpeg', None): binary
    for 'f.txt.gz' guess is ('text/plain', 'gzip'): binary
    for unknowns,  guess may be (None, None): binary
    mimetype can also guess name from type: see PyMailGUI
    """
    add_type('text/x-python-win', '.pyw')                       # not in tables
    mimetype, encoding = guess_type(remotename, strict=False)   # allow extras
    mimetype  = mimetype or '?/?'                               # type unknown?
    maintype  = mimetype.split('/')[0]                          # get first part
    if trace: print(maintype, encoding or '')
    return maintype == 'text' and encoding == None              # not compressed

def connectFtp(cf):
    print('connecting...')
    connection = ftplib.FTP(cf.remotesite)           # connect to FTP site
    connection.login(cf.remoteuser, cf.remotepass)   # log in as user/password
    connection.cwd(cf.remotedir)                     # cd to directory to xfer
    if cf.nonpassive:                                # force active mode FTP
        connection.set_pasv(False)                   # most servers do passive
    return connection

def cleanLocals(cf):
    """
    try to delete all locals files first to remove garbage
    """
    if cf.cleanall:
        for localname in os.listdir(cf.localdir):    # local dirlisting
            try:                                     # local file delete
                print('deleting local', localname)
                os.remove(os.path.join(cf.localdir, localname))
            except:
                print('cannot delete local', localname)

def downloadAll(cf, connection):
    """
    download all files from remote site/dir per cf config
    ftp nlst() gives files list, dir() gives full details
    """
    remotefiles = connection.nlst()                  # nlst is remote listing
    for remotename in remotefiles:
        if remotename in ('.', '..'): continue
        localpath = os.path.join(cf.localdir, remotename)
        print('downloading', remotename, 'to', localpath, 'as', end=' ')
        if isTextKind(remotename):
            # use text mode xfer
            localfile = open(localpath, 'w', encoding=connection.encoding)
            def callback(line): localfile.write(line + '\n')
            connection.retrlines('RETR ' + remotename, callback)
        else:
            # use binary mode xfer
            localfile = open(localpath, 'wb')
            connection.retrbinary('RETR ' + remotename, localfile.write)
        localfile.close()
    connection.quit()
    print('Done:', len(remotefiles), 'files downloaded.')

if __name__ == '__main__':
    cf = configTransfer()
    conn = connectFtp(cf)
    cleanLocals(cf)          # don't delete if can't connect
    downloadAll(cf, conn)</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Compare this version with the original. This script, and
            every other in this section, runs the same as the original flat
            download and upload programs. Although we haven’t changed its
            behavior, though, we’ve modified the script’s software structure
            <span>radically—</span>its code is now a
            set of <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>tools</em></span> that can be imported and reused
            in other programs.</p>
<p>The refactored upload program in Example 13-13, for instance, is
            now noticeably simpler, and the code it shares with the download
            script only needs to be changed in one place if it ever requires
            improvement.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id32"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 13-13. PP4E\Internet\Ftp\Mirror\uploadflat_modular.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">#!/bin/env python
"""
##############################################################################
use FTP to upload all files from a local dir to a remote site/directory;
this version reuses downloader's functions, to avoid code redundancy;
##############################################################################
"""

import os
from downloadflat_modular import configTransfer, connectFtp, isTextKind

def cleanRemotes(cf, connection):
    """
    try to delete all remote files first to remove garbage
    """
    if cf.cleanall:
        for remotename in connection.nlst():            # remote dir listing
            try:                                        # remote file delete
                print('deleting remote', remotename)    # skips . and .. exc
                connection.delete(remotename)
            except:
                print('cannot delete remote', remotename)

def uploadAll(cf, connection):
    """
    upload all files to remote site/dir per cf config
    listdir() strips dir path, any failure ends script
    """
    localfiles = os.listdir(cf.localdir)            # listdir is local listing
    for localname in localfiles:
        localpath = os.path.join(cf.localdir, localname)
        print('uploading', localpath, 'to', localname, 'as', end=' ')
        if isTextKind(localname):
            # use text mode xfer
            localfile = open(localpath, 'rb')
            connection.storlines('STOR ' + localname, localfile)
        else:
            # use binary mode xfer
            localfile = open(localpath, 'rb')
            connection.storbinary('STOR ' + localname, localfile)
        localfile.close()
    connection.quit()
    print('Done:', len(localfiles), 'files uploaded.')

if __name__ == '__main__':
    cf = configTransfer(site='learning-python.com', rdir='books', user='lutz')
    conn = connectFtp(cf)
    cleanRemotes(cf, conn)
    uploadAll(cf, conn)</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Not only is the upload script simpler now because it reuses
            common code, but it will also inherit any changes made in the
            download module. For instance, the <code class="epub__literal">isTextKind</code> function was later augmented
            with code that adds the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>.pyw</em></span> extension to
            <code class="epub__literal">mimetypes</code> tables (this file
            type is not recognized by default); because it is a shared
            function, the change is automatically picked up in the upload
            program, too.</p>
<p>This script and the one it imports achieve the same goals as
            the originals, but changing them for easier code maintenance is a
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>big deal</em></span> in the real world of software
            development. The following, for example, downloads the site from
            one server and uploads to <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54206"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54208"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54210"></a>another:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e54213"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Ftp\Mirror&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python downloadflat_modular.py test</code></strong>
Clean target directory first?
Password for lutz on home.rmi.net:
connecting...
downloading 2004-longmont-classes.html to test\2004-longmont-classes.html as text
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...lines omitted...</span></em>
downloading relo-feb010-index.html to test\relo-feb010-index.html as text
Done: 297 files downloaded.

C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Ftp\Mirror&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python uploadflat_modular.py test</code></strong>
Clean target directory first?
Password for lutz on learning-python.com:
connecting...
uploading test\2004-longmont-classes.html to 2004-longmont-classes.html as text
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...lines omitted...</span></em>
uploading test\zopeoutline.htm to zopeoutline.htm as text
Done: 297 files uploaded.</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Refactoring with classes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="refactoring_with_classes"></a>Refactoring with classes</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The function-based <a id="sc13.4.3.2"></a><a id="cl13.4.3.2"></a><a id="re13.4.3.2"></a>approach of the last two examples addresses the
            redundancy issue, but they are perhaps clumsier than they need to
            be. For instance, their <code class="epub__literal">cf</code>
            configuration options object provides a namespace that replaces
            global variables and breaks cross-file dependencies. Once we start
            making objects to model namespaces, though, Python’s OOP support
            tends to be a more natural structure for our code. As one last
            twist, Example 13-14
            refactors the FTP code one more time in order to leverage Python’s
            class feature.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id33"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 13-14. PP4E\Internet\Ftp\Mirror\ftptools.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">#!/bin/env python
"""
##############################################################################
use FTP to download or upload all files in a single directory from/to a
remote site and directory;  this version has been refactored to use classes
and OOP for namespace and a natural structure;  we could also structure this
as a download superclass, and an upload subclass which redefines the clean
and transfer methods, but then there is no easy way for another client to
invoke both an upload and download;  for the uploadall variant and possibly
others, also make single file upload/download code in orig loops methods;
##############################################################################
"""

import os, sys, ftplib
from getpass   import getpass
from mimetypes import guess_type, add_type

# defaults for all clients
dfltSite = 'home.rmi.net'
dfltRdir = '.'
dfltUser = 'lutz'

class FtpTools:

    # allow these 3 to be redefined
    def getlocaldir(self):
        return (len(sys.argv) &gt; 1 and sys.argv[1]) or '.'

    def getcleanall(self):
        return input('Clean target dir first?')[:1] in ['y','Y']

    def getpassword(self):
        return getpass(
               'Password for %s on %s:' % (self.remoteuser, self.remotesite))

    def configTransfer(self, site=dfltSite, rdir=dfltRdir, user=dfltUser):
        """
        get upload or download parameters
        from module defaults, args, inputs, cmdline
        anonymous ftp: user='anonymous' pass=emailaddr
        """
        self.nonpassive = False             # passive FTP on by default in 2.1+
        self.remotesite = site              # transfer to/from this site
        self.remotedir  = rdir              # and this dir ('.' means acct root)
        self.remoteuser = user
        self.localdir   = self.getlocaldir()
        self.cleanall   = self.getcleanall()
        self.remotepass = self.getpassword()

    def isTextKind(self, remotename, trace=True):
        """
        use mimetypes to guess if filename means text or binary
        for 'f.html,   guess is ('text/html', None): text
        for 'f.jpeg'   guess is ('image/jpeg', None): binary
        for 'f.txt.gz' guess is ('text/plain', 'gzip'): binary
        for unknowns,  guess may be (None, None): binary
        mimetypes can also guess name from type: see PyMailGUI
        """
        add_type('text/x-python-win', '.pyw')                    # not in tables
        mimetype, encoding = guess_type(remotename, strict=False)# allow extras
        mimetype  = mimetype or '?/?'                            # type unknown?
        maintype  = mimetype.split('/')[0]                       # get 1st part
        if trace: print(maintype, encoding or '')
        return maintype == 'text' and encoding == None           # not compressed

    def connectFtp(self):
        print('connecting...')
        connection = ftplib.FTP(self.remotesite)           # connect to FTP site
        connection.login(self.remoteuser, self.remotepass) # log in as user/pswd
        connection.cwd(self.remotedir)                     # cd to dir to xfer
        if self.nonpassive:                                # force active mode
            connection.set_pasv(False)                     # most do passive
        self.connection = connection

    def cleanLocals(self):
        """
        try to delete all local files first to remove garbage
        """
        if self.cleanall:
            for localname in os.listdir(self.localdir):    # local dirlisting
                try:                                       # local file delete
                    print('deleting local', localname)
                    os.remove(os.path.join(self.localdir, localname))
                except:
                    print('cannot delete local', localname)

    def cleanRemotes(self):
        """
        try to delete all remote files first to remove garbage
        """
        if self.cleanall:
            for remotename in self.connection.nlst():       # remote dir listing
                try:                                        # remote file delete
                    print('deleting remote', remotename)
                    self.connection.delete(remotename)
                except:
                    print('cannot delete remote', remotename)

    def downloadOne(self, remotename, localpath):
        """
        download one file by FTP in text or binary mode
        local name need not be same as remote name
        """
        if self.isTextKind(remotename):
            localfile = open(localpath, 'w', encoding=self.connection.encoding)
            def callback(line): localfile.write(line + '\n')
            self.connection.retrlines('RETR ' + remotename, callback)
        else:
            localfile = open(localpath, 'wb')
            self.connection.retrbinary('RETR ' + remotename, localfile.write)
        localfile.close()

    def uploadOne(self, localname, localpath, remotename):
        """
        upload one file by FTP in text or binary mode
        remote name need not be same as local name
        """
        if self.isTextKind(localname):
            localfile = open(localpath, 'rb')
            self.connection.storlines('STOR ' + remotename, localfile)
        else:
            localfile = open(localpath, 'rb')
            self.connection.storbinary('STOR ' + remotename, localfile)
        localfile.close()

    def downloadDir(self):
        """
        download all files from remote site/dir per config
        ftp nlst() gives files list, dir() gives full details
        """
        remotefiles = self.connection.nlst()         # nlst is remote listing
        for remotename in remotefiles:
            if remotename in ('.', '..'): continue
            localpath = os.path.join(self.localdir, remotename)
            print('downloading', remotename, 'to', localpath, 'as', end=' ')
            self.downloadOne(remotename, localpath)
        print('Done:', len(remotefiles), 'files downloaded.')

    def uploadDir(self):
        """
        upload all files to remote site/dir per config
        listdir() strips dir path, any failure ends script
        """
        localfiles = os.listdir(self.localdir)       # listdir is local listing
        for localname in localfiles:
            localpath = os.path.join(self.localdir, localname)
            print('uploading', localpath, 'to', localname, 'as', end=' ')
            self.uploadOne(localname, localpath, localname)
        print('Done:', len(localfiles), 'files uploaded.')

    def run(self, cleanTarget=lambda:None, transferAct=lambda:None):
        """
        run a complete FTP session
        default clean and transfer are no-ops
        don't delete if can't connect to server
        """
        self.connectFtp()
        cleanTarget()
        transferAct()
        self.connection.quit()

if __name__ == '__main__':
    ftp = FtpTools()
    xfermode = 'download'
    if len(sys.argv) &gt; 1:
        xfermode = sys.argv.pop(1)   # get+del 2nd arg
    if xfermode == 'download':
        ftp.configTransfer()
        ftp.run(cleanTarget=ftp.cleanLocals,  transferAct=ftp.downloadDir)
    elif xfermode == 'upload':
        ftp.configTransfer(site='learning-python.com', rdir='books', user='lutz')
        ftp.run(cleanTarget=ftp.cleanRemotes, transferAct=ftp.uploadDir)
    else:
        print('Usage: ftptools.py ["download" | "upload"] [localdir]')</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>In fact, this last mutation combines uploads and downloads
            into a single file, because they are so closely related. As
            before, common code is factored into methods to avoid redundancy.
            New here, the instance object itself becomes a natural namespace
            for storing configuration options (they become <code class="epub__literal">self</code> attributes). Study this example’s
            code for more details of the restructuring applied.</p>
<p>Again, this revision runs the same as our original site
            download and upload scripts; see its self-test code at the end for
            usage details, and pass in a command-line argument to specify
            “download” or “upload.” We haven’t changed what it does, we’ve
            refactored it for maintainability and reuse:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e54265"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Ftp\Mirror&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>ftptools.py download test</code></strong>
Clean target dir first?
Password for lutz on home.rmi.net:
connecting...
downloading 2004-longmont-classes.html to test\2004-longmont-classes.html as text
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...lines omitted...</span></em>
downloading relo-feb010-index.html to test\relo-feb010-index.html as text
Done: 297 files downloaded.


C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Ftp\Mirror&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>ftptools.py upload test</code></strong>
Clean target dir first?
Password for lutz on learning-python.com:
connecting...
uploading test\2004-longmont-classes.html to 2004-longmont-classes.html as text
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...lines omitted...</span></em>
uploading test\zopeoutline.htm to zopeoutline.htm as text
Done: 297 files uploaded.</pre>
<p>Although this file can still be run as a command-line script
            like this, its class is really now a package of FTP tools that can
            be mixed into other programs and reused. By wrapping its code in a
            class, it can be easily customized by redefining its methods—its
            configuration calls, such as <code class="epub__literal">getlocaldir</code>, for example, may be
            redefined in subclasses for custom scenarios.</p>
<p>Perhaps most importantly, using classes optimizes code
            reusability. Clients of this file can both upload and download
            directories by simply subclassing or embedding an instance of this
            class and calling its methods. To see one example of how, let’s
            move on to the next <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54286"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54288"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54290"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54292"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54294"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54296"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54298"></a>section.</p>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[49] </sup>No, really. The second edition of this book included a tale
            of woe here about how my ISP forced its users to wean themselves
            off Telnet access. This seems like a small issue today. Common
            practice on the Internet has come far in a short time. One of my
            sites has even grown too complex for manual edits (except, of
            course, to work around bugs in the site-builder tool). Come to
            think of it, so has Python’s presence on the Web. When I first
            found Python in 1992, it was a set of encoded email messages,
            which users decoded and concatenated and hoped the result worked.
            Yes, yes, I know—gee, Grandpa, tell us more…</p>
</div><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[50] </sup>Usage note: These scripts are highly dependent on the FTP
              server functioning properly. For a while, the upload script
              occasionally had timeout errors when running over my current
              broadband connection. These errors went away later, when my ISP
              fixed or reconfigured their server. If you have failures, try
              running against a different server; connecting and disconnecting
              around each transfer may or may not help (some servers limit
              their number of connections).</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
