<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Processing Internet Email</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Processing Internet Email"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="processing_internet_email"></a>Processing Internet Email</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Some of the other most <a id="email13.6"></a><a id="client13.6"></a>common, higher-level Internet protocols have to do with
        reading and sending email messages: POP and IMAP for fetching email
        from servers, SMTP for sending new messages, and other formalisms such
        as RFC822<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54600"></a> for specifying email message content and format. You
        don’t normally need to know about such acronyms when using common
        email tools, but internally, programs like Microsoft Outlook and
        webmail systems generally talk to POP and SMTP servers to do your
        bidding.</p>
<p>Like FTP, email ultimately consists of formatted commands and
        byte streams shipped over sockets and ports (port 110 for POP; 25 for
        SMTP). Regardless of the nature of its content and attachments, an
        email message is little more than a string of bytes sent and received
        through sockets. But also like FTP, Python has standard library
        modules to simplify all aspects of email processing:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">poplib</code> and <code class="epub__literal">imaplib</code> for <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54616"></a>fetching email</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">smtplib</code> for sending
            email</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">email</code> module package
            for parsing email and constructing email</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>These modules are related: for nontrivial messages, we typically
        use <code class="epub__literal">email</code> to parse mail text which
        has been fetched with <code class="epub__literal">poplib</code> and
        use <code class="epub__literal">email</code> to compose mail text to
        be sent with <code class="epub__literal">smtplib</code>. The <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package also handles tasks such as
        address parsing, date and time formatting, attachment formatting and
        extraction, and encoding and decoding of email content (e,g, uuencode,
        Base64). Additional modules handle more specific tasks (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">mimetypes</code> to map filenames to and from
        content types).</p>
<p>In the next few sections, we explore the POP and SMTP interfaces
        for fetching and sending email from and to servers, and the <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package interfaces for parsing and
        composing email message text. Other email interfaces in Python are
        analogous and are documented in the Python library reference
        manual.<sup>[51]</sup></p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Unicode in Python 3.X and Email Tools"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="unicode_in_python_3.x_and_email_tools"></a>Unicode in Python 3.X and Email Tools</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In the prior sections of this <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54668"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54673"></a>chapter, we studied how Unicode encodings can impact
          scripts using Python’s <code class="epub__literal">ftplib</code> FTP
          tools in some depth, because it illustrates the implications of
          Python 3.X’s Unicode string model for real-world programming. In
          short:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>All binary mode transfers should open local output and
              input files in binary mode (modes <code class="epub__literal">wb</code> and <code class="epub__literal">rb</code>).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Text-mode downloads should open local output files in text
              mode with explicit encoding names (mode <code class="epub__literal">w</code>, with an <code class="epub__literal">encoding</code> argument that defaults to
              <code class="epub__literal">latin1</code> within <code class="epub__literal">ftplib</code> itself).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Text-mode uploads should open local input files in binary
              mode (mode <code class="epub__literal">rb</code>).</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>The prior sections describe why these rules are in force. The
          last two points here differ for scripts written originally for
          Python 2.X. As you might expect, given that the underlying sockets
          transfer byte strings today, the email story is somewhat convoluted
          for Unicode in Python 3.X as well. As a brief preview:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Fetching</span></dt><dd>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">poplib</code> module
                <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54725"></a>returns fetched email text in <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> string form. Command text sent
                to the server is encoded per <code class="epub__literal">UTF8</code> internally, but replies are
                returned as raw binary <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> and not decoded into <code class="epub__literal">str</code> text.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Sending</span></dt><dd>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">smtplib</code> module
                <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54753"></a>accepts email content to send as <code class="epub__literal">str</code> strings. Internally, message
                text passed in <code class="epub__literal">str</code> form is
                encoded to binary <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> for
                transmission using the <code class="epub__literal">ascii</code> encoding scheme. Passing an
                already encoded <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>
                string to the send call may allow more explicit
                control.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Composing</span></dt><dd>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package
                <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54784"></a>produces Unicode <code class="epub__literal">str</code> strings containing plain text
                when generating full email text for sending with <code class="epub__literal">smtplib</code> and accepts optional
                encoding specifications for messages and their parts, which it
                applies according to email standard rules. Message headers may
                also be encoded per email, MIME, and Unicode
                conventions.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Parsing</span></dt><dd>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package in
                3.1 currently requires raw email byte strings of the type
                fetched with <code class="epub__literal">poplib</code> to be
                decoded into Unicode <code class="epub__literal">str</code>
                strings as appropriate before it can be passed in to be parsed
                into a message object. This pre-parse decoding might be done
                by a default, user preference, mail headers inspection, or
                intelligent guess. Because this requirement raises difficult
                issues for package clients, it may be dropped in a future
                version of <code class="epub__literal">email</code> and
                Python.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Navigating</span></dt><dd>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package
                returns most message components as <code class="epub__literal">str</code> strings, though parts content
                decoded by Base64 and other email encoding schemes may be
                returned as <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> strings,
                parts fetched without such decoding may be <code class="epub__literal">str</code> or <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>, and some <code class="epub__literal">str</code> string parts are internally
                encoded to <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> with
                scheme <code class="epub__literal">raw-unicode-escape</code>
                before processing. Message headers may be decoded by the
                package on request as well.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>If you’re migrating email scripts (or your mindset) from 2.X,
          you’ll need to treat email text fetched from a server as byte
          strings, and encode it before passing it along for parsing; scripts
          that send or compose email are generally unaffected (and this may be
          the majority of Python email-aware scripts), though content may have
          to be treated specially if it may be returned as byte
          strings.</p>
<p>This is the story in Python 3.1, which is of course prone to
          change over time. We’ll see how these email constraints translate
          into code as we move along in this section. Suffice it to say, the
          text on the Internet is not as simple as it used to be, though it
          probably shouldn’t have been <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54849"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54851"></a>anyhow.</p>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[51] </sup>IMAP, or Internet Message Access Protocol, was designed as
            an alternative to POP, but it is still not as widely available
            today, and so it is not presented in this text. For instance,
            major commercial providers used for this book’s examples provide
            only POP (or web-based) access to email. See the Python library
            manual for IMAP server interface details. Python used to have a
            RFC822 module as well, but it’s been subsumed by the <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package in 3.X.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
