<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>POP: Fetching Email</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="POP: Fetching Email"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="pop_colon_fetching_email"></a>POP: Fetching Email</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>I confess: up <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54859"></a><a id="email13.7"></a><a id="client13.7"></a>until just before 2000, I took a
        lowest-common-denominator approach to email. I preferred to check my
        messages by <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54875"></a>Telnetting to my <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54879"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54882"></a>ISP and using a simple command-line email interface. Of
        course, that’s not ideal for mail with attachments, pictures, and the
        like, but its portability was staggering—because Telnet runs on almost
        any machine with a network link, I was able to check my mail quickly
        and easily from anywhere on the planet. Given that I make my living
        traveling around the world teaching Python classes, this wild
        accessibility was a big win.</p>
<p>As with website maintenance, times have changed on this front.
        Somewhere along the way, most ISPs began offering web-based email
        access with similar portability and dropped Telnet altogether. When my
        ISP took away Telnet access, however, they also took away one of my
        main email access methods. Luckily, Python came to the rescue again—by
        writing email access scripts in Python, I could still read and send
        email from any machine in the world that has Python and an Internet
        connection. Python can be as portable a solution as Telnet, but much
        more powerful.</p>
<p>Moreover, I can still use these scripts as an alternative to
        tools suggested by the ISP. Besides my not being fond of delegating
        control to commercial products of large companies, closed email tools
        impose choices on users that are not always ideal and may sometimes
        fail altogether. In many ways, the motivation for coding Python email
        scripts is the same as it was for the larger GUIs in Chapter 11: the
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>scriptability</em></span> of Python programs can be a decided
        advantage.</p>
<p>For example, Microsoft Outlook historically and by default has
        preferred to download mail to your PC and delete it from the mail
        server as soon as you access it. This keeps your email box small (and
        your ISP happy), but it isn’t exactly friendly to people who travel
        and use multiple machines along the way—once accessed, you cannot get
        to a prior email from any machine except the one to which it was
        initially downloaded. Worse, the web-based email interfaces offered by
        my ISPs have at times gone offline completely, leaving me cut off from
        email (and usually at the worst possible time).</p>
<p>The next two scripts represent one first-cut solution to such
        portability and reliability constraints (we’ll see others in this and
        later chapters). The first, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>popmail.py</em></span>, is a
        simple <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54902"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54905"></a>mail reader tool, which downloads and prints the
        contents of each email in an email account. This script is admittedly
        primitive, but it lets you read your email on any machine with Python
        and sockets; moreover, it leaves your email intact on the server, and
        isn’t susceptible to webmail outages. The second,
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>smtpmail.py</em></span>, is a one-shot script for writing and
        sending a new email message that is as portable as Python
        itself.</p>
<p>Later in this chapter, we’ll implement an interactive
        console-based email client (pymail), and later in this book we’ll code
        a full-blown GUI email tool (PyMailGUI) and a web-based email program
        of our own (PyMailCGI). For now, we’ll start with the basics.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Mail Configuration Module"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="mail_configuration_module"></a>Mail Configuration Module</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Before we get to the <a id="pop13.7.1"></a><a id="mail13.7.1"></a>scripts, let’s first take a look at a common module
          they import and use. The module in Example 13-17 is used to configure
          email parameters appropriately for a particular user. It’s simply a
          collection of assignments to variables used by mail programs that
          appear in this book; each major mail client has its own version, to
          allow content to vary. Isolating these configuration settings in
          this single module makes it easy to configure the book’s email
          programs for a particular user, without having to edit actual
          program logic code.</p>
<p>If you want to use any of this book’s email programs to do
          mail processing of your own, be sure to change its assignments to
          reflect your servers, account usernames, and so on (as shown, they
          refer to email accounts used for developing this book). Not all
          scripts use all of these settings; we’ll revisit this module in
          later examples to explain more of them.</p>
<p>Note that some ISPs may require that you be connected directly
          to their systems in order to use their SMTP servers to send mail.
          For example, when connected directly by dial-up in the past, I could
          use my ISP’s server directly, but when connected via broadband, I
          had to route requests through a cable Internet provider. You may
          need to adjust these settings to match your configuration; see your
          ISP to obtain the required POP and SMTP servers. Also, some SMTP
          servers check domain name validity in addresses, and may require an
          authenticating login step—see the SMTP section later in this chapter
          for interface details.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id36"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 13-17. PP4E\Internet\Email\mailconfig.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
user configuration settings for various email programs (pymail/mailtools version);
email scripts get their server names and other email config options from this
module: change me to reflect your server names and mail preferences;
"""

#------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# (required for load, delete: all) POP3 email server machine, user
#------------------------------------------------------------------------------

popservername = 'pop.secureserver.net'
popusername   = 'PP4E@learning-python.com'

#------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# (required for send: all) SMTP email server machine name
# see Python smtpd module for a SMTP server class to run locally;
#------------------------------------------------------------------------------

smtpservername = 'smtpout.secureserver.net'

#------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# (optional: all) personal information used by clients to fill in mail if set;
# signature  -- can be a triple-quoted block, ignored if empty string;
# address -- used for initial value of "From" field if not empty,
# no longer tries to guess From for replies: this had varying success;
#------------------------------------------------------------------------------

myaddress   = 'PP4E@learning-python.com'
mysignature = ('Thanks,\n'
               '--Mark Lutz  (http://learning-python.com, http://rmi.net/~lutz)')

#------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# (optional: mailtools) may be required for send; SMTP user/password if
# authenticated; set user to None or '' if no login/authentication is
# required; set pswd to name of a file holding your SMTP password, or
# an empty string to force programs to ask (in a console, or GUI);
#------------------------------------------------------------------------------

smtpuser  = None                           # per your ISP
smtppasswdfile  = ''                       # set to '' to be asked

#------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# (optional: mailtools) name of local one-line text file with your pop
# password; if empty or file cannot be read, pswd is requested when first
# connecting; pswd not encrypted: leave this empty on shared machines;
#------------------------------------------------------------------------------

poppasswdfile  = r'c:\temp\pymailgui.txt'      # set to '' to be asked

#------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# (required: mailtools) local file where sent messages are saved by some clients;
#------------------------------------------------------------------------------

sentmailfile   = r'.\sentmail.txt'             # . means in current working dir

#------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# (required: pymail, pymail2) local file where pymail saves pop mail on request;
#------------------------------------------------------------------------------

savemailfile   = r'c:\temp\savemail.txt'       # not used in PyMailGUI: dialog

#------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# (required: pymail, mailtools) fetchEncoding is the Unicode encoding used to
# decode fetched full message bytes, and to encode and decode message text if
# stored in text-mode save files; see Chapter 13 for details: this is a limited
# and temporary approach to Unicode encodings until a new bytes-friendly email
# package is developed; headersEncodeTo is for sent headers: see chapter13;
#------------------------------------------------------------------------------

fetchEncoding = 'utf8'      # 4E: how to decode and store message text (or latin1?)
headersEncodeTo = None      # 4E: how to encode non-ASCII headers sent (None=utf8)

#------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# (optional: mailtools) the maximum number of mail headers or messages to
# download on each load request; given this setting N, mailtools fetches at
# most N of the most recently arrived mails; older mails outside this set are
# not fetched from the server, but are returned as empty/dummy emails; if this
# is assigned to None (or 0), loads will have no such limit; use this if you
# have very many mails in your inbox, and your Internet or mail server speed
# makes full loads too slow to be practical;  some clients also load only
# newly-arrived emails, but this setting is independent of that feature;
#------------------------------------------------------------------------------

fetchlimit = 25             # 4E: maximum number headers/emails to fetch on loads</pre>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="POP Mail Reader Script"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="pop_mail_reader_script"></a>POP Mail Reader Script</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>On to <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54944"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54946"></a><a id="pop13.7.2"></a><a id="mail13.7.2"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54956"></a><a id="popmail13.7.2"></a>reading email in Python: the script in Example 13-18 employs Python’s
          standard <code class="epub__literal">poplib</code> module, an
          implementation of the client-side interface to POP—the Post Office
          Protocol. POP is a well-defined and widely available way to fetch
          email from servers over sockets. This script connects to a POP
          server to implement a simple yet portable email download and display
          tool.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id37"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 13-18. PP4E\Internet\Email\popmail.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">#!/usr/local/bin/python
"""
##############################################################################
use the Python POP3 mail interface module to view your POP email account
messages;  this is just a simple listing--see pymail.py for a client with
more user interaction features, and smtpmail.py for a script which sends
mail;  POP is used to retrieve mail, and runs on a socket using port number
110 on the server machine, but Python's poplib hides all protocol details;
to send mail, use the smtplib module (or os.popen('mail...')).  see also:
imaplib module for IMAP alternative, PyMailGUI/PyMailCGI for more features;
##############################################################################
"""

import poplib, getpass, sys, mailconfig

mailserver = mailconfig.popservername      # ex: 'pop.rmi.net'
mailuser   = mailconfig.popusername        # ex: 'lutz'
mailpasswd = getpass.getpass('Password for %s?' % mailserver)

print('Connecting...')
server = poplib.POP3(mailserver)
server.user(mailuser)                      # connect, log in to mail server
server.pass_(mailpasswd)                   # pass is a reserved word

try:
    print(server.getwelcome())             # print returned greeting message
    msgCount, msgBytes = server.stat()
    print('There are', msgCount, 'mail messages in', msgBytes, 'bytes')
    print(server.list())
    print('-' * 80)
    input('[Press Enter key]')

    for i in range(msgCount):
        hdr, message, octets = server.retr(i+1)    # octets is byte count
        for line in message: print(line.decode())  # retrieve, print all mail
        print('-' * 80)                            # mail text is bytes in 3.x
        if i &lt; msgCount - 1:
           input('[Press Enter key]')              # mail box locked till quit
finally:                                           # make sure we unlock mbox
    server.quit()                                  # else locked till timeout
print('Bye.')</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Though primitive, this script illustrates the basics of
          reading email in Python. To establish a connection to an email
          server, we start by making an instance of the <code class="epub__literal">poplib.POP3</code> object, passing in the email
          server machine’s name as a string:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e54980"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">server = poplib.POP3(mailserver)</pre>
<p>If this call doesn’t raise an exception, we’re connected (by
          socket) to the POP server listening on POP port number 110 at the
          machine where our email account lives.</p>
<p>The next thing we need to do before fetching messages is tell
          the server our username and password; notice that the password
          method is called <code class="epub__literal">pass_</code>. Without
          the trailing underscore, <code class="epub__literal">pass</code>
          would name a reserved word and trigger a syntax error:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e54992"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">server.user(mailuser)                      # connect, log in to mail server
server.pass_(mailpasswd)                   # pass is a reserved word</pre>
<p>To keep things simple and relatively secure, this script
          always asks for the account password interactively; the <code class="epub__literal">getpass</code> module we met in the FTP section
          of this chapter is used to input but not display a password string
          typed by the user.</p>
<p>Once we’ve told the server our username and password, we’re
          free to fetch mailbox information with the <code class="epub__literal">stat</code> method (number messages, total bytes
          among all messages) and fetch the full text of a particular message
          with the <code class="epub__literal">retr</code> method (pass the
          message number—they start at 1). The full text includes all headers,
          followed by a blank line, followed by the mail’s text and any
          attached parts. The <code class="epub__literal">retr</code> call
          sends back a tuple that includes a list of line strings representing
          the content of the mail:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e55010"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">msgCount, msgBytes = server.stat()
hdr, message, octets = server.retr(i+1)    # octets is byte count</pre>
<p>We close the email server connection by calling the POP
          object’s <code class="epub__literal">quit</code> method:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e55018"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">server.quit()                              # else locked till timeout</pre>
<p>Notice that this call appears inside the <code class="epub__literal">finally</code> clause of a <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement that wraps the bulk of the
          script. To minimize complications associated with changes, POP
          servers lock your email inbox between the time you first connect and
          the time you close your connection (or until an arbitrary,
          system-defined timeout expires). Because the POP <code class="epub__literal">quit</code> method also unlocks the mailbox, it’s
          crucial that we do this before exiting, whether an exception is
          raised during email processing or not. By wrapping the action in a
          <code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">finally</code> statement, we guarantee that the
          script calls <code class="epub__literal">quit</code> on exit to
          unlock the mailbox to make it accessible to other processes (e.g.,
          delivery of incoming email).</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Fetching Messages"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="fetching_messages"></a>Fetching Messages</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Here is the <code class="epub__literal">popmail</code> script
          of Example 13-18 in action,
          displaying two messages in my account’s mailbox on machine
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>pop.secureserver.net</em></span>—the domain name of the
          mail server machine used by the ISP hosting my
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>learning-python.com</em></span> domain name, as <span>configured</span> in the module <code class="epub__literal">mailconfig</code>. To keep this output reasonably
          sized, I’ve omitted or truncated a few irrelevant message header
          lines here, including most of the <code class="epub__literal">Received:</code> headers that chronicle an
          email’s journey; run this on your own to see all the gory details of
          raw email text:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e55067"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Email&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>popmail.py</code></strong>
Password for pop.secureserver.net?
Connecting...
b'+OK &lt;1314.1273085900@p3pop01-02.prod.phx3.gdg&gt;'
There are 2 mail messages in 3268 bytes
(b'+OK ', [b'1 1860', b'2 1408'], 16)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[Press Enter key]
Received: (qmail 7690 invoked from network); 5 May 2010 15:29:43 −0000
X-IronPort-Anti-Spam-Result: AskCAG4r4UvRVllAlGdsb2JhbACDF44FjCkVAQEBAQkLCAkRAx+
Received: from 72.236.109.185 by webmail.earthlink.net with HTTP; Wed, 5 May 201
Message-ID: &lt;27293081.1273073376592.JavaMail.root@mswamui-thinleaf.atl.sa.earthl
Date: Wed, 5 May 2010 11:29:36 −0400 (EDT)
From: lutz@rmi.net
Reply-To: lutz@rmi.net
To: pp4e@learning-python.com
Subject: I'm a Lumberjack, and I'm Okay
Mime-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=UTF-8
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit
X-Mailer: EarthLink Zoo Mail 1.0
X-ELNK-Trace: 309f369105a89a174e761f5d55cab8bca866e5da7af650083cf64d888edc8b5a35
X-Originating-IP: 209.86.224.51
X-Nonspam: None

I cut down trees, I skip and jump,
I like to press wild flowers...


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[Press Enter key]
Received: (qmail 17482 invoked from network); 5 May 2010 15:33:47 −0000
X-IronPort-Anti-Spam-Result: AlIBAIss4UthSoc7mWdsb2JhbACDF44FjD4BAQEBAQYNCgcRIq1
Received: (qmail 4009 invoked by uid 99); 5 May 2010 15:33:47 −0000
Content-Transfer-Encoding: quoted-printable
Content-Type: text/plain; charset="utf-8"
X-Originating-IP: 72.236.109.185
User-Agent: Web-Based Email 5.2.13
Message-Id: &lt;20100505083347.deec9532fd532622acfef00cad639f45.0371a89d29.wbe@emai
From: lutz@learning-python.com
To: PP4E@learning-python.com
Cc: lutz@learning-python.com
Subject: testing
Date: Wed, 05 May 2010 08:33:47 −0700
Mime-Version: 1.0
X-Nonspam: None

Testing Python mail tools.


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Bye.</pre>
<p>This user interface is about as simple as it could be—after
          connecting to the server, it prints the complete and raw full text
          of one message at a time, pausing between each until you press the
          Enter key. The <code class="epub__literal">input</code> built-in is
          called to wait for the key press between message displays. The pause
          keeps messages from scrolling off the screen too fast; to make them
          visually distinct, emails are also separated by lines of
          dashes.</p>
<p>We could make the display fancier (e.g., we can use the
          <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package to parse headers,
          bodies, and attachments—watch for examples in this and later
          chapters), but here we simply display the whole message that was
          sent. This works well for simple mails like these two, but it can be
          inconvenient for larger messages with attachments; we’ll improve on
          this in later clients.</p>
<p>This book won’t cover the full of set of headers that may
          appear in emails, but we’ll make use of some along the way. For
          example, the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>X-Mailer</em></span> header line, if present,
          typically identifies the sending program; we’ll use it later to
          identify Python-coded email senders we write. The more common
          headers such as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>From</em></span> and
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Subject</em></span> are more crucial to a message. In fact,
          a variety of extra header lines can be sent in a message’s text. The
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Received</em></span> headers, for example, trace the
          machines that a message passed through on its way to the target
          mailbox.</p>
<p>Because <code class="epub__literal">popmail</code> prints the
          entire raw text of a message, you see all headers here, but you
          usually see only a few by default in end-user-oriented mail GUIs
          such as Outlook and webmail pages. The raw text here also makes
          apparent the email structure we noted earlier: an email in general
          consists of a set of headers like those here, followed by a blank
          line, which is followed by the mail’s main text, though as we’ll see
          later, they can be more complex if there are alternative parts or
          attachments.</p>
<p>The script in Example 13-18 never deletes mail
          from the server. Mail is simply retrieved and printed and will be
          shown again the next time you run the script (barring deletion in
          another tool, of course). To really remove mail permanently, we need
          to call other methods (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">server.dele(msgnum)</code>), but such a
          capability is best deferred until we develop more interactive mail
          tools.</p>
<p>Notice how the reader script decodes each mail content line
          with <code class="epub__literal">line.decode</code> into a <code class="epub__literal">str</code> string for display; as mentioned
          earlier, <code class="epub__literal">poplib</code> returns content
          as <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> strings in 3.X. In fact,
          if we change the script to not decode, this becomes more obvious in
          its output:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e55122"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">[Press Enter key]
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...assorted lines omitted...</span></em>
b'Date: Wed, 5 May 2010 11:29:36 −0400 (EDT)'
b'From: lutz@rmi.net'
b'Reply-To: lutz@rmi.net'
b'To: pp4e@learning-python.com'
b"Subject: I'm a Lumberjack, and I'm Okay"
b'Mime-Version: 1.0'
b'Content-Type: text/plain; charset=UTF-8'
b'Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit'
b'X-Mailer: EarthLink Zoo Mail 1.0'
b''
b'I cut down trees, I skip and jump,'
b'I like to press wild flowers...'
b''</pre>
<p>As we’ll see later, we’ll need to decode similarly in order to
          parse this text with email tools. The next section exposes the
          bytes-based interface as <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e55129"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e55131"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e55133"></a>well.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Fetching Email at the Interactive Prompt"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="fetching_email_at_the_interactive_prompt"></a>Fetching Email at the Interactive Prompt</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>If you don’t <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e55141"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e55146"></a>mind typing code and reading POP server messages, it’s
          possible to use the Python interactive prompt as a simple email
          client, too. The following session uses two additional interfaces
          we’ll apply in later examples:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">conn.list()</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Returns a list of “message-number message-size”
                strings.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">conn.top(</code>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>N</code></em> <code class="epub__literal">,
              0)</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Retrieves just the header text portion of message number
                <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>N</em></span>.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">top</code> call also returns a
          tuple that includes the list of line strings sent back; its second
          argument tells the server how many additional lines after the
          headers to send, if any. If all you need are header details,
          <code class="epub__literal">top</code> can be much quicker than the
          full text fetch of <code class="epub__literal">retr</code>, provided
          your mail server implements the TOP command (most do):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e55187"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Email&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from poplib import POP3</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>conn = POP3('pop.secureserver.net')</code></strong>         # connect to server
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>conn.user('PP4E@learning-python.com')</code></strong>       # log in to account
b'+OK '
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>conn.pass_('xxxxxxxx')</code></strong>
b'+OK '

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>conn.stat()</code></strong>      # num mails, num bytes
(2, 3268)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>conn.list()</code></strong>
(b'+OK ', [b'1 1860', b'2 1408'], 16)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>conn.top(1, 0)</code></strong>
(b'+OK 1860 octets ', [b'Received: (qmail 7690 invoked from network); 5 May 2010
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...lines omitted...</span></em>
b'X-Originating-IP: 209.86.224.51', b'X-Nonspam: None', b'', b''], 1827)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>conn.retr(1)</code></strong>
(b'+OK 1860 octets ', [b'Received: (qmail 7690 invoked from network); 5 May 2010
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...lines omitted...</span></em>
b'X-Originating-IP: 209.86.224.51', b'X-Nonspam: None', b'',
b'I cut down trees, I skip and jump,', b'I like to press wild flowers...',
b'', b''], 1898)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>conn.quit()</code></strong>
b'+OK '</pre>
<p>Printing the full text of a message at the interactive prompt
          is easy once it’s fetched: simply decode each line to a normal
          string as it is printed, like our pop mail script did, or
          concatenate the line strings returned by <code class="epub__literal">retr</code> or <code class="epub__literal">top</code> adding a newline between; any of the
          following will suffice for an open POP server object:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e55235"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>info, msg, oct = connection.retr(1)</code></strong>       # fetch first email in mailbox

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for x in msg: print(x.decode())</code></strong>           # four ways to display message lines
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(b'\n'.join(msg).decode())</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = [print(x.decode()) for x in msg]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = list(map(print, map(bytes.decode, msg)))</code></strong></pre>
<p>Parsing email text to extract headers and components is more
          complex, especially for mails with attached and possibly encoded
          parts, such as images. As we’ll see later in this chapter, the
          standard library’s <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package
          can parse the mail’s full or headers text after it has been fetched
          with <code class="epub__literal">poplib</code> (or <code class="epub__literal">imaplib</code>).</p>
<p>See the Python library manual for details on other POP module
          tools. As of Python 2.4, there is also a <code class="epub__literal">POP3_SSL</code> class in the <code class="epub__literal">poplib</code> module that connects to the server
          over an SSL-encrypted socket on port 995 by default (the standard
          port for POP over SSL). It provides an identical interface, but it
          uses secure sockets for the conversation where supported <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e55270"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e55272"></a>by servers.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
