<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>email: Parsing and Composing Mail Content</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="email: Parsing and Composing Mail Content"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="email_colon_parsing_and_composing_mail_c"></a>email: Parsing and Composing Mail Content</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The second <a id="email13.9"></a><a id="client13.9"></a><a id="par13.9"></a>edition of this book used a handful of standard library
        modules (<code class="epub__literal">rfc822</code>, <code class="epub__literal">StringIO</code>, and more) to parse the contents of
        messages, and simple text processing to compose them. Additionally,
        that edition included a section on extracting and decoding attached
        parts of a message using modules such as <code class="epub__literal">mhlib</code>, <code class="epub__literal">mimetools</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">base64</code>.</p>
<p>In the third edition, those tools were still available, but
        were, frankly, a bit clumsy and error-prone. Parsing attachments from
        messages, for example, was tricky, and composing even basic messages
        was tedious (in fact, an early printing of the prior edition contained
        a potential bug, because it omitted one <code class="epub__literal">\n</code> character in a string formatting
        operation). Adding attachments to sent messages wasn’t even attempted,
        due to the complexity of the formatting involved. Most of these tools
        are gone completely in Python 3.X as I write this fourth edition,
        partly because of their complexity, and partly because they’ve been
        made obsolete.</p>
<p>Luckily, things are much simpler today. After the second
        edition, Python sprouted a new<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e55994"></a> <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package—a
        powerful collection of tools that automate most of the work behind
        parsing and composing email messages. This module gives us an
        object-based message interface and handles all the textual message
        structure details, both analyzing and creating it. Not only does this
        eliminate a whole class of potential bugs, it also promotes more
        advanced mail processing.</p>
<p>Things like attachments, for instance, become accessible to mere
        mortals (and authors with limited book real estate). In fact, an
        entire original section on manual attachment parsing and decoding was
        deleted in the third edition—it’s essentially automatic with <code class="epub__literal">email</code>. The new package parses and constructs
        headers and attachments; generates correct email text; decodes and
        encodes Base64, quoted-printable, and <span>uuencoded</span> data; and much more.</p>
<p>We won’t cover the <code class="epub__literal">email</code>
        package in its entirety in this book; it is well documented in
        Python’s library manual. Our goal here is to explore some example
        usage code, which you can study in conjunction with the manuals. But
        to help get you started, let’s begin with a quick overview. In a
        nutshell, the <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package is
        based around the <code class="epub__literal">Message</code> object it
        provides:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Parsing mail</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>A mail’s full text, fetched from <code class="epub__literal">poplib</code> or <code class="epub__literal">imaplib</code>, is parsed into a new <code class="epub__literal">Message</code> object, with an API for
              accessing its components. In the object, mail headers become
              dictionary-like keys, and components become a “payload” that can
              be walked with a generator interface (more on payloads in a
              moment).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Creating mail</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>New mails are composed by creating a new <code class="epub__literal">Message</code> object, using an API to attach
              headers and parts, and asking the object for its print
              representation—a correctly formatted mail message text, ready to
              be passed to the <code class="epub__literal">smtplib</code>
              module for delivery. Headers are added by key assignment and
              attachments by method calls.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>In other words, the <code class="epub__literal">Message</code>
        object is used both for accessing existing messages and for creating
        new ones from scratch. In both cases, <code class="epub__literal">email</code> can automatically handle details like
        content encodings (e.g., attached binary images can be treated as text
        with Base64 encoding and decoding), content types, and more.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Message Objects"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="message_objects"></a>Message Objects</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Since the <code class="epub__literal">email</code> module’s
          <code class="epub__literal">Message</code> <a id="mes13.9.1"></a><a id="email13.9.1"></a>object is at the heart of its API, you need a cursory
          understanding of its form to get started. In short, it is designed
          to reflect the structure of a formatted email message. Each <code class="epub__literal">Message</code> consists of three main pieces of
          <span>information</span>:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Type</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>A content type (plain text, HTML text, JPEG image, and
                so on), encoded as a MIME main type and a subtype. For
                instance, “text/html” means the main type is text and the
                subtype is HTML (a web page); “image/jpeg” means a JPEG photo.
                A “multipart/mixed” type means there are nested parts within
                the message.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Headers</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>A dictionary-like mapping interface, with one key per
                mail header (From, To, and so on). This interface supports
                almost all of the usual dictionary operations, and headers may
                be fetched or set by normal key indexing.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Content</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>A “payload,” which represents the mail’s content. This
                can be either a string (<code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> or <code class="epub__literal">str</code>) for simple messages, or a list
                of additional <code class="epub__literal">Message</code>
                objects for <span>multipart</span>
                container messages with attached or alternative parts. For
                some oddball types, the payload may be a Python <code class="epub__literal">None</code> object.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>The MIME type of a Message is key to understanding its
          content. For example, mails with attached images may have a main
          top-level <code class="epub__literal">Message</code> (type <code class="epub__literal">multipart/mixed</code>), with three more <code class="epub__literal">Message</code> objects in its payload—one for its
          main text (type <code class="epub__literal">text/plain</code>),
          followed by two of type image for the photos (type <code class="epub__literal">image/jpeg</code>). The photo parts may be
          encoded for transmission as text with Base64 or another scheme; the
          encoding type, as well as the original image filename, are specified
          in the part’s headers.</p>
<p>Similarly, mails that include both simple text and an HTML
          alternative will have two nested <code class="epub__literal">Message</code> objects in their payload, of type
          plain text (<code class="epub__literal">text/plain</code>) and HTML
          text (<code class="epub__literal">text/html</code>), along with a
          main root <code class="epub__literal">Message</code> of type
          <code class="epub__literal">multipart/alternative</code>. Your mail
          client decides which part to display, often based on your
          preferences.</p>
<p>Simpler messages may have just a root <code class="epub__literal">Message</code> of type <code class="epub__literal">text/plain</code> or <code class="epub__literal">text/html</code>, representing the entire message
          body. The payload for such mails is a simple string. They may also
          have no explicitly given type at all, which generally defaults to
          <code class="epub__literal">text/plain</code>. Some single-part
          messages are <code class="epub__literal">text/html</code>, with no
          <code class="epub__literal">text/plain</code> alternative—they
          require a web browser or other HTML viewer (or a very keen-eyed
          user).</p>
<p>Other combinations are possible, including some types that are
          not commonly seen in practice, such as <code class="epub__literal">message/delivery</code> status. Most messages
          have a main text part, though it is not required, and may be nested
          in a multipart or other construct.</p>
<p>In all cases, an email message is a simple, linear string, but
          these message structures are automatically detected when mail text
          is parsed and are created by your method calls when new messages are
          composed. For instance, when creating messages, the message <code class="epub__literal">attach</code> method adds parts for multipart
          mails, and <code class="epub__literal">set_payload</code> sets the
          entire payload to a string for simple mails.</p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">Message</code> objects also have
          assorted properties (e.g., the filename of an attachment), and they
          provide a convenient <code class="epub__literal">walk</code>
          generator method, which returns the next <code class="epub__literal">Message</code> in the payload each time through
          in a <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop or other iteration
          context. Because the walker yields the root <code class="epub__literal">Message</code> object first (i.e., <code class="epub__literal">self</code>), single-part messages don’t have to
          be handled as a special case; a nonmultipart message is effectively
          a <code class="epub__literal">Message</code> with a single item in
          its payload—itself.</p>
<p>Ultimately, the <code class="epub__literal">Message</code>
          object structure closely mirrors the way mails are formatted as
          text. Special header lines in the mail’s text give its type (e.g.,
          plain text or multipart), as well as the separator used between the
          content of nested parts. Since the underlying textual details are
          automated by the <code class="epub__literal">email</code>
          package—both when parsing and when composing—we won’t go into
          further formatting details here.</p>
<p>If you are interested in seeing how this translates to real
          emails, a great way to learn mail structure is by inspecting the
          full raw text of messages displayed by email clients you already
          use, as we’ll see with some we meet in this book. In fact, we’ve
          already seen a few—see the raw text printed by our earlier POP email
          scripts for simple mail text examples. For more on the <code class="epub__literal">Message</code> object, and <code class="epub__literal">email</code> in general, consult the <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package’s entry in Python’s library
          manual. We’re skipping details such as its available encoders and
          MIME object classes here in the interest of space.</p>
<p>Beyond the <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package,
          the Python library includes other tools for mail-related processing.
          For instance, <code class="epub__literal">mimetypes</code> maps a
          filename to and from a MIME type:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">mimetypes.guess_type(filename)</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Maps a <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e56252"></a>filename to a MIME type. Name
                <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>spam.txt</em></span> maps to text/plan.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">mimetypes.guess_extension(contype)</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Maps a MIME <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e56268"></a>type to a filename extension. Type text/html
                maps to <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>.html</em></span>.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>We also used the <code class="epub__literal">mimetypes</code>
          module earlier in this chapter to guess FTP transfer modes from
          filenames (see Example 13-10), as well as in
          Chapter 6, where we used it to
          guess a media player for a filename (see the examples there,
          including <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>playfile.py</em></span>, Example 6-23). For email, these can
          come in handy when attaching files to a new message (<code class="epub__literal">guess_type</code>) and saving parsed attachments
          that do not provide a filename (<code class="epub__literal">guess_extension</code>). In fact, this module’s
          source code is a fairly complete reference to MIME types. See the
          library manual for more on these <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e56298"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e56300"></a>tools.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Basic email Package Interfaces in Action"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="basic_email_package_interfaces_in_action"></a>Basic email Package Interfaces in Action</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Although we can’t <a id="email13.9.2"></a><a id="mes13.9.2"></a>provide an exhaustive reference here, let’s step
          through a simple interactive session to illustrate the fundamentals
          of email processing. To <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>compose</em></span> the full text
          of a message—to be delivered with <code class="epub__literal">smtplib</code>, for instance—make a <code class="epub__literal">Message</code>, assign headers to its keys, and
          set its payload to the message body. Converting to a string yields
          the mail text. This process is substantially simpler and less
          error-prone than the manual text operations we used earlier in Example 13-19 to build mail as
          strings:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e56330"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from email.message import Message</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m = Message()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m['from'] = 'Jane Doe &lt;jane@doe.com&gt;'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m['to']   = 'PP4E@learning-python.com'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m.set_payload('The owls are not what they seem...')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>s = str(m)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(s)</code></strong>
from: Jane Doe &lt;jane@doe.com&gt;
to: PP4E@learning-python.com

The owls are not what they seem...</pre>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Parsing</em></span> a message’s text—like the kind
          you obtain with <code class="epub__literal">poplib</code>—is
          similarly simple, and essentially the inverse: we get back a
          <code class="epub__literal">Message</code> object from the text,
          with keys for headers and a payload for the body:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e56364"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>s</code></strong>    # same as in prior interaction
'from: Jane Doe &lt;jane@doe.com&gt;\nto: PP4E@learning-python.com\n\nThe owls are not...'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from email.parser import Parser</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = Parser().parsestr(s)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x</code></strong>
&lt;email.message.Message object at 0x015EA9F0&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x['From']</code></strong>
'Jane Doe &lt;jane@doe.com&gt;'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.get_payload()</code></strong>
'The owls are not what they seem...'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.items()</code></strong>
[('from', 'Jane Doe &lt;jane@doe.com&gt;'), ('to', 'PP4E@learning-python.com')]</pre>
<p>So far this isn’t much different from the older and
          now-defunct<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e56390"></a> <code class="epub__literal">rfc822</code> module, but
          as we’ll see in a moment, things get more interesting when there is
          more than one part. For simple messages like this one, the message
          <code class="epub__literal">walk</code> generator treats it as a
          single-part mail, of type plain text:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e56400"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for part in x.walk():</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(x.get_content_type())</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(x.get_payload())</code></strong>
...
text/plain
The owls are not what they seem...</pre>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Handling multipart messages"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="handling_multipart_messages"></a>Handling multipart messages</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Making a mail with <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>attachments</em></span> is a
            little <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e56419"></a>more work, but not much: we just make a root
            <code class="epub__literal">Message</code> and attach nested
            <code class="epub__literal">Message</code> objects created from
            the MIME type object that corresponds to the type of data we’re
            attaching. The <code class="epub__literal">MIMEText</code> class,
            for instance, is a subclass of <code class="epub__literal">Message</code>, which is tailored for text
            parts, and knows how to generate the right types of header
            information when printed. <code class="epub__literal">MIMEImage</code> and <code class="epub__literal">MIMEAudio</code> similarly customize Message
            for images and audio, and also know how to apply Base64 and other
            MIME encodings to binary data. The root message is where we store
            the main headers of the mail, and we attach parts here, instead of
            setting the entire payload—the payload is a list now, not a
            string. <code class="epub__literal">MIMEMultipart</code> is a
            <code class="epub__literal">Message</code> that provides the extra
            header protocol we need for the root:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e56450"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from email.mime.multipart import MIMEMultipart</code></strong>      # Message subclasses
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from email.mime.text import MIMEText</code></strong>                # with extra headers+logic
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>top = MIMEMultipart()</code></strong>                               # root Message object
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>top['from'] = 'Art &lt;arthur@camelot.org&gt;'</code></strong>            # subtype default=mixed
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>top['to']   = 'PP4E@learning-python.com'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sub1 = MIMEText('nice red uniforms...\n')</code></strong>           # part Message attachments
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sub2 = MIMEText(open('data.txt').read())</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sub2.add_header('Content-Disposition', 'attachment', filename='data.txt')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>top.attach(sub1)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>top.attach(sub2)</code></strong></pre>
<p>When we ask for the text, a correctly formatted full mail
            text is returned, separators and all, ready to be sent with
            <code class="epub__literal">smtplib</code>—quite a trick, if
            you’ve ever tried this by hand:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e56487"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>text = top.as_string()</code></strong>    # or do: str(top) or print(top)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(text)</code></strong>
Content-Type: multipart/mixed; boundary="===============1574823535=="
MIME-Version: 1.0
from: Art &lt;arthur@camelot.org&gt;
to: PP4E@learning-python.com

--===============1574823535==
Content-Type: text/plain; charset="us-ascii"
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit

nice red uniforms...

--===============1574823535==
Content-Type: text/plain; charset="us-ascii"
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit
Content-Disposition: attachment; filename="data.txt"

line1
line2
line3

--===============1574823535==--</pre>
<p>If we are sent this message and retrieve it via <code class="epub__literal">poplib</code>, parsing its full text yields a
            <code class="epub__literal">Message</code>
            object just like the one we built to send. The message <code class="epub__literal">walk</code> generator allows us to step through
            each part, fetching their types and payloads:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e56506"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>text</code></strong>    # same as in prior interaction
'Content-Type: multipart/mixed; boundary="===============1574823535=="\nMIME-Ver...'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from email.parser import Parser</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>msg = Parser().parsestr(text)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>msg['from']</code></strong>
'Art &lt;arthur@camelot.org&gt;'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for part in msg.walk():</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(part.get_content_type())</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(part.get_payload())</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print()</code></strong>
...
 multipart/mixed
[&lt;email.message.Message object at 0x015EC610&gt;,
&lt;email.message.Message object at0x015EC630&gt;]

text/plain
nice red uniforms...


text/plain
line1
line2
line3</pre>
<p>Multipart alternative messages (with text and HTML
            renditions of the same message) can be composed and parsed in
            similar fashion. Because <code class="epub__literal">email</code>
            clients are able to parse and compose messages with a simple
            object-based API, they are freed to focus on user-interface
            instead of text <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e56538"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e56540"></a>processing.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Unicode, Internationalization, and the Python 3.1 email Package"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="unicode_comma_internationalization_comma"></a>Unicode, Internationalization, and the Python 3.1 email
          Package</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Now that I’ve shown you how “cool” the email package is, I
          unfortunately need to let you know that it’s not completely
          operational in Python 3.1. The<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e56548"></a> <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package
          works as shown for simple messages, but is severely impacted by
          Python 3.X’s Unicode/bytes string dichotomy in a number of
          ways.</p>
<p>In short, the <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package
          in Python 3.1 is still somewhat coded to operate in the realm of 2.X
          <code class="epub__literal">str</code> text strings. Because these
          have become Unicode in 3.X, and because some tools that <code class="epub__literal">email</code> uses are now oriented toward
          <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> strings, which do not mix
          freely with <code class="epub__literal">str</code>, a variety of
          conflicts crop up and cause issues for programs that depend upon
          this module.</p>
<p>At this writing, a new version of <code class="epub__literal">email</code> is being developed which will handle
          <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> and Unicode encodings
          better, but the going consensus is that it won’t be folded back into
          Python until release 3.3 or later, long after this book’s release.
          Although a few patches might make their way into 3.2, the current
          sense is that fully addressing the package’s problems appears to
          require a full redesign.</p>
<p>To be fair, it’s a substantial problem. Email has historically
          been oriented toward single-byte ASCII text, and generalizing it for
          Unicode is difficult to do well. In fact, the same holds true for
          most of the Internet today—as discussed elsewhere in this chapter,
          FTP, POP, SMTP, and even webpage bytes fetched over HTTP pose the
          same sorts of issues. Interpreting the bytes shipped over networks
          as text is easy if the mapping is one-to-one, but allowing for
          arbitrary <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e56584"></a>Unicode encoding in that text opens a Pandora’s box of
          dilemmas. The extra complexity is necessary today, but, as <code class="epub__literal">email</code> attests, can be a daunting
          task.</p>
<p>Frankly, I considered not releasing this edition of this book
          until this package’s issues could be resolved, but I decided to go
          forward because a new <code class="epub__literal">email</code>
          package may be years away (two Python releases, by all accounts).
          Moreover, the issues serve as a case study of the types of problems
          you’ll run into in the real world of large-scale software
          development. Things change over time, and program code is no
          exception.</p>
<p>Instead, this book’s examples provide new Unicode and
          Internationalization support but adopt policies to work around
          issues where possible. Programs in books are meant to be
          educational, after all, not commercially viable. Given the state of
          the <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package that the
          examples depend on, though, the solutions used here might not be
          completely universal, and there may be additional Unicode issues
          lurking. To address the future, watch this book’s website (described
          in the Preface) for updated notes and code examples if/when the
          anticipated new <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package
          appears. Here, we’ll work with what we have.</p>
<p>The good news is that we’ll be able to make use of <code class="epub__literal">email</code> in its current form to build fairly
          sophisticated and full-featured email clients in this book anyhow.
          It still offers an amazing number of tools, including MIME encoding
          and decoding, message formatting and parsing, Internationalized
          headers extraction and construction, and more. The bad news is that
          this will require a handful of obscure workarounds and may need to
          be changed in the future, though few software projects are exempt
          from such realities.</p>
<p>Because <code class="epub__literal">email</code>’s limitations
          have implications for later email code in this book, I’m going to
          quickly run through them in this section. Some of this can be safely
          saved for later reference, but parts of later examples may be
          difficult to understand if you don’t have this background. The
          upside is that exploring the package’s limitations here also serves
          as a vehicle for digging a bit deeper into the <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package’s interfaces in
          general.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Parser decoding requirement"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="parser_decoding_requirement"></a>Parser decoding requirement</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The first Unicode <a id="par13.9.3.1"></a><a id="uni13.9.3.1"></a><a id="email13.9.3.1"></a>issue in Python3.1’s <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package is nearly a showstopper in
            some contexts: the <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>
            strings of the sort produced by <code class="epub__literal">poplib</code> for mail fetches must be decoded
            to <code class="epub__literal">str</code> prior to parsing with
            <code class="epub__literal">email</code>. Unfortunately, because
            there may not be enough information to know how to decode the
            message bytes per Unicode, some clients of this package may need
            to be generalized to detect whole-message encodings prior to
            parsing; in worst cases other than email that may mandate mixed
            data types, the current package cannot be used at all. Here’s the
            issue live:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e56656"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>text</code></strong>    # from prior example in his section
'Content-Type: multipart/mixed; boundary="===============1574823535=="\nMIME-Ver...'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>btext = text.encode()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>btext</code></strong>
b'Content-Type: multipart/mixed; boundary="===============1574823535=="\nMIME-Ve...'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>msg = Parser().parsestr(text)</code></strong>           # email parser expects Unicode str
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>msg = Parser().parsestr(btext)</code></strong>          # but poplib fetches email as bytes!
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "&lt;stdin&gt;", line 1, in &lt;module&gt;
  File "C:\Python31\lib\email\parser.py", line 82, in parsestr
    return self.parse(StringIO(text), headersonly=headersonly)
TypeError: initial_value must be str or None, not bytes

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>msg = Parser().parsestr(btext.decode())</code></strong>               # okay per default
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>msg = Parser().parsestr(btext.decode('utf8'))</code></strong>         # ascii encoded (default)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>msg = Parser().parsestr(btext.decode('latin1'))</code></strong>       # ascii is same in all 3
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>msg = Parser().parsestr(btext.decode('ascii'))</code></strong></pre>
<p>This is less than ideal, as a <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>-based <code class="epub__literal">email</code> would be able to handle message
            encodings more directly. As mentioned, though, the <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package is not really fully
            functional in Python 3.1, because of its legacy <code class="epub__literal">str</code> focus, and the sharp distinction
            that Python 3.X makes between Unicode text and byte strings. In
            this case, its parser should accept <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> and not expect clients to know how
            to decode.</p>
<p>Because of that, this book’s email clients take simplistic
            approaches to decoding fetched message bytes to be parsed by
            <code class="epub__literal">email</code>. Specifically, full-text
            decoding will try a user-configurable encoding name, then fall
            back on trying common types as a heuristic, and finally attempt to
            decode just message headers.</p>
<p>This will suffice for the examples shown but may need to be
            enhanced for broader applicability. In some cases, encoding may
            have to be determined by other schemes such as inspecting email
            headers (if present at all), guessing from bytes structure <span>analysis</span>, or dynamic user feedback.
            Adding such enhancements in a robust fashion is likely too complex
            to attempt in a book’s example code, and it is better performed in
            common standard library tools in any event.</p>
<p>Really, robust decoding of mail text may not be possible
            today at all, if it requires headers inspections—we can’t inspect
            a message’s encoding information headers unless we parse the
            message, but we can’t parse a message with 3.1’s <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package unless we already know the
            encoding. That is, scripts may need to parse in order to decode,
            but they need to decode in order to parse! The byte strings of
            <code class="epub__literal">poplib</code> and Unicode strings of
            <code class="epub__literal">email</code> in 3.1 are fundamentally
            at odds. Even within its own libraries, Python 3.X’s changes have
            created a chicken-and-egg dependency problem that still exists
            nearly two years after 3.0’s release.</p>
<p>Short of writing our own email parser, or pursuing other
            similarly complex approaches, the best bet today for fetched
            messages seems to be decoding per user preferences and defaults,
            and that’s how we’ll proceed in this edition. The PyMailGUI client
            of Chapter 14, for instance, will
            allow Unicode encodings for full mail text to be set on a
            per-session basis.</p>
<p>The real issue, of course, is that email in general is
            inherently complicated by the presence of arbitrary text
            encodings. Besides full mail text, we also must consider Unicode
            encoding issues for the text components of a message once it’s
            parsed—both its text parts and its message headers. To see why,
            let’s <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e56729"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e56734"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e56736"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e56738"></a>move on.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note"><h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Related Issue for CGI scripts</em></span>: I
              should also note that the full text decoding issue may not be as
              large a factor for email as it is for some other <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package clients. Because the
              original email standards call for <span>ASCII</span> text and require binary data
              to be MIME encoded, most emails are likely to decode properly
              according to a 7- or 8-bit encoding such as Latin-1.</p>
<p>As we’ll see in Chapter 15,
              though, a more insurmountable and related issue looms for
              server-side scripts that support <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>CGI file
              uploads</em></span> on the Web—because Python’s CGI module also
              uses the <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package to
              parse multipart form data; because this package requires data to
              be decoded to <code class="epub__literal">str</code> for
              parsing; and because such data might have mixed text and binary
              data (included raw binary data that is <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>not</em></span>
              MIME-encoded, text of any encoding, and even arbitrary
              combinations of these), these uploads fail in Python 3.1 if any
              binary or incompatible text files are included. The <code class="epub__literal">cgi</code> module triggers Unicode decoding
              or type errors internally, before the Python script has a chance
              to intervene.</p>
<p>CGI uploads worked in Python 2.X, because the <code class="epub__literal">str</code> type represented both possibly
              encoded text and binary data. Saving this type’s content to a
              binary mode file as a string of bytes in 2.X sufficed for both
              arbitrary text and binary data such as images. Email parsing
              worked in 2.X for the same reason. For better or worse, the 3.X
              <code class="epub__literal">str</code>/<code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> dichotomy makes this generality
              impossible.</p>
<p>In other words, although we can generally work around the
              <code class="epub__literal">email</code> parser’s <code class="epub__literal">str</code> requirement for fetched emails by
              decoding per an 8-bit encoding, it’s much more malignant for web
              scripting today. Watch for more details on this in Chapter 15, and stay tuned for a future
              fix, which may have materialized by the time you read these
              words.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Text payload encodings: Handling mixed type results"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="text_payload_encodings_colon_handling_mi"></a>Text payload encodings: Handling mixed type results</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Our next <code class="epub__literal">email</code> Unicode
            <a id="email13.9.3.2"></a><a id="uni13.9.3.2"></a><a id="text13.9.3.2"></a>issue seems to fly in the face of Python’s generic
            programming model: the data types of message payload objects may
            differ, depending on how they are fetched. Especially for programs
            that walk and process payloads of mail parts <span>generically</span>, this complicates
            code.</p>
<p>Specifically, the <code class="epub__literal">Message</code>
            object’s <code class="epub__literal">get_payload</code> <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e56826"></a>method we used earlier accepts an optional <code class="epub__literal">decode</code> argument to control automatic
            email-style MIME decoding (e.g., Base64, uuencode,
            quoted-printable). If this argument is passed in as <code class="epub__literal">1</code> (or equivalently, <code class="epub__literal">True</code>), the payload’s data is
            MIME-decoded when fetched, if required. Because this argument is
            so useful for complex messages with arbitrary parts, it will
            normally be passed as true in all cases. Binary parts are normally
            MIME-encoded, but even text parts might also be present in Base64
            or another MIME form if their bytes fall outside email standards.
            Some types of Unicode text, for example, require MIME
            encoding.</p>
<p>The upshot is that <code class="epub__literal">get_payload</code> normally returns <code class="epub__literal">str</code> strings for <code class="epub__literal">str</code> text parts, but returns <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> strings if its <code class="epub__literal">decode</code> argument is true—even if the
            message part is known to be text by nature. If this argument is
            not used, the payload’s type depends upon how it was set: <code class="epub__literal">str</code> or <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>. Because Python 3.X does not allow
            <code class="epub__literal">str</code> and <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> to be mixed freely, clients that
            need to use the result in text processing or store it in files
            need to accommodate the difference. Let’s run some code to
            illustrate:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e56872"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from email.message import Message</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m = Message()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m['From'] = 'Lancelot'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m.set_payload('Line?...')</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m['From']</code></strong>
'Lancelot'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m.get_payload()</code></strong>                 # str, if payload is str
'Line?...'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m.get_payload(decode=1)</code></strong>         # bytes, if MIME decode (same as decode=True)
b'Line?...'</pre>
<p>The combination of these different return types and Python
            3.X’s strict <code class="epub__literal">str</code>/<code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> dichotomy can cause problems in
            code that processes the result unless they decode <span>carefully</span>:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e56907"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m.get_payload(decode=True) + 'spam'</code></strong>                        # can't mix in 3.X!
TypeError: can't concat bytes to str
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m.get_payload(decode=True).decode() + 'spam'</code></strong>               # convert if required
'Line?...spam'</pre>
<p>To make sense of these examples, it may help to remember
            that there are two different concepts of “encoding” for email
            text:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Email-style MIME encodings</em></span> such as
                Base64, uuencode, and quoted-printable, which are applied to
                binary and otherwise unusual content to make them acceptable
                for transmission in email text</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Unicode text encodings</em></span> for strings
                in general, which apply to message text as well as its parts,
                and may be required after MIME encoding for text message
                parts</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package handles
            email-style MIME encodings automatically when we pass <code class="epub__literal">decode=1</code> to fetch parsed payloads, or
            generate text for messages that have nonprintable parts, but
            scripts still need to take Unicode encodings into consideration
            because of Python 3.X’s sharp string types differentiation. For
            example, the first <code class="epub__literal">decode</code> in
            the following refers to MIME, and the second to Unicode:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e56939"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">m.get_payload(decode=True).decode()  # to bytes via MIME, then to str via Unicode</pre>
<p>Even without the MIME <code class="epub__literal">decode</code> argument, the payload type may
            also differ if it is stored in different forms:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e56947"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m = Message(); m.set_payload('spam'); m.get_payload()</code></strong>      # fetched as stored
'spam'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m = Message(); m.set_payload(b'spam'); m.get_payload()</code></strong>
b'spam'</pre>
<p>Moreover, the same hold true for the text-specific MIME
            subclass (though as we’ll see later in this section, we cannot
            pass a <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> to its constructor
            to force a binary payload):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e56960"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from email.mime.text import MIMEText</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m = MIMEText('Line...?')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m['From'] = 'Lancelot'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m['From']</code></strong>
'Lancelot'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m.get_payload()</code></strong>
'Line...?'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m.get_payload(decode=1)</code></strong>
b'Line...?'</pre>
<p>Unfortunately, the fact that payloads might be either
            <code class="epub__literal">str</code> or <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> today not only flies in the face
            of Python’s type-neutral mindset, it can complicate your
            code—scripts may need to convert in contexts that require one or
            the other type. For instance, GUI libraries might allow both, but
            file saves and web page content generation may be less flexible.
            In our example programs, we’ll process payloads as <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> whenever possible, but decode to
            <code class="epub__literal">str</code> text in cases where
            required using the encoding information available in the header
            API described in the next section.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Text payload encodings: Using header information to decode"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="text_payload_encodings_colon_using_heade"></a>Text payload encodings: Using header information to
            decode</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>More profoundly, text in email can be even richer than
            implied so far—in principle, text payloads of a single message may
            be encoded in a variety of different Unicode schemes (e.g., three
            HTML webpage file attachments, all in different Unicode encodings,
            and possibly different than the full message text’s encoding).
            Although treating such text as binary byte strings can sometimes
            finesse encoding issues, saving such parts in text-mode files for
            opening must respect the original encoding types. Further, any
            text processing performed on such parts will be similarly
            type-specific.</p>
<p>Luckily, the <code class="epub__literal">email</code>
            package both adds character-set headers when generating message
            text and retains character-set information for parts if it is
            present when parsing message text. For instance, adding non-ASCII
            text attachments simply requires passing in an encoding name—the
            appropriate message headers are added automatically on text
            generation, and the character set is available directly via
            the<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e57006"></a> <code class="epub__literal">get_content_charset</code> method:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e57015"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>s = b'A\xe4B'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>s.decode('latin1')</code></strong>
'AäB'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from email.message import Message</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m = Message()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m.set_payload(b'A\xe4B', charset='latin1')</code></strong>       # or 'latin-1': see ahead
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>t = m.as_string()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(t)</code></strong>
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain; charset="latin1"
Content-Transfer-Encoding: base64

QeRC

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m.get_content_charset()</code></strong>
'latin1'</pre>
<p>Notice how <code class="epub__literal">email</code>
            automatically applies Base64 MIME encoding to non-ASCII text parts
            on generation, to conform to email standards. The same is true for
            the more specific MIME text subclass of <code class="epub__literal">Message</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e57050"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from email.mime.text import MIMEText</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m = MIMEText(b'A\xe4B', _charset='latin1')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>t = m.as_string()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(t)</code></strong>
Content-Type: text/plain; charset="latin1"
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Transfer-Encoding: base64

QeRC

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m.get_content_charset()</code></strong>
'latin1'</pre>
<p>Now, if we parse this message’s text string with <code class="epub__literal">email</code>, we get back a new <code class="epub__literal">Message</code> whose text payload is the Base64
            MIME-encoded text used to represent the non-ASCII Unicode string.
            Requesting MIME decoding for the payload with <code class="epub__literal">decode=1</code> returns the byte string we
            originally attached:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e57078"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from email.parser import Parser</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>q = Parser().parsestr(t)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>q</code></strong>
&lt;email.message.Message object at 0x019ECA50&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>q.get_content_type()</code></strong>
'text/plain'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>q._payload</code></strong>
'QeRC\n'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>q.get_payload()</code></strong>
'QeRC\n'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>q.get_payload(decode=1)</code></strong>
b'A\xe4B'</pre>
<p>However, running Unicode decoding on this byte string to
            convert to text fails if we attempt to use the platform default on
            Windows (UTF8). To be more accurate, and support a wide variety of
            text types, we need to use the character-set information saved by
            the parser and attached to the <code class="epub__literal">Message</code> object. This is especially
            important if we need to save the data to a file—we either have to
            store as bytes in binary mode files, or specify the correct (or at
            least a compatible) Unicode encoding in order to use such strings
            for text-mode files. Decoding manually works the same way:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e57107"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>q.get_payload(decode=1).decode()</code></strong>
UnicodeDecodeError: 'utf8' codec can't decode bytes in position 1-2: unexpected

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>q.get_content_charset()</code></strong>
'latin1'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>q.get_payload(decode=1).decode('latin1')</code></strong>                    # known type
'AäB'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>q.get_payload(decode=1).decode(q.get_content_charset())</code></strong>     # allow any type
'AäB'</pre>
<p>In fact, all the header details are available on <code class="epub__literal">Message</code> objects, if we know where to
            look. The character set can also be absent entirely, in which case
            it’s returned as <code class="epub__literal">None</code>; clients
            need to define policies for such ambiguous text (they might try
            common types, guess, or treat the data as a raw byte
            string):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e57130"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>q['content-type']</code></strong>                                     # mapping interface
'text/plain; charset="latin1"'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>q.items()</code></strong>
[('Content-Type', 'text/plain; charset="latin1"'), ('MIME-Version', '1.0'),
('Content-Transfer-Encoding', 'base64')]

&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>q.get_params(header='Content-Type')</code></strong>                    # param interface
[('text/plain', ''), ('charset', 'latin1')]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>q.get_param('charset', header='Content-Type')</code></strong>
'latin1'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>charset = q.get_content_charset()</code></strong>                     # might be missing
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if charset:</code></strong>
...    <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(q.get_payload(decode=1).decode(charset))</code></strong>
...
AäB</pre>
<p>This handles encodings for message text parts in parsed
            emails. For composing new emails, we still must apply session-wide
            user settings or allow the user to specify an encoding for each
            part interactively. In some of this book’s email clients, payload
            conversions are performed as needed—using encoding information in
            message headers after parsing and provided by users during mail
            <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e57156"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e57158"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e57160"></a>composition.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Message header encodings: email package support"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="message_header_encodings_colon_email_pac"></a>Message header encodings: email package support</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>On a related note, the <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package <a id="email13.9.3.4"></a><a id="uni13.9.3.4"></a><a id="in13.9.3.4"></a><a id="mes13.9.3.4"></a>also provides support for encoding and decoding
            message headers themselves (e.g., From, Subject) per email
            standards when they are not simple text. Such headers are often
            called <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Internationalized</em></span> (or
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>i18n</em></span>) headers, because they support inclusion
            of non-ASCII character set text in emails. This term is also
            sometimes used to refer to encoded text of message payloads;
            unlike message headers, though, message payload encoding is used
            for both international Unicode text and truly binary data such as
            images (as we’ll see in the next section).</p>
<p>Like mail payload parts, i18n headers are encoded specially
            for email, and may also be encoded per Unicode. For instance,
            here’s how to decode an encoded subject line from an arguably
            spammish email that just showed up in my inbox; its <code class="epub__literal">=?UTF-8?Q?</code> preamble declares that the
            data following it is UTF-8 encoded Unicode text, which is also
            MIME-encoded per quoted-printable for transmission in email (in
            short, unlike the prior section’s part payloads, which declare
            their encodings in separate header lines, headers themselves may
            declare their Unicode and MIME encodings by embedding them in
            their own content this way):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e57203"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rawheader = '=?UTF-8?Q?Introducing=20Top=20Values=3A=20A=20Special=20Selecti</code></strong>
<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>on=20of=20Great=20Money=20Savers?='</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from email.header import decode_header</code></strong>        # decode per email+MIME
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>decode_header(rawheader)</code></strong>
[(b'Introducing Top Values: A Special Selection of Great Money Savers', 'utf-8')]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bin, enc = decode_header(rawheader)[0]</code></strong>        # and decode per Unicode
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bin, enc</code></strong>
(b'Introducing Top Values: A Special Selection of Great Money Savers', 'utf-8')
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bin.decode(enc)</code></strong>
'Introducing Top Values: A Special Selection of Great Money Savers'</pre>
<p>Subtly, the <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package
            can return multiple parts if there are encoded substrings in the
            header, and each must be decoded individually and joined to
            produce decoded header text. Even more subtly, in 3.1, this
            package returns all <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> when
            any substring (or the entire header) is encoded but returns
            <code class="epub__literal">str</code> for a fully unencoded
            header, and uncoded substrings returned as <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> are encoded per
            “raw-unicode-escape” in the package—an encoding scheme useful to
            convert <code class="epub__literal">str</code> to <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> when no encoding type
            applies:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e57248"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from email.header import decode_header</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S1 = 'Man where did you get that assistant?'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S2 = '=?utf-8?q?Man_where_did_you_get_that_assistant=3F?='</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S3 = 'Man where did you get that =?UTF-8?Q?assistant=3F?='</code></strong>

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># str: don't decode()</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>decode_header(S1)</code></strong>
[('Man where did you get that assistant?', None)]

# bytes: do decode()
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>decode_header(S2)</code></strong>
[(b'Man where did you get that assistant?', 'utf-8')]

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># bytes: do decode() using raw-unicode-escape applied in package</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>decode_header(S3)</code></strong>
[(b'Man where did you get that', None), (b'assistant?', 'utf-8')]

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># join decoded parts if more than one</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>parts = decode_header(S3)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>' '.join(abytes.decode('raw-unicode-escape' if enc == None else enc)</code></strong>
...          <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for (abytes, enc) in parts)</code></strong>
'Man where did you get that assistant?'</pre>
<p>We’ll use logic similar to the last step here in the
            <code class="epub__literal">mailtools</code> package ahead, but
            also retain <code class="epub__literal">str</code> substrings
            intact without attempting to <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e57299"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e57301"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e57303"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e57305"></a>decode.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note"><h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Late-breaking news</em></span>: As I write this
              in mid-2010, it seems possible that this mixed type,
              nonpolymorphic, and frankly, non-Pythonic API behavior may be
              addressed in a future Python release. In response to a rant
              posted on the Python developers list by a book author whose work
              you might be familiar with, there is presently a vigorous
              discussion of the topic there. Among other ideas is a proposal
              for a <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>-like type which
              carries with it an explicit Unicode encoding; this may make it
              possible to treat some text cases in a more generic fashion.
              While it’s impossible to foresee the outcome of such proposals,
              it’s good to see that the issues are being actively explored.
              Stay tuned to this book’s website for further developments in
              the Python 3.X library API and Unicode stories.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Message address header encodings and parsing, and header creation"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="message_address_header_encodings_and_par"></a>Message address header encodings and parsing, and header
            creation</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>One wrinkle pertaining to the <a id="mes13.9.3.5"></a><a id="email13.9.3.5"></a><a id="uni13.9.3.5"></a><a id="mod13.9.3.5"></a>prior section: for message headers that contain
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>email addresses</em></span> (e.g., From), the name
            component of the name/address pair might be encoded this way as
            well. Because the email package’s header parser expects encoded
            substrings to be followed by whitespace or the end of string, we
            cannot ask it to decode a complete address-related header—quotes
            around name components will fail.</p>
<p>To support such Internationalized address headers, we must
            also parse out the first part of the email address and then
            decode. First of all, we need to extract the name and address
            parts of an email address using <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package tools:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e57348"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from email.utils import parseaddr, formataddr</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>p = parseaddr('"Smith, Bob" &lt;bob@bob.com&gt;')</code></strong>      # split into name/addr pair
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>p</code></strong>                                                # unencoded addr
('Smith, Bob', 'bob@bob.com')
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>formataddr(p)</code></strong>
'"Smith, Bob" &lt;bob@bob.com&gt;'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>parseaddr('Bob Smith &lt;bob@bob.com&gt;')</code></strong>             # unquoted name part
('Bob Smith', 'bob@bob.com')
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>formataddr(parseaddr('Bob Smith &lt;bob@bob.com&gt;'))</code></strong>
'Bob Smith &lt;bob@bob.com&gt;'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>parseaddr('bob@bob.com')</code></strong>                          # simple, no name
('', 'bob@bob.com')
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>formataddr(parseaddr('bob@bob.com'))</code></strong>
'bob@bob.com'</pre>
<p>Fields with multiple addresses (e.g., To) separate
            individual addresses by commas. Since email names might embed
            commas, too, blindly splitting on commas to run each though
            parsing won’t always work. Instead, another utility can be used to
            parse each address individually: <code class="epub__literal">getaddresses</code> ignores commas in names
            when spitting apart separate addresses, and <code class="epub__literal">parseaddr</code> does, too, because it simply
            returns the first pair in the <code class="epub__literal">getaddresses</code> result (some line breaks
            were added to the following for legibility):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e57386"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from email.utils import getaddresses</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>multi = '"Smith, Bob" &lt;bob@bob.com&gt;, Bob Smith &lt;bob@bob.com&gt;, bob@bob.com,</code></strong>
<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>"Bob" &lt;bob@bob.com&gt;'</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>getaddresses([multi])</code></strong>
[('Smith, Bob', 'bob@bob.com'), ('Bob Smith', 'bob@bob.com'), ('', 'bob@bob.com'),
('Bob', 'bob@bob.com')]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[formataddr(pair) for pair in getaddresses([multi])]</code></strong>
['"Smith, Bob" &lt;bob@bob.com&gt;', 'Bob Smith &lt;bob@bob.com&gt;', 'bob@bob.com',
'Bob &lt;bob@bob.com&gt;']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>', '.join([formataddr(pair) for pair in getaddresses([multi])])</code></strong>
'"Smith, Bob" &lt;bob@bob.com&gt;, Bob Smith &lt;bob@bob.com&gt;, bob@bob.com,
Bob &lt;bob@bob.com&gt;'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>getaddresses(['bob@bob.com'])</code></strong>     # handles single address cases too
('', 'bob@bob.com')]</pre>
<p>Now, decoding email addresses is really just an extra step
            before and after the normal header decoding logic we saw
            earlier:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e57412"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rawfromheader = '"=?UTF-8?Q?Walmart?=" &lt;newsletters@walmart.com&gt;'</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from email.utils import parseaddr, formataddr</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from email.header import decode_header</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>name, addr = parseaddr(rawfromheader)</code></strong>             # split into name/addr parts
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>name, addr</code></strong>
('=?UTF-8?Q?Walmart?=', 'newsletters@walmart.com')

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>abytes, aenc = decode_header(name)[0]</code></strong>             # do email+MIME decoding
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>abytes, aenc</code></strong>
(b'Walmart', 'utf-8')

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>name = abytes.decode(aenc)</code></strong>                        # do Unicode decoding
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>name</code></strong>
'Walmart'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>formataddr((name, addr))</code></strong>                          # put parts back together
'Walmart &lt;newsletters@walmart.com&gt;'</pre>
<p>Although From headers will typically have just one address,
            to be fully robust we need to apply this to every address in
            headers, such as To, Cc, and Bcc. Again, the multiaddress <code class="epub__literal">getaddresses</code> utility <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e57450"></a>avoids comma clashes between names and address
            separators; since it also handles the single address case, it
            suffices for From headers as well:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e57454"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rawfromheader = '"=?UTF-8?Q?Walmart?=" &lt;newsletters@walmart.com&gt;'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rawtoheader = rawfromheader + ', ' + rawfromheader</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rawtoheader</code></strong>
'"=?UTF-8?Q?Walmart?=" &lt;newsletters@walmart.com&gt;, "=?UTF-8?Q?Walmart?=" &lt;newslet
ters@walmart.com&gt;'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pairs = getaddresses([rawtoheader])</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pairs</code></strong>
[('=?UTF-8?Q?Walmart?=', 'newsletters@walmart.com'), ('=?UTF-8?Q?Walmart?=', 'ne
wsletters@walmart.com')]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>addrs = []</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for name, addr in pairs:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>abytes, aenc = decode_header(name)[0]      # email+MIME</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>name = abytes.decode(aenc)                 # Unicode</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>addrs.append(formataddr((name, addr)))     # one or more addrs</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>', '.join(addrs)</code></strong>
'Walmart &lt;newsletters@walmart.com&gt;, Walmart &lt;newsletters@walmart.com&gt;'</pre>
<p>These tools are generally forgiving for unencoded content
            and return them intact. To be robust, though, the last portion of
            code here should also allow for multiple parts returned by
            <code class="epub__literal">decode_header</code> (for encoded
            substrings), <code class="epub__literal">None</code> encoding
            values for parts (for unencoded substrings), and <code class="epub__literal">str</code> substring values instead of bytes
            (for fully unencoded names).</p>
<p>Decoding this way applies both MIME and Unicode decoding
            steps to fetched mails. Creating properly
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>encoded</em></span> headers for inclusion in new mails
            composed and sent is similarly straightforward:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e57507"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from email.header import make_header</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>hdr = make_header([(b'A\xc4B\xe4C', 'latin-1')])</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(hdr)</code></strong>
AÄBäC
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(hdr.encode())</code></strong>
=?iso-8859-1?q?A=C4B=E4C?=
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>decode_header(hdr.encode())</code></strong>
[(b'A\xc4B\xe4C', 'iso-8859-1')]</pre>
<p>This can be applied to entire headers such as Subject, as
            well as the name component of each email address in an
            address-related header line such as From and To (use <code class="epub__literal">getaddresses</code> to split into individual
            addresses first if needed). The header object provides an
            alternative interface; both techniques handle additional details,
            such as line lengths, for which we’ll defer to Python
            manuals:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e57529"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from email.header import Header</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>h = Header(b'A\xe4B\xc4X', charset='latin-1')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>h.encode()</code></strong>
'=?iso-8859-1?q?A=E4B=C4X?='
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>h = Header('spam', charset='ascii')</code></strong>       # same as Header('spam')
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>h.encode()</code></strong>
'spam'</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">mailtools</code> package
            ahead and its PyMailGUI client of Chapter 14 will use these interfaces to
            automatically decode message headers in fetched mails per their
            content for display, and to encode headers sent that are not in
            ASCII format. That latter also applies to the name component of
            email addresses, and assumes that SMTP servers will allow these to
            pass. This may encroach on some SMTP server issues which we don’t
            have space to address in this book. See the Web for more on SMTP
            headers handling. For more on headers decoding, see also file
            <em class="epub__filename">_test-i18n-headers.py</em> in the
            examples package; it decodes additional subject and
            address-related headers using <code class="epub__literal">mailtools</code> <span>methods</span>, and displays them in a
            tkinter <code class="epub__literal">Text</code> widget—a foretaste
            of how these will be displayed in <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e57566"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e57568"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e57570"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e57572"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e57574"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e57576"></a>PyMailGUI.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Workaround: Message text generation for binary attachment payloads is broken"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="workaround_colon_message_text_generation"></a>Workaround: Message text generation for binary attachment
            payloads is broken</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Our last two <code class="epub__literal">email</code>
            Unicode <a id="email13.9.3.6"></a><a id="uni13.9.3.6"></a>issues are outright bugs which we must work around
            today, though they will almost certainly be fixed in a future
            Python release. The first breaks message text generation for all
            but trivial messages—the <code class="epub__literal">email</code>
            package today no longer supports generation of full mail text for
            messages that contain any binary parts, such as images or audio
            files. Without coding workarounds, only simple emails that consist
            entirely of text parts can be composed and generated in Python
            3.1’s <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package; any
            MIME-encoded binary part causes mail text generation to
            fail.</p>
<p>This is a bit tricky to understand without poring over
            <code class="epub__literal">email</code>’s source code (which,
            thankfully, we can in the land of open source), but to demonstrate
            the issue, first notice how simple text payloads are rendered as
            full message text when printed as we’ve already seen:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e57609"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Email&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from email.message import Message</code></strong>            # generic message object
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m = Message()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m['From'] = 'bob@bob.com'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m.set_payload(open('text.txt').read())</code></strong>       # payload is str text
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(m)</code></strong>                                     # print uses as_string()
From: bob@bob.com

spam
Spam
SPAM!</pre>
<p>As we’ve also seen, for convenience, the <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package also provides subclasses
            of the <code class="epub__literal">Message</code> object, tailored
            to add message headers that provide the extra descriptive details
            used by email clients to know how to process the data:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e57638"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from email.mime.text import MIMEText</code></strong>         # Message subclass with headers
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>text = open('text.txt').read()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m = MIMEText(text)</code></strong>                           # payload is str text
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m['From'] = 'bob@bob.com'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(m)</code></strong>
Content-Type: text/plain; charset="us-ascii"
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit
From: bob@bob.com

spam
Spam
SPAM!</pre>
<p>This works for text, but watch what happens when we try to
            render a message part with truly binary data, such as an image
            that could not be decoded as Unicode text:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e57659"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from email.message import Message</code></strong>            # generic Message object
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m = Message()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m['From'] = 'bob@bob.com'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bytes = open('monkeys.jpg', 'rb').read()</code></strong>     # read binary bytes (not Unicode)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m.set_payload(bytes)</code></strong>                         # we set the payload to bytes
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(m)</code></strong>
Traceback (most recent call last):
  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...lines omitted...</span></em>
  File "C:\Python31\lib\email\generator.py", line 155, in _handle_text
    raise TypeError('string payload expected: %s' % type(payload))
TypeError: string payload expected: &lt;class 'bytes'&gt;

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m.get_payload()[:20]</code></strong>
b'\xff\xd8\xff\xe0\x00\x10JFIF\x00\x01\x01\x01\x00x\x00x\x00\x00'</pre>
<p>The problem here is that the <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package’s text generator assumes
            that the message’s payload data is a Base64 (or similar) encoded
            <code class="epub__literal">str</code> text string by generation
            time, not <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>. Really, the
            error is probably our fault in this case, because we set the
            payload to raw <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> manually.
            We should use the <code class="epub__literal">MIMEImage</code>
            MIME subclass tailored for images; if we do, the <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package internally performs Base64
            MIME email encoding on the data when the message object is
            created. Unfortunately, it still leaves it as <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>, not <code class="epub__literal">str</code>, despite the fact the whole point of
            Base64 is to change binary data to text (though the exact Unicode
            flavor this text should take may be unclear). This leads to
            additional failures in Python 3.1:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e57713"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from email.mime.image import MIMEImage</code></strong>       # Message sublcass with hdrs+base64
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bytes = open('monkeys.jpg', 'rb').read()</code></strong>     # read binary bytes again
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m = MIMEImage(bytes)</code></strong>                         # MIME class does Base64 on data
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(m)</code></strong>
Traceback (most recent call last):
  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...lines omitted...</span></em>
  File "C:\Python31\lib\email\generator.py", line 155, in _handle_text
    raise TypeError('string payload expected: %s' % type(payload))
TypeError: string payload expected: &lt;class 'bytes'&gt;

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m.get_payload()[:40]</code></strong>                         # this is already Base64 text
b'/9j/4AAQSkZJRgABAQEAeAB4AAD/2wBDAAIBAQIB'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m.get_payload()[:40].decode('ascii')</code></strong>         # but it's still bytes internally!
'/9j/4AAQSkZJRgABAQEAeAB4AAD/2wBDAAIBAQIB'</pre>
<p>In other words, not only does the Python 3.1 <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package not fully support the
            Python 3.X Unicode/bytes dichotomy, it was actually broken by it.
            Luckily, there’s a workaround for this case.</p>
<p>To address this specific issue, I opted to create a custom
            encoding function for binary MIME attachments, and pass it in to
            the <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package’s MIME
            message object <span>subclasses</span>
            for all binary data types. This custom function is coded in the
            upcoming <code class="epub__literal">mailtools</code> package of
            this chapter (Example 13-23). Because it is
            used by <code class="epub__literal">email</code> to encode from
            bytes to text at initialization time, it is able to decode to
            ASCII text per Unicode as an extra step, after running the
            original call to perform Base64 encoding and arrange
            content-encoding headers. The fact that <code class="epub__literal">email</code> does not do this extra Unicode
            decoding step itself is a genuine bug in that package (albeit, one
            introduced by changes elsewhere in Python standard libraries), but
            the workaround does <span>its
            job</span>:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e57766"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># in mailtools.mailSender module ahead in this chapter...</span></em>
def fix_encode_base64(msgobj):
     from email.encoders import encode_base64
     encode_base64(msgobj)                # what email does normally: leaves bytes
     bytes = msgobj.get_payload()         # bytes fails in email pkg on text gen
     text  = bytes.decode('ascii')        # decode to unicode str so text gen works
     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...line splitting logic omitted...</span></em>
     msgobj.set_payload('\n'.join(lines))

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from email.mime.image import MIMEImage</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from mailtools.mailSender import fix_encode_base64</code></strong>      # use custom workaround
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bytes = open('monkeys.jpg', 'rb').read()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m = MIMEImage(bytes, _encoder=fix_encode_base64)</code></strong>        # convert to ascii str
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(m.as_string()[:500])</code></strong>
Content-Type: image/jpeg
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Transfer-Encoding: base64

/9j/4AAQSkZJRgABAQEAeAB4AAD/2wBDAAIBAQIBAQICAgICAgICAwUDAwMDAwYEBAMFBwYHBwcG
BwcICQsJCAgKCAcHCg0KCgsMDAwMBwkODw0MDgsMDAz/2wBDAQICAgMDAwYDAwYMCAcIDAwMDAwM
DAwMDAwMDAwMDAwMDAwMDAwMDAwMDAwMDAwMDAwMDAwMDAwMDAwMDAwMDAz/wAARCAHoAvQDASIA
AhEBAxEB/8QAHwAAAQUBAQEBAQEAAAAAAAAAAAECAwQFBgcICQoL/8QAtRAAAgEDAwIEAwUFBAQA
AAF9AQIDAAQRBRIhMUEGE1FhByJxFDKBkaEII0KxwRVS0fAkM2JyggkKFhcYGRolJicoKSo0NTY3
ODk6Q0RFRkdISUpTVFVWV1hZWmNkZWZnaGlqc

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(m)</code></strong>   # to print the entire message: very long</pre>
<p>Another possible workaround involves defining a custom
            <code class="epub__literal">MIMEImage</code> class that is like
            the original but does not attempt to perform Base64 ending on
            creation; that way, we could encode and translate to <code class="epub__literal">str</code> before message object creation, but
            still make use of the original class’s header-generation logic. If
            you take this route, though, you’ll find that it requires
            repeating (really, cutting and pasting) far too much of the
            original logic to be reasonable—this repeated code would have to
            mirror any future <code class="epub__literal">email</code>
            changes:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e57803"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from email.mime.nonmultipart import MIMENonMultipart</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class MyImage(MIMENonMultipart):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __init__(self, imagedata, subtype):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>MIMENonMultipart.__init__(self, 'image', subtype)</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>self.set_payload(_imagedata)</code></strong>

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...repeat all the base64 logic here, with an extra ASCII Unicode decode...</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m = MyImage(text_from_bytes)</code></strong></pre>
<p>Interestingly, this regression in <code class="epub__literal">email</code> actually reflects an unrelated
            change in Python’s <code class="epub__literal">base64</code>
            module made in 2007, which was completely benign until the Python
            3.X <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>/<code class="epub__literal">str</code> differentiation came online. Prior
            to that, the email encoder worked in Python 2.X, because <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> was really <code class="epub__literal">str</code>. In 3.X, though, because <code class="epub__literal">base64</code> returns <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>, the normal mail encoder in
            <code class="epub__literal">email</code> also leaves the payload
            as <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>, even though it’s been
            encoded to Base64 text form. This in turn breaks <code class="epub__literal">email</code> text generation, because it
            assumes the payload is text in this case, and requires it to be
            <code class="epub__literal">str</code>. As is common in
            large-scale <span>software</span>
            systems, the effects of some 3.X changes may have been difficult
            to anticipate or accommodate in full.</p>
<p>By contrast, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>parsing</em></span> binary attachments
            (as opposed to generating text for them) works fine in 3.X,
            because the parsed message payload is saved in message objects as
            a Base64-encoded <code class="epub__literal">str</code> string,
            not <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>, and is converted to
            <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> only when fetched. This
            bug seems likely to also go away in a future Python and <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package (perhaps even as a simple
            patch in Python 3.2), but it’s more serious than the other Unicode
            decoding issues described here, because it prevents mail
            composition for all but trivial mails.</p>
<p>The flexibility afforded by the package and the Python
            language allows such a workaround to be developed external to the
            package, rather than hacking the package’s code directly. With
            open source and forgiving APIs, you rarely are truly <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e57888"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e57890"></a>stuck.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note"><h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Late-breaking news</em></span>: This section’s
              bug is scheduled to be fixed in Python 3.2, making our
              workaround here unnecessary in this and later Python releases.
              This is per communications with members of Python’s email
              special interest group (on the “email-sig” mailing list).</p>
<p>Regrettably, this fix didn’t appear until after this
              chapter and its examples had been written. I’d like to remove
              the workaround and its description entirely, but this book is
              based on Python 3.1, both before and after the fix was
              incorporated.</p>
<p>So that it works under Python 3.2 alpha, too, though, the
              workaround code ahead was specialized just before publication to
              check for bytes prior to decoding. Moreover, the workaround
              still must manually split lines in Base64 data, because 3.2
              still does not.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Workaround: Message composition for non-ASCII text parts is broken"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="workaround_colon_message_composition_for"></a>Workaround: Message composition for non-ASCII text parts is
            broken</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Our final <code class="epub__literal">email</code> Unicode
            issue <a id="uni13.9.3.7"></a><a id="email13.9.3.7"></a>is as severe as the prior one: changes like that of
            the prior section introduced yet another regression for mail
            composition. In short, it’s impossible to make text message parts
            today without specializing for different Unicode encodings.</p>
<p>Some types of text are automatically MIME-encoded for
            transmission. Unfortunately, because of the <code class="epub__literal">str</code>/<code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> split, the MIME text message class
            in <code class="epub__literal">email</code> now requires different
            string object types for different Unicode encodings. The net
            effect is that you now have to know how the <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package will process your text
            data when making a text message object, or repeat most of its
            logic redundantly.</p>
<p>For example, to properly generate Unicode encoding headers
            and apply required MIME encodings, here’s how we must proceed
            today for common Unicode text types:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e57937"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m = MIMEText('abc', _charset='ascii')</code></strong>             # pass text for ascii
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(m)</code></strong>
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain; charset="us-ascii"
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit

abc
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m = MIMEText('abc', _charset='latin-1')</code></strong>           # pass text for latin-1
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(m)</code></strong>                                          # but not for 'latin1': ahead
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain; charset="iso-8859-1"
Content-Transfer-Encoding: quoted-printable

abc
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m = MIMEText(b'abc', _charset='utf-8')</code></strong>            # pass bytes for utf8
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(m)</code></strong>
Content-Type: text/plain; charset="utf-8"
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Transfer-Encoding: base64

YWJj</pre>
<p>This works, but if you look closely, you’ll notice that we
            must pass <code class="epub__literal">str</code> to the first two,
            but <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> to the third. That
            requires that we special-case code for Unicode types based upon
            the package’s internal operation. Types other than those expected
            for a Unicode encoding don’t work at all, because of newly invalid
            <code class="epub__literal">str</code>/<code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> combinations that occur inside the
            <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package in 3.1:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e57975"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m = MIMEText('abc', _charset='ascii')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m = MIMEText(b'abc', _charset='ascii')</code></strong>            # bug: assumes 2.X str
Traceback (most recent call last):
  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...lines omitted...</span></em>
  File "C:\Python31\lib\email\encoders.py", line 60, in encode_7or8bit
    orig.encode('ascii')
AttributeError: 'bytes' object has no attribute 'encode'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m = MIMEText('abc', _charset='latin-1')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m = MIMEText(b'abc', _charset='latin-1')</code></strong>          # bug: qp uses str
Traceback (most recent call last):
  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...lines omitted...</span></em>
  File "C:\Python31\lib\email\quoprimime.py", line 176, in body_encode
    if line.endswith(CRLF):
TypeError: expected an object with the buffer interface

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m = MIMEText(b'abc', _charset='utf-8'</code></strong>)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m = MIMEText('abc', _charset='utf-8')</code></strong>             # bug: base64 uses bytes
Traceback (most recent call last):
  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...lines omitted...</span></em>
  File "C:\Python31\lib\email\base64mime.py", line 94, in body_encode
    enc = b2a_base64(s[i:i + max_unencoded]).decode("ascii")
TypeError: must be bytes or buffer, not str</pre>
<p>Moreover, the <code class="epub__literal">email</code>
            package is pickier about encoding name synonyms than Python and
            most other tools are: “latin-1” is detected as a quoted-printable
            MIME type, but “latin1” is unknown and so defaults to Base64 MIME.
            In fact, this is why Base64 was used for the “latin1” Unicode type
            earlier in this section—an encoding choice that is irrelevant to
            any recipient that understands the “latin1” synonym, including
            Python itself. Unfortunately, that means that we also need to pass
            in a different string type if we use a synonym the package doesn’t
            understand today:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e58010"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m = MIMEText('abc', _charset='latin-1')</code></strong>            # str for 'latin-1'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(m)</code></strong>
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain; charset="iso-8859-1"
Content-Transfer-Encoding: quoted-printable

abc
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m = MIMEText('abc', _charset='latin1')</code></strong>
Traceback (most recent call last):
  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...lines omitted...</span></em>
  File "C:\Python31\lib\email\base64mime.py", line 94, in body_encode
    enc = b2a_base64(s[i:i + max_unencoded]).decode("ascii")
TypeError: must be bytes or buffer, not str

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m = MIMEText(b'abc', _charset='latin1')</code></strong>            # bytes for 'latin1'!
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(m)</code></strong>
Content-Type: text/plain; charset="latin1"
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Transfer-Encoding: base64

YWJj</pre>
<p>There are ways to add aliases and new encoding types in the
            <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package, but they’re not
            supported out of the box. Programs that care about being robust
            would have to cross-check the user’s spelling, which may be valid
            for Python itself, against that expected by <code class="epub__literal">email</code>. This also holds true if your data
            is not ASCII in general—you’ll have to first decode to text in
            order to use the expected “latin-1” name because its
            quoted-printable MIME encoding expects <code class="epub__literal">str</code>, even though <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> are required if “latin1” <span>triggers</span> the default Base64
            MIME:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e58048"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m = MIMEText(b'A\xe4B', _charset='latin1')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(m)</code></strong>
Content-Type: text/plain; charset="latin1"
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Transfer-Encoding: base64

QeRC

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m = MIMEText(b'A\xe4B', _charset='latin-1')</code></strong>
Traceback (most recent call last):
  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...lines omitted...</span></em>
  File "C:\Python31\lib\email\quoprimime.py", line 176, in body_encode
    if line.endswith(CRLF):
TypeError: expected an object with the buffer interface

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m = MIMEText(b'A\xe4B'.decode('latin1'), _charset='latin-1')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(m)</code></strong>
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain; charset="iso-8859-1"
Content-Transfer-Encoding: quoted-printable

A=E4B</pre>
<p>In fact, the text message object doesn’t check to see that
            the data you’re MIME-<span>encoding</span> is valid per Unicode in
            general—we can send invalid UTF text but the receiver may have
            trouble decoding it:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e58075"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m = MIMEText(b'A\xe4B', _charset='utf-8'</code></strong>)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(m)</code></strong>
Content-Type: text/plain; charset="utf-8"
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Transfer-Encoding: base64

QeRC

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>b'A\xe4B'.decode('utf8')</code></strong>
UnicodeDecodeError: 'utf8' codec can't decode bytes in position 1-2: unexpected...

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import base64</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>base64.b64decode(b'QeRC')</code></strong>
b'A\xe4B'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>base64.b64decode(b'QeRC').decode('utf')</code></strong>
UnicodeDecodeError: 'utf8' codec can't decode bytes in position 1-2: unexpected...</pre>
<p>So what to do if we need to attach message text to composed
            messages if the text’s datatype requirement is indirectly dictated
            by its Unicode encoding name? The generic <code class="epub__literal">Message</code> superclass doesn’t help here
            directly if we specify an encoding, as it exhibits the same
            encoding-specific behavior:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e58101"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m = Message()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m.set_payload('spam', charset='us-ascii')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(m)</code></strong>
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain; charset="us-ascii"
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit

spam
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m = Message()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m.set_payload(b'spam', charset='us-ascii')</code></strong>
AttributeError: 'bytes' object has no attribute 'encode'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m.set_payload('spam', charset='utf-8')</code></strong>
TypeError: must be bytes or buffer, not str</pre>
<p>Although we could try to work around these issues by
            repeating much of the code that <code class="epub__literal">email</code> runs, the redundancy would make us
            hopelessly tied to its current implementation and dependent upon
            its future changes. The following, for example, parrots the steps
            that email runs internally to create a text message object for
            ASCII encoding text; unlike the <code class="epub__literal">MIMEText</code> class, this approach allows all
            data to be read from files as binary byte strings, even if it’s
            simple ASCII:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e58130"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m = Message()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m.add_header('Content-Type', 'text/plain')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m['MIME-Version'] = '1.0'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m.set_param('charset', 'us-ascii')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m.add_header('Content-Transfer-Encoding', '7bit')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>data = b'spam'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m.set_payload(data.decode('ascii'))</code></strong>           # data read as bytes here
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(m)</code></strong>
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain; charset="us-ascii"
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit

spam
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(MIMEText('spam', _charset='ascii'))</code></strong>     # same, but type-specific
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain; charset="us-ascii"
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit

spam</pre>
<p>To do the same for other kinds of text that require MIME
            encoding, just insert an extra encoding step; although we’re
            concerned with text parts here, a similar imitative approach could
            address the binary parts text generation bug we met
            earlier:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e58162"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m = Message()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m.add_header('Content-Type', 'text/plain')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m['MIME-Version'] = '1.0'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m.set_param('charset', 'utf-8')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m.add_header('Content-Transfer-Encoding', 'base64')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>data = b'spam'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from binascii import b2a_base64</code></strong>               # add MIME encode if needed
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>data = b2a_base64(data)</code></strong>                       # data read as bytes here too
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m.set_payload(data.decode('ascii'))</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(m)</code></strong>
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: text/plain; charset="utf-8"
Content-Transfer-Encoding: base64

c3BhbQ==

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(MIMEText(b'spam', _charset='utf-8'))</code></strong>    # same, but type-specific
Content-Type: text/plain; charset="utf-8"
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Transfer-Encoding: base64

c3BhbQ==</pre>
<p>This works, but besides the redundancy and dependency it
            creates, to use this approach broadly we’d also have to generalize
            to account for all the various kinds of Unicode encodings and MIME
            encodings possible, like the <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package already does internally.
            We might also have to support encoding name synonyms to be
            flexible, adding further redundancy. In other words, this requires
            additional work, and in the end, we’d still have to specialize our
            code for different Unicode types.</p>
<p>Any way we go, some dependence on the current implementation
            seems unavoidable today. It seems the best we can do here, apart
            from hoping for an improved <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package in a few years’ time, is
            to specialize text message construction calls by Unicode type, and
            assume both that encoding names match those expected by the
            package and that message data is valid for the Unicode type
            selected. Here is the sort of arguably magic code that the
            upcoming <code class="epub__literal">mailtools</code> package
            (again in Example 13-23)
            will apply to choose text types:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e58213"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from email.charset import Charset, BASE64, QP</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for e in ('us-ascii', 'latin-1', 'utf8', 'latin1', 'ascii'):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>cset = Charset(e)</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>benc = cset.body_encoding</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if benc in (None, QP):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(e, benc, 'text')</code></strong>              # read/fetch data as str
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>else:</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(e, benc, 'binary')</code></strong>            # read/fetch data as bytes
...
us-ascii None text
latin-1 1 text
utf8 2 binary
latin1 2 binary
ascii None text</pre>
<p>We’ll proceed this way in this book, with the major caveat
            that this is almost certainly likely to require changes in the
            future because of its strong coupling with the current email
            <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e58243"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e58245"></a>implementation.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note"><h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Late-breaking news</em></span>: Like the prior
              section, it now appears that this section’s bug will also be
              fixed in Python 3.2, making the workaround here unnecessary in
              this and later Python releases. The nature of the fix is
              unknown, though, and we still need the fix for the version of
              Python current when this chapter was written. As of just before
              publication, the alpha release of 3.2 is still somewhat type
              specific on this issue, but now accepts either <code class="epub__literal">str</code> or <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> for text that triggers Base64
              encodings, instead of just <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Summary: Solutions and workarounds"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="summary_colon_solutions_and_workarounds"></a>Summary: Solutions and workarounds</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package in
            Python 3.1 provides powerful tools for parsing and composing
            mails, and can be used as the basis for full-featured mail clients
            like those in this book with just a few workarounds. As you can
            see, though, it is less than fully functional today. Because of
            that, further specializing code to its current API is perhaps a
            temporary solution. Short of writing our own email parser and
            composer (not a practical option in a finitely-sized book!), some
            compromises are in order here. Moreover, the inherent complexity
            of Unicode support in <code class="epub__literal">email</code>
            places some limits on how much we can pursue this thread in this
            book.</p>
<p>In this edition, we will support Unicode encodings of text
            parts and headers in messages composed, and respect the Unicode
            encodings in text parts and mail headers of messages fetched. To
            make this work with the partially crippled <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package in <span>Python 3.1</span>, though, we’ll apply the
            following Unicode policies in various email clients in this
            book:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Use user preferences and defaults for the preparse
                decoding of full mail text fetched and encoding of text
                payloads sent.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Use header information, if available, to decode the
                <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> payloads returned by
                <code class="epub__literal">get_payload</code> when text parts
                must be treated as <code class="epub__literal">str</code>
                text, but use binary mode files to finesse the issue in other
                contexts.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Use formats prescribed by email standard to decode and
                encode message headers such as From and Subject if they are
                not simple text.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Apply the fix described to work around the message text
                generation issue for binary parts.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Special-case construction of text message objects
                according to Unicode types and <code class="epub__literal">email</code> behavior.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>These are not necessarily complete solutions. For example,
            some of this edition’s email clients allow for Unicode encodings
            for both text attachments and mail headers, but they do nothing
            about encoding the full text of messages sent beyond the policies
            inherited from <code class="epub__literal">smtplib</code> and
            implement policies that might be inconvenient in some use cases.
            But as we’ll see, despite their limitations, our email clients
            will still be able to handle complex email tasks and a very large
            set of emails.</p>
<p>Again, since this story is in flux in Python today, watch
            this book’s website for updates that may improve or be required of
            code that uses <code class="epub__literal">email</code> in the
            future. A future <code class="epub__literal">email</code> may
            handle Unicode encodings more accurately. Like Python 3.X, though,
            backward compatibility may be sacrificed in the process and
            require updates to this book’s code. For more on this issue, see
            the Web as well as up-to-date Python release notes.</p>
<p>Although this quick tour captures the basic flavor of the
            interface, we need to step up to larger examples to see more of
            the <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package’s power. The
            next section takes us on the first of those <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e58328"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e58330"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e58332"></a>steps.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
