<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>A Console-Based Email Client</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="A Console-Based Email Client"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="a_console-based_email_client"></a>A Console-Based Email Client</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Let’s put <a id="client13.10"></a><a id="email13.10"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e58350"></a><a id="py13.10"></a>together what we’ve learned about fetching, sending,
        parsing, and composing email in a simple but functional command-line
        console email tool. The script in Example 13-20 implements an
        interactive email session—users may type commands to read, send, and
        delete email messages. It uses <code class="epub__literal">poplib</code> and <code class="epub__literal">smtplib</code> to <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e58370"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e58375"></a>fetch and send, and uses the <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package directly to parse and
        compose.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id39"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 13-20. PP4E\Internet\Email\pymail.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">#!/usr/local/bin/python
"""
##########################################################################
pymail - a simple console email interface client in Python; uses Python
poplib module to view POP email messages, smtplib to send new mails, and
the email package to extract mail headers and payload and compose mails;
##########################################################################
"""

import poplib, smtplib, email.utils, mailconfig
from email.parser  import Parser
from email.message import Message
fetchEncoding = mailconfig.fetchEncoding

def decodeToUnicode(messageBytes, fetchEncoding=fetchEncoding):
    """
    4E, Py3.1: decode fetched bytes to str Unicode string for display or parsing;
    use global setting (or by platform default, hdrs inspection, intelligent guess);
    in Python 3.2/3.3, this step may not be required: if so, return message intact;
    """
    return [line.decode(fetchEncoding) for line in messageBytes]

def splitaddrs(field):
    """
    4E: split address list on commas, allowing for commas in name parts
    """
    pairs = email.utils.getaddresses([field])                 # [(name,addr)]
    return [email.utils.formataddr(pair) for pair in pairs]   # [name &lt;addr&gt;]

def inputmessage():
    import sys
    From = input('From? ').strip()
    To   = input('To?   ').strip()           # datetime hdr may be set auto
    To   = splitaddrs(To)                    # possible many, name+&lt;addr&gt; okay
    Subj = input('Subj? ').strip()           # don't split blindly on ',' or ';'
    print('Type message text, end with line="."')
    text = ''
    while True:
        line = sys.stdin.readline()
        if line == '.\n': break
        text += line
    return From, To, Subj, text

def sendmessage():
    From, To, Subj, text = inputmessage()
    msg = Message()
    msg['From']    = From
    msg['To']      = ', '.join(To)                     # join for hdr, not send
    msg['Subject'] = Subj
    msg['Date']    = email.utils.formatdate()          # curr datetime, rfc2822
    msg.set_payload(text)
    server = smtplib.SMTP(mailconfig.smtpservername)
    try:
        failed = server.sendmail(From, To, str(msg))   # may also raise exc
    except:
        print('Error - send failed')
    else:
        if failed: print('Failed:', failed)

def connect(servername, user, passwd):
    print('Connecting...')
    server = poplib.POP3(servername)
    server.user(user)                     # connect, log in to mail server
    server.pass_(passwd)                  # pass is a reserved word
    print(server.getwelcome())            # print returned greeting message
    return server

def loadmessages(servername, user, passwd, loadfrom=1):
    server = connect(servername, user, passwd)
    try:
        print(server.list())
        (msgCount, msgBytes) = server.stat()
        print('There are', msgCount, 'mail messages in', msgBytes, 'bytes')
        print('Retrieving...')
        msgList = []                                     # fetch mail now
        for i in range(loadfrom, msgCount+1):            # empty if low &gt;= high
            (hdr, message, octets) = server.retr(i)      # save text on list
            message = decodeToUnicode(message)           # 4E, Py3.1: bytes to str
            msgList.append('\n'.join(message))           # leave mail on server
    finally:
        server.quit()                                    # unlock the mail box
    assert len(msgList) == (msgCount - loadfrom) + 1     # msg nums start at 1
    return msgList

def deletemessages(servername, user, passwd, toDelete, verify=True):
    print('To be deleted:', toDelete)
    if verify and input('Delete?')[:1] not in ['y', 'Y']:
        print('Delete cancelled.')
    else:
        server = connect(servername, user, passwd)
        try:
            print('Deleting messages from server...')
            for msgnum in toDelete:                 # reconnect to delete mail
                server.dele(msgnum)                 # mbox locked until quit()
        finally:
            server.quit()

def showindex(msgList):
    count = 0                                       # show some mail headers
    for msgtext in msgList:
        msghdrs = Parser().parsestr(msgtext, headersonly=True)  # expects str in 3.1
        count += 1
        print('%d:\t%d bytes' % (count, len(msgtext)))
        for hdr in ('From', 'To', 'Date', 'Subject'):
            try:
                print('\t%-8s=&gt;%s' % (hdr, msghdrs[hdr]))
            except KeyError:
                print('\t%-8s=&gt;(unknown)' % hdr)
        if count % 5 == 0:
            input('[Press Enter key]')  # pause after each 5

def showmessage(i, msgList):
    if 1 &lt;= i &lt;= len(msgList):
       #print(msgList[i-1])             # old: prints entire mail--hdrs+text
        print('-' * 79)
        msg = Parser().parsestr(msgList[i-1])      # expects str in 3.1
        content = msg.get_payload()     # prints payload: string, or [Messages]
        if isinstance(content, str):    # keep just one end-line at end
            content = content.rstrip() + '\n'
        print(content)
        print('-' * 79)                 # to get text only, see email.parsers
    else:
        print('Bad message number')

def savemessage(i, mailfile, msgList):
    if 1 &lt;= i &lt;= len(msgList):
        savefile = open(mailfile, 'a', encoding=mailconfig.fetchEncoding)  # 4E
        savefile.write('\n' + msgList[i-1] + '-'*80 + '\n')
    else:
        print('Bad message number')

def msgnum(command):
    try:
        return int(command.split()[1])
    except:
        return −1   # assume this is bad

helptext = """
Available commands:
i     - index display
l n?  - list all messages (or just message n)
d n?  - mark all messages for deletion (or just message n)
s n?  - save all messages to a file (or just message n)
m     - compose and send a new mail message
q     - quit pymail
?     - display this help text
"""

def interact(msgList, mailfile):
    showindex(msgList)
    toDelete = []
    while True:
        try:
            command = input('[Pymail] Action? (i, l, d, s, m, q, ?) ')
        except EOFError:
            command = 'q'
        if not command: command = '*'

        # quit
        if command == 'q':
            break

        # index
        elif command[0] == 'i':
            showindex(msgList)

        # list
        elif command[0] == 'l':
            if len(command) == 1:
                for i in range(1, len(msgList)+1):
                    showmessage(i, msgList)
            else:
                showmessage(msgnum(command), msgList)

        # save
        elif command[0] == 's':
            if len(command) == 1:
                for i in range(1, len(msgList)+1):
                    savemessage(i, mailfile, msgList)
            else:
                savemessage(msgnum(command), mailfile, msgList)

        # delete
        elif command[0] == 'd':
            if len(command) == 1:                          # delete all later
                toDelete = list(range(1, len(msgList)+1))  # 3.x requires list
            else:
                delnum = msgnum(command)
                if (1 &lt;= delnum &lt;= len(msgList)) and (delnum not in toDelete):
                    toDelete.append(delnum)
                else:
                    print('Bad message number')

        # mail
        elif command[0] == 'm':                # send a new mail via SMTP
            sendmessage()
            #execfile('smtpmail.py', {})       # alt: run file in own namespace

        elif command[0] == '?':
            print(helptext)
        else:
            print('What? -- type "?" for commands help')
    return toDelete

if __name__ == '__main__':
    import getpass, mailconfig
    mailserver = mailconfig.popservername        # ex: 'pop.rmi.net'
    mailuser   = mailconfig.popusername          # ex: 'lutz'
    mailfile   = mailconfig.savemailfile         # ex:  r'c:\stuff\savemail'
    mailpswd   = getpass.getpass('Password for %s?' % mailserver)
    print('[Pymail email client]')
    msgList    = loadmessages(mailserver, mailuser, mailpswd)     # load all
    toDelete   = interact(msgList, mailfile)
    if toDelete: deletemessages(mailserver, mailuser, mailpswd, toDelete)
    print('Bye.')</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>There isn’t much new here—just a combination of user-interface
        logic and tools we’ve already met, plus a handful of new
        techniques:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Loads</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>This client loads all email from the server into an
              in-memory Python list only once, on startup; you must exit and
              restart to reload newly arrived email.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Saves</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>On demand, <code class="epub__literal">pymail</code> saves
              the raw text of a selected message into a local file, whose name
              you place in the <code class="epub__literal">mailconfig</code>
              module of Example 13-17.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Deletions</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>We finally support on-request deletion of mail from the
              server here: in <code class="epub__literal">pymail</code>, mails
              are selected for deletion by number, but are still only
              physically removed from your server on exit, and then only if
              you verify the operation. By deleting only on exit, we avoid
              changing mail message numbers during a session—under POP,
              deleting a mail not at the end of the list decrements the number
              assigned to all mails following the one deleted. Since mail is
              cached in memory by <code class="epub__literal">pymail</code>,
              future operations on the numbered messages in memory can be
              applied to the wrong mail if deletions were done
              immediately.<sup>[53]</sup></p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Parsing and composing messages</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p><code class="epub__literal">pymail</code> now displays
              just the payload of a message on listing commands, not the
              entire raw text, and the mail index listing only displays
              selected headers parsed out of each message. Python’s <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package is used to extract
              headers and content from a message, as shown in the prior
              section. Similarly, we use <code class="epub__literal">email</code> to compose a message and ask for
              its string to ship as a mail.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>By now, I expect that you know enough to read this script for a
        deeper look, so instead of saying more about its design here, let’s
        jump into an interactive <code class="epub__literal">pymail</code>
        session to see how it works.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Running the pymail Console Client"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="running_the_pymail_console_client"></a>Running the pymail Console Client</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Let’s start up <code class="epub__literal">pymail</code> to
          <a id="pro13.10.1"></a>read and delete email at our mail server and send new
          messages. <code class="epub__literal">pymail</code> runs on any
          machine with Python and sockets, fetches mail from any email server
          with a POP interface on which you have an account, and sends mail
          via the SMTP server you’ve named in the <code class="epub__literal">mailconfig</code> module we wrote earlier (Example 13-17).</p>
<p>Here it is in action running on my Windows laptop machine; its
          operation is identical on other machines thanks to the portability
          of both Python and its standard library. First, we start the script,
          supply a POP password (remember, SMTP servers usually require no
          password), and wait for the <code class="epub__literal">pymail</code> email list index to appear; as is,
          this version loads the full text of all mails in the inbox on
          startup:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e58485"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Email&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pymail.py</code></strong>
Password for pop.secureserver.net?
[Pymail email client]
Connecting...
b'+OK &lt;8927.1273263898@p3pop01-10.prod.phx3.gdg&gt;'
(b'+OK ', [b'1 1860', b'2 1408', b'3 1049', b'4 1009', b'5 1038', b'6 957'], 47)
There are 6 mail messages in 7321 bytes
Retrieving...
1:      1861 bytes
        From    =&gt;lutz@rmi.net
        To      =&gt;pp4e@learning-python.com
        Date    =&gt;Wed, 5 May 2010 11:29:36 −0400 (EDT)
        Subject =&gt;I'm a Lumberjack, and I'm Okay
2:      1409 bytes
        From    =&gt;lutz@learning-python.com
        To      =&gt;PP4E@learning-python.com
        Date    =&gt;Wed, 05 May 2010 08:33:47 −0700
        Subject =&gt;testing
3:      1050 bytes
        From    =&gt;Eric.the.Half.a.Bee@yahoo.com
        To      =&gt;PP4E@learning-python.com
        Date    =&gt;Thu, 06 May 2010 14:11:07 −0000
        Subject =&gt;A B C D E F G
4:      1010 bytes
        From    =&gt;PP4E@learning-python.com
        To      =&gt;PP4E@learning-python.com
        Date    =&gt;Thu, 06 May 2010 14:16:31 −0000
        Subject =&gt;testing smtpmail
5:      1039 bytes
        From    =&gt;Eric.the.Half.a.Bee@aol.com
        To      =&gt;nobody.in.particular@marketing.com
        Date    =&gt;Thu, 06 May 2010 14:32:32 −0000
        Subject =&gt;a b c d e f g
[Press Enter key]
6:      958 bytes
        From    =&gt;PP4E@learning-python.com
        To      =&gt;maillist
        Date    =&gt;Thu, 06 May 2010 10:58:40 −0400
        Subject =&gt;test interactive smtplib
[Pymail] Action? (i, l, d, s, m, q, ?) <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>l 6</code></strong>
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
testing 1 2 3...

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[Pymail] Action? (i, l, d, s, m, q, ?) <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>l 3</code></strong>
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Fiddle de dum, Fiddle de dee,
Eric the half a bee.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[Pymail] Action? (i, l, d, s, m, q, ?)</pre>
<p>Once <code class="epub__literal">pymail</code> downloads your
          email to a Python list on the local client machine, you type command
          letters to process it. The <code class="epub__literal">l</code>
          command lists (prints) the contents of a given mail number; here, we
          just used it to list two emails we sent in the preceding section,
          with the <code class="epub__literal">smtpmail</code> script, and
          interactively.</p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">pymail</code> also lets us get
          command help, delete messages (deletions actually occur at the
          server on exit from the program), and save messages away in a local
          text file whose name is listed in the <code class="epub__literal">mailconfig</code> module we saw earlier:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e58514"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">[Pymail] Action? (i, l, d, s, m, q, ?) <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>?</code></strong>

Available commands:
i     - index display
l n?  - list all messages (or just message n)
d n?  - mark all messages for deletion (or just message n)
s n?  - save all messages to a file (or just message n)
m     - compose and send a new mail message
q     - quit pymail
?     - display this help text

[Pymail] Action? (i, l, d, s, m, q, ?) <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>s 4</code></strong>
[Pymail] Action? (i, l, d, s, m, q, ?) <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>d 4</code></strong></pre>
<p>Now, let’s pick the <code class="epub__literal">m</code> mail
          compose option—<code class="epub__literal">pymail</code> inputs the
          mail parts, builds mail text with <code class="epub__literal">email</code>, and ships it off with <code class="epub__literal">smtplib</code>. You can separate recipients with
          a comma, and use either simple “addr” or full “name &lt;addr&gt;”
          address pairs if desired. Because the mail is sent by SMTP, you can
          use arbitrary From addresses here; but again, you generally
          shouldn’t do that (unless, of course, you’re trying to come up with
          interesting examples for a book):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e58538"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">[Pymail] Action? (i, l, d, s, m, q, ?) <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m</code></strong>
From? <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Cardinal@hotmail.com</code></strong>
To?   <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>PP4E@learning-python.com</code></strong>
Subj? <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Among our weapons are these</code></strong>
Type message text, end with line="."
<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Nobody Expects the Spanish Inquisition!</code></strong>
<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>.</code></strong>
[Pymail] Action? (i, l, d, s, m, q, ?) <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>q</code></strong>
To be deleted: [4]
Delete?<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y</code></strong>
Connecting...
b'+OK &lt;16872.1273264370@p3pop01-17.prod.phx3.secureserver.net&gt;'
Deleting messages from server...
Bye.</pre>
<p>As mentioned, deletions really happen only on exit. When we
          quit <code class="epub__literal">pymail</code> with the <code class="epub__literal">q</code> command, it tells us which messages are
          queued for deletion, and verifies the request. Once verified,
          <code class="epub__literal">pymail</code> finally contacts the mail
          server again and issues POP calls to delete the selected mail
          messages. Because deletions change message numbers in the server’s
          inbox, postponing deletion until exit simplifies the handling of
          already loaded email (we’ll improve on this in the PyMailGUI client
          of the next chapter).</p>
<p>Because <code class="epub__literal">pymail</code> downloads
          mail from your server into a local Python list only once at startup,
          though, we need to start <code class="epub__literal">pymail</code>
          again to refetch mail from the server if we want to see the result
          of the mail we sent and the deletion we made. Here, our new mail
          shows up at the end as new number 6, and the original mail assigned
          number 4 in the prior session is gone:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e58585"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Email&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pymail.py</code></strong>
Password for pop.secureserver.net?
[Pymail email client]
Connecting...
b'+OK &lt;11563.1273264637@p3pop01-26.prod.phx3.secureserver.net&gt;'
(b'+OK ', [b'1 1860', b'2 1408', b'3 1049', b'4 1038', b'5 957', b'6 1037'], 47)
There are 6 mail messages in 7349 bytes
Retrieving...
1:      1861 bytes
        From    =&gt;lutz@rmi.net
        To      =&gt;pp4e@learning-python.com
        Date    =&gt;Wed, 5 May 2010 11:29:36 −0400 (EDT)
        Subject =&gt;I'm a Lumberjack, and I'm Okay
2:      1409 bytes
        From    =&gt;lutz@learning-python.com
        To      =&gt;PP4E@learning-python.com
        Date    =&gt;Wed, 05 May 2010 08:33:47 −0700
        Subject =&gt;testing
3:      1050 bytes
        From    =&gt;Eric.the.Half.a.Bee@yahoo.com
        To      =&gt;PP4E@learning-python.com
        Date    =&gt;Thu, 06 May 2010 14:11:07 −0000
        Subject =&gt;A B C D E F G
4:      1039 bytes
        From    =&gt;Eric.the.Half.a.Bee@aol.com
        To      =&gt;nobody.in.particular@marketing.com
        Date    =&gt;Thu, 06 May 2010 14:32:32 −0000
        Subject =&gt;a b c d e f g
5:      958 bytes
        From    =&gt;PP4E@learning-python.com
        To      =&gt;maillist
        Date    =&gt;Thu, 06 May 2010 10:58:40 −0400
        Subject =&gt;test interactive smtplib
[Press Enter key]
6:      1038 bytes
        From    =&gt;Cardinal@hotmail.com
        To      =&gt;PP4E@learning-python.com
        Date    =&gt;Fri, 07 May 2010 20:32:38 −0000
        Subject =&gt;Among our weapons are these
[Pymail] Action? (i, l, d, s, m, q, ?) <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>l 6</code></strong>
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Nobody Expects the Spanish Inquisition!

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[Pymail] Action? (i, l, d, s, m, q, ?) <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>q</code></strong>
Bye.</pre>
<p>Though not shown in this session, you can also send to
          multiple recipients, and include full name and address pairs in your
          email addresses. This works just because the script employs <code class="epub__literal">email</code> utilities described earlier to split
          up addresses and fully parse to allow commas as both separators and
          name characters. The following, for example, would send to two and
          three recipients, respectively, using mostly full address
          formats:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e58601"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">[Pymail] Action? (i, l, d, s, m, q, ?) <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m</code></strong>
From? <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>"moi 1" &lt;pp4e@learning-python.com&gt;</code></strong>
To?   <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>"pp 4e" &lt;pp4e@learning-python.com&gt;, "lu,tz" &lt;lutz@learning-python.com&gt;</code></strong>

[Pymail] Action? (i, l, d, s, m, q, ?) <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m</code></strong>
From? <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>The Book &lt;pp4e@learning-python.com&gt;</code></strong>
To?   <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>"pp 4e" &lt;pp4e@learning-python.com&gt;, "lu,tz" &lt;lutz@learning-python.com&gt;,</code></strong>
<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>lutz@rmi.net</code></strong></pre>
<p>Finally, if you are running this live, you will also find the
          mail save file on your machine, containing the one message we asked
          to be saved in the prior session; it’s simply the raw text of saved
          emails, with separator lines. This is both human and <span>machine</span>-<span>readable—</span>in principle, another script
          could load saved mail from this file into a Python list by calling
          the string object’s <code class="epub__literal">split</code> method
          on the file’s text with the separator line as a delimiter. As shown
          in this book, it shows up in file <em class="epub__filename">C:\temp\savemail.txt</em>, but you can
          configure this as you like in the <code class="epub__literal">mailconfig</code> <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e58642"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e58644"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e58646"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e58648"></a>module.</p>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[53] </sup>There will be more on POP message numbers when we
                  study <code class="epub__literal">mailtools</code> later in
                  this chapter. Interestingly, the list of message numbers to
                  be deleted need not be sorted; they remain valid for the
                  duration of the delete connection, so deletions earlier in
                  the list don’t change numbers of messages later in the list
                  while you are still connected to the POP server. We’ll also
                  see that some subtle issues may arise if mails in the server
                  inbox are deleted without <code class="epub__literal">pymail</code>’s knowledge (e.g., by your
                  ISP or another email client); although very rare, suffice it
                  to say for now that deletions in this script are not
                  guaranteed to be accurate.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
