<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>The mailtools Utility Package</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="The mailtools Utility Package"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="the_mailtools_utility_package"></a>The mailtools Utility Package</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">email</code> <a id="client13.11"></a><a id="email13.11"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e58670"></a>package used by the <code class="epub__literal">pymail</code> example of the prior section is a
        collection of powerful tools—in fact, perhaps too powerful to remember
        completely. At the minimum, some reusable boilerplate code for common
        use cases can help insulate you from some of its details; by isolating
        module usage, such code can also ease the migration to possible future
        <code class="epub__literal">email</code> changes. To simplify email
        interfacing for more complex mail clients, and to further demonstrate
        the use of standard library email tools, I developed the custom
        utility modules listed in this section—a package called <code class="epub__literal">mailtools</code>.</p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">mailtools</code> is a Python modules
        package: a directory of code, with one module per tool class, and an
        initialization module run when the directory is first imported. This
        package’s modules are essentially just a wrapper layer above the
        standard library’s <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package,
        as well as its <code class="epub__literal">poplib</code> and <code class="epub__literal">smtplib</code> modules. They make some assumptions
        about the way <code class="epub__literal">email</code> is to be used,
        but they are reasonable and allow us to forget some of the underlying
        complexity of the standard library tools employed.</p>
<p>In a nutshell, the <code class="epub__literal">mailtools</code>
        package provides three classes—to fetch, send, and parse email
        messages. These classes can be used as
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>superclasses</em></span> in order to mix in their methods to
        an application-specific class, or as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>standalone</em></span>
        or <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>embedded</em></span> objects that export their methods for
        direct calls. We’ll see these classes deployed both ways in this
        text.</p>
<p>As a simple example of this package’s tools in action, its
        <code class="epub__literal">selftest.py</code> <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e58721"></a>module serves as a self-test script. When run, it sends
        a message from you, to you, which includes the
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>selftest.py</em></span> file as an attachment. It also
        fetches and displays some mail headers and parsed and unparsed
        content. These interfaces, along with some user-interface magic, will
        lead us to full-blown email clients and websites in later
        chapters.</p>
<p>Two design notes worth mentioning up front: First, none of the
        code in this package knows anything about the user interface it will
        be used in (console, GUI, web, or other) or does anything about things
        like threads; it is just a toolkit. As we’ll see, its clients are
        responsible for deciding how it will be deployed. By focusing on just
        email processing here, we simplify the code, as well as the programs
        that will use it.</p>
<p>Second, each of the main modules in this package illustrate
        Unicode issues that confront Python 3.X code, especially when using
        the 3.1 Python <code class="epub__literal">email</code>
        package:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>sender</em></span> must address encodings for
            the main message text, attachment input files, saved-mail output
            files, and message headers.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>fetcher</em></span> must resolve full mail text
            encodings when new mails are fetched.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>parser</em></span> must deal with encodings in
            text part payloads of parsed messages, as well as those in message
            headers.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>In addition, the sender must provide workarounds for the binary
        parts generation and text part creation issues in <code class="epub__literal">email</code> described earlier in this chapter.
        Since these highlight Unicode factors in general, and might not be
        solved as broadly as they might be due to limitations of the current
        Python <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package, I’ll
        elaborate on each of these choices along the way.</p>
<p>The next few sections list <code class="epub__literal">mailtools</code> source code. Together, its files
        consist of roughly 1,050 lines of code, including whitespace and
        comments. We won’t cover all of this package’s code in depth—study its
        listings for more details, and see its self-test module for a usage
        example. Also, for more context and examples, watch for the three
        clients that will use this package—the modified <code class="epub__literal">pymail2.py</code> following this listing, the
        <span>PyMailGUI</span> client in Chapter 14, and the PyMailCGI server in Chapter 16. By sharing and reusing this module,
        all three systems inherit all its utility, as well as any future
        <span>enhancements</span>.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Initialization File"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="initialization_file"></a>Initialization File</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The module <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e58788"></a>in Example 13-21 implements the
          initialization logic of the <code class="epub__literal">mailtools</code> package; as usual, its code is
          run automatically the first time a script imports through the
          package’s directory. Notice how this file collects the contents of
          all the nested modules into the directory’s namespace with <code class="epub__literal">from *</code> statements—because <code class="epub__literal">mailtools</code> began life as a single
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>.py</em></span> file, this provides backward compatibility
          for existing clients. We also must use package-relative import
          syntax here (<code class="epub__literal">from .module</code>),
          because Python 3.X no longer includes the package’s own directory on
          the module import search path (only the package’s container is on
          the path). Since this is the root module, global comments appear
          here as well.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id40"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 13-21. PP4E\Internet\Email\mailtools\__init__.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
##################################################################################
mailtools package: interface to mail server transfers, used by pymail2, PyMailGUI,
and PyMailCGI;  does loads, sends, parsing, composing, and deleting, with part
attachments, encodings (of both the email and Unicdode kind), etc.;  the parser,
fetcher, and sender classes here are designed to be mixed-in to subclasses which
use their methods, or used as embedded or standalone objects;

this package also includes convenience subclasses for silent mode, and more;
loads all mail text if pop server doesn't do top;  doesn't handle threads or UI
here, and allows askPassword to differ per subclass;  progress callback funcs get
status;  all calls raise exceptions on error--client must handle in GUI/other;
this changed from file to package: nested modules imported here for bw compat;

4E: need to use package-relative import syntax throughout, because in Py 3.X
package dir in no longer on module import search path if package is imported
elsewhere (from another directory which uses this package);  also performs
Unicode decoding on mail text when fetched (see mailFetcher), as well as for
some text part payloads which might have been email-encoded (see mailParser);

TBD: in saveparts, should file be opened in text mode for text/ contypes?
TBD: in walkNamedParts, should we skip oddballs like message/delivery-status?
TBD: Unicode support has not been tested exhaustively: see Chapter 13 for more
on the Py3.1 email package and its limitations, and the policies used here;
##################################################################################
"""

# collect contents of all modules here, when package dir imported directly
from .mailFetcher import *
from .mailSender  import *                 # 4E: package-relative
from .mailParser  import *

# export nested modules here, when from mailtools import *
__all__ = 'mailFetcher', 'mailSender', 'mailParser'

# self-test code is in selftest.py to allow mailconfig's path
# to be set before running thr nested module imports above</pre>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="MailTool Class"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="mailtool_class"></a>MailTool Class</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Example 13-22
<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e58825"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e58830"></a>contains common superclasses for the other classes in
          the package. This is in part meant for future expansion. At present,
          these are used only to enable or disable trace message output (some
          clients, such as web-based programs, may not want text to be printed
          to the output stream). Subclasses mix in the silent variant to turn
          off output.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id41"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 13-22. PP4E\Internet\Email\mailtools\mailTool.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
###############################################################################
common superclasses: used to turn trace massages on/off
###############################################################################
"""

class MailTool:                    # superclass for all mail tools
    def trace(self, message):      # redef me to disable or log to file
        print(message)

class SilentMailTool:              # to mixin instead of subclassing
    def trace(self, message):
        pass</pre>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="MailSender Class"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="mailsender_class"></a>MailSender Class</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The class used to <a id="mailt13.11.3"></a><a id="mails13.11.3"></a>compose and send messages is coded in Example 13-23. This module
          provides a convenient interface that combines standard library tools
          we’ve already met in this chapter—the <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package to compose messages with
          attachments and encodings, and the <code class="epub__literal">smtplib</code> module to send the resulting email
          text. Attachments are passed in as a list of filenames—MIME types
          and any required encodings are determined automatically with the
          module <code class="epub__literal">mimetypes</code>. Moreover, date
          and time strings are automated with an <code class="epub__literal">email.utils</code> call, and non-ASCII headers
          are encoded per email, MIME, and Unicode standards. Study this
          file’s code and comments for more on its operation.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Unicode issues for attachments, save files, and headers"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="unicode_issues_for_attachments_comma_sav"></a>Unicode issues for attachments, save files, and
            headers</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>This is also <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e58874"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e58879"></a>where we open and add attachment files, generate
            message text, and save sent messages to a local file. Most
            attachment files are opened in binary mode, but as we’ve seen,
            some text attachments must be opened in text mode because the
            current <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package requires
            them to be <code class="epub__literal">str</code> strings when
            message objects are created. As we also saw earlier, the <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package requires attachments to be
            <code class="epub__literal">str</code> text when mail text is
            later generated, possibly as the result of MIME encoding.</p>
<p>To satisfy these constraints with the Python 3.1 <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package, we must apply the two
            fixes described earlier— part file <code class="epub__literal">open</code> calls select between text or binary
            mode (and thus read <code class="epub__literal">str</code> or
            <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>) based upon the way
            <code class="epub__literal">email</code> will process the data,
            and MIME encoding calls for binary data are augmented to decode
            the result to ASCII text. The latter of these also splits the
            Base64 text into lines here for binary parts (unlike <code class="epub__literal">email</code>), because it is otherwise sent as
            one long line, which may work in some contexts, but causes
            problems in some text editors if the raw text is viewed.</p>
<p>Beyond these fixes, clients may optionally provide the names
            of the Unicode encoding scheme associated with the main text part
            and each text attachment part. In Chapter 14’s PyMailGUI, this is controlled
            in the <code class="epub__literal">mailconfig</code> user settings
            module, with UTF-8 used as a fallback default whenever user
            settings fail to encode a text part. We could in principle also
            catch part file decoding errors and return an error indicator
            string (as we do for received mails in the mail fetcher ahead),
            but sending an invalid attachment is much more grievous than
            displaying one. Instead, the send request fails entirely on
            errors.</p>
<p>Finally, there is also new support for encoding non-ASCII
            headers (both full headers and names of email addresses) per a
            client-selectable encoding that defaults to UTF-8, and the sent
            message save file is opened in the same <code class="epub__literal">mailconfig</code> Unicode encoding mode used to
            decode messages when they are fetched.</p>
<p>The latter policy for sent mail saves is used because the
            sent file may be opened to fetch full mail text in this encoding
            later by clients which apply this encoding scheme. This is
            intended to mirror the way that clients such as PyMailGUI save
            full message text in local files to be opened and parsed later. It
            might fail if the mail fetcher resorted to guessing a different
            and incompatible encoding, and it assumes that no message gives
            rise to incompatibly encoded data in the file across multiple
            sessions. We could instead keep one save file per encoding, but
            encodings for full message text probably will not vary; ASCII was
            the original standard for full mail text, so 7- or 8-bit text is
            likely.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id42"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 13-23. PP4E\Internet\Email\mailtools\mailSender.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
###############################################################################
send messages, add attachments (see __init__ for docs, test)
###############################################################################
"""

import mailconfig                                      # client's mailconfig
import smtplib, os, mimetypes                          # mime: name to type
import email.utils, email.encoders                     # date string, base64
from .mailTool import MailTool, SilentMailTool         # 4E: package-relative

from email.message          import Message             # general message, obj-&gt;text
from email.mime.multipart   import MIMEMultipart       # type-specific messages
from email.mime.audio       import MIMEAudio           # format/encode attachments
from email.mime.image       import MIMEImage
from email.mime.text        import MIMEText
from email.mime.base        import MIMEBase
from email.mime.application import MIMEApplication     # 4E: use new app class


def fix_encode_base64(msgobj):
    """
    4E: workaround for a genuine bug in Python 3.1 email package that prevents
    mail text generation for binary parts encoded with base64 or other email
    encodings;  the normal email.encoder run by the constructor leaves payload
    as bytes, even though it's encoded to base64 text form;  this breaks email
    text generation which assumes this is text and requires it to be str;  net
    effect is that only simple text part emails can be composed in Py 3.1 email
    package as is - any MIME-encoded binary part cause mail text generation to
    fail;  this bug seems likely to go away in a future Python and email package,
    in which case this should become a no-op;  see Chapter 13 for more details;
    """

    linelen = 76  # per MIME standards
    from email.encoders import encode_base64

    encode_base64(msgobj)                # what email does normally: leaves bytes
    text = msgobj.get_payload()          # bytes fails in email pkg on text gen
    if isinstance(text, bytes):          # payload is bytes in 3.1, str in 3.2 alpha
        text = text.decode('ascii')      # decode to unicode str so text gen works

    lines = []                           # split into lines, else 1 massive line
    text  = text.replace('\n', '')       # no \n present in 3.1, but futureproof me!
    while text:
        line, text = text[:linelen], text[linelen:]
        lines.append(line)
    msgobj.set_payload('\n'.join(lines))


def fix_text_required(encodingname):
    """
    4E: workaround for str/bytes combination errors in email package;  MIMEText
    requires different types for different Unicode encodings in Python 3.1, due
    to the different ways it MIME-encodes some types of text;  see Chapter 13;
    the only other alternative is using generic Message and repeating much code;
    """
    from email.charset import Charset, BASE64, QP

    charset = Charset(encodingname)   # how email knows what to do for encoding
    bodyenc = charset.body_encoding   # utf8, others require bytes input data
    return bodyenc in (None, QP)      # ascii, latin1, others require str


class MailSender(MailTool):
    """
    send mail: format a message, interface with an SMTP server;
    works on any machine with Python+Inet, doesn't use cmdline mail;
    a nonauthenticating client: see MailSenderAuth if login required;
    4E: tracesize is num chars of msg text traced: 0=none, big=all;
    4E: supports Unicode encodings for main text and text parts;
    4E: supports header encoding, both full headers and email names;
    """
    def __init__(self, smtpserver=None, tracesize=256):
        self.smtpServerName = smtpserver or mailconfig.smtpservername
        self.tracesize = tracesize

    def sendMessage(self, From, To, Subj, extrahdrs, bodytext, attaches,
                                      saveMailSeparator=(('=' * 80) + 'PY\n'),
                                      bodytextEncoding='us-ascii',
                                      attachesEncodings=None):
        """
        format and send mail: blocks caller, thread me in a GUI;
        bodytext is main text part, attaches is list of filenames,
        extrahdrs is list of (name, value) tuples to be added;
        raises uncaught exception if send fails for any reason;
        saves sent message text in a local file if successful;

        assumes that To, Cc, Bcc hdr values are lists of 1 or more already
        decoded addresses (possibly in full name+&lt;addr&gt; format); client
        must parse to split these on delimiters, or use multiline input;
        note that SMTP allows full name+&lt;addr&gt; format in recipients;
        4E: Bcc addrs now used for send/envelope, but header is dropped;
        4E: duplicate recipients removed, else will get &gt;1 copies of mail;
        caveat: no support for multipart/alternative mails, just /mixed;
        """

        # 4E: assume main body text is already in desired encoding;
        # clients can decode to user pick, default, or utf8 fallback;
        # either way, email needs either str xor bytes specifically;

        if fix_text_required(bodytextEncoding):
            if not isinstance(bodytext, str):
                bodytext = bodytext.decode(bodytextEncoding)
        else:
            if not isinstance(bodytext, bytes):
                bodytext = bodytext.encode(bodytextEncoding)

        # make message root
        if not attaches:
            msg = Message()
            msg.set_payload(bodytext, charset=bodytextEncoding)
        else:
            msg = MIMEMultipart()
            self.addAttachments(msg, bodytext, attaches,
                                     bodytextEncoding, attachesEncodings)

        # 4E: non-ASCII hdrs encoded on sends; encode just name in address,
        # else smtp may drop the message completely; encodes all envelope
        # To names (but not addr) also, and assumes servers will allow;
        # msg.as_string retains any line breaks added by encoding headers;

        hdrenc = mailconfig.headersEncodeTo or 'utf-8'        # default=utf8
        Subj = self.encodeHeader(Subj, hdrenc)                # full header
        From = self.encodeAddrHeader(From, hdrenc)            # email names
        To   = [self.encodeAddrHeader(T, hdrenc) for T in To] # each recip
        Tos  = ', '.join(To)                                  # hdr+envelope

        # add headers to root
        msg['From']    = From
        msg['To']      = Tos                        # poss many: addr list
        msg['Subject'] = Subj                       # servers reject ';' sept
        msg['Date']    = email.utils.formatdate()   # curr datetime, rfc2822 utc
        recip = To
        for name, value in extrahdrs:               # Cc, Bcc, X-Mailer, etc.
            if value:
                if name.lower() not in ['cc', 'bcc']:
                    value = self.encodeHeader(value, hdrenc)
                    msg[name] = value
                else:
                    value = [self.encodeAddrHeader(V, hdrenc) for V in value]
                    recip += value                     # some servers reject ['']
                    if name.lower() != 'bcc':          # 4E: bcc gets mail, no hdr
                        msg[name] = ', '.join(value)   # add commas between cc

        recip = list(set(recip))                       # 4E: remove duplicates
        fullText = msg.as_string()                     # generate formatted msg

        # sendmail call raises except if all Tos failed,
        # or returns failed Tos dict for any that failed

        self.trace('Sending to...' + str(recip))
        self.trace(fullText[:self.tracesize])                  # SMTP calls connect
        server = smtplib.SMTP(self.smtpServerName, timeout=15) # this may fail too
        self.getPassword()                                     # if srvr requires
        self.authenticateServer(server)                        # login in subclass
        try:
            failed = server.sendmail(From, recip, fullText)    # except or dict
        except:
            server.close()                                     # 4E: quit may hang!
            raise                                              # reraise except
        else:
            server.quit()                                      # connect + send OK
        self.saveSentMessage(fullText, saveMailSeparator)      # 4E: do this first
        if failed:
            class SomeAddrsFailed(Exception): pass
            raise SomeAddrsFailed('Failed addrs:%s\n' % failed)
        self.trace('Send exit')

    def addAttachments(self, mainmsg, bodytext, attaches,
                                      bodytextEncoding, attachesEncodings):
        """
        format a multipart message with attachments;
        use Unicode encodings for text parts if passed;
        """
        # add main text/plain part
        msg = MIMEText(bodytext, _charset=bodytextEncoding)
        mainmsg.attach(msg)

        # add attachment parts
        encodings = attachesEncodings or (['us-ascii'] * len(attaches))
        for (filename, fileencode) in zip(attaches, encodings):
            # filename may be absolute or relative
            if not os.path.isfile(filename):             # skip dirs, etc.
                continue

            # guess content type from file extension, ignore encoding
            contype, encoding = mimetypes.guess_type(filename)
            if contype is None or encoding is not None:  # no guess, compressed?
                contype = 'application/octet-stream'     # use generic default
            self.trace('Adding ' + contype)

            # build sub-Message of appropriate kind
            maintype, subtype = contype.split('/', 1)
            if maintype == 'text':                       # 4E: text needs encoding
                if fix_text_required(fileencode):        # requires str or bytes
                    data = open(filename, 'r', encoding=fileencode)
                else:
                    data = open(filename, 'rb')
                msg = MIMEText(data.read(), _subtype=subtype, _charset=fileencode)
                data.close()

            elif maintype == 'image':
                data = open(filename, 'rb')              # 4E: use fix for binaries
                msg  = MIMEImage(
                       data.read(), _subtype=subtype, _encoder=fix_encode_base64)
                data.close()

            elif maintype == 'audio':
                data = open(filename, 'rb')
                msg  = MIMEAudio(
                       data.read(), _subtype=subtype, _encoder=fix_encode_base64)
                data.close()

            elif maintype == 'application':              # new  in 4E
                data = open(filename, 'rb')
                msg  = MIMEApplication(
                       data.read(), _subtype=subtype, _encoder=fix_encode_base64)
                data.close()

            else:
                data = open(filename, 'rb')              # application/* could
                msg  = MIMEBase(maintype, subtype)       # use this code too
                msg.set_payload(data.read())
                data.close()                             # make generic type
                fix_encode_base64(msg)                   # was broken here too!
               #email.encoders.encode_base64(msg)        # encode using base64

            # set filename (ascii or utf8/mime encoded) and attach to container
            basename = self.encodeHeader(os.path.basename(filename)) # oct 2011
            msg.add_header('Content-Disposition',
                           'attachment', filename=basename)
            mainmsg.attach(msg)

        # text outside mime structure, seen by non-MIME mail readers
        mainmsg.preamble = 'A multi-part MIME format message.\n'
        mainmsg.epilogue = ''  # make sure message ends with a newline

    def saveSentMessage(self, fullText, saveMailSeparator):
        """
        append sent message to local file if send worked for any;
        client: pass separator used for your application, splits;
        caveat: user may change the file at same time (unlikely);
        """
        try:
            sentfile = open(mailconfig.sentmailfile, 'a',
                                  encoding=mailconfig.fetchEncoding)    # 4E
            if fullText[-1] != '\n': fullText += '\n'
            sentfile.write(saveMailSeparator)
            sentfile.write(fullText)
            sentfile.close()
        except:
            self.trace('Could not save sent message')    # not a show-stopper

    def encodeHeader(self, headertext, unicodeencoding='utf-8'):
        """
        4E: encode composed non-ascii message headers content per both email
        and Unicode standards, according to an optional user setting or UTF-8;
        header.encode adds line breaks in header string automatically if needed;
        """
        try:
            headertext.encode('ascii')
        except:
            try:
                hdrobj = email.header.make_header([(headertext, unicodeencoding)])
                headertext = hdrobj.encode()
            except:
                pass         # auto splits into multiple cont lines if needed
        return headertext    # smtplib may fail if it won't encode to ascii

    def encodeAddrHeader(self, headertext, unicodeencoding='utf-8'):
        """
        4E: try to encode non-ASCII names in email addresess per email, MIME,
        and Unicode standards; if this fails drop name and use just addr part;
        if cannot even get addresses, try to decode as a whole, else smtplib
        may run into errors when it tries to encode the entire mail as ASCII;
        utf-8 default should work for most, as it formats code points broadly;

        inserts newlines if too long or hdr.encode split names to multiple lines,
        but this may not catch some lines longer than the cutoff (improve me);
        as used, Message.as_string formatter won't try to break lines further;
        see also decodeAddrHeader in mailParser module for the inverse of this;
        """
        try:
            pairs = email.utils.getaddresses([headertext])   # split addrs + parts
            encoded = []
            for name, addr in pairs:
                try:
                    name.encode('ascii')         # use as is if okay as ascii
                except UnicodeError:             # else try to encode name part
                    try:
                        uni  = name.encode(unicodeencoding)
                        hdr  = email.header.make_header([(uni, unicodeencoding)])
                        name = hdr.encode()
                    except:
                        name = None              # drop name, use address part only
                joined = email.utils.formataddr((name, addr))  # quote name if need
                encoded.append(joined)

            fullhdr = ', '.join(encoded)
            if len(fullhdr) &gt; 72 or '\n' in fullhdr:      # not one short line?
                fullhdr = ',\n '.join(encoded)            # try multiple lines
            return fullhdr
        except:
            return self.encodeHeader(headertext)

    def authenticateServer(self, server):
        pass  # no login required for this server/class

    def getPassword(self):
        pass  # no login required for this server/class


################################################################################
# specialized subclasses
################################################################################

class MailSenderAuth(MailSender):
    """
    use for servers that require login authorization;
    client: choose MailSender or MailSenderAuth super
    class based on mailconfig.smtpuser setting (None?)
    """
    smtpPassword = None    # 4E: on class, not self, shared by poss N instances
    
    def __init__(self, smtpserver=None, smtpuser=None):
        MailSender.__init__(self, smtpserver)
        self.smtpUser = smtpuser or mailconfig.smtpuser
        #self.smtpPassword = None # 4E: makes PyMailGUI ask for each send!

    def authenticateServer(self, server):
        server.login(self.smtpUser, self.smtpPassword)

    def getPassword(self):
        """
        get SMTP auth password if not yet known;
        may be called by superclass auto, or client manual:
        not needed until send, but don't run in GUI thread;
        get from client-side file or subclass method
        """
        if not self.smtpPassword:
            try:
                localfile = open(mailconfig.smtppasswdfile)
                MailSenderAuth.smtpPassword = localfile.readline()[:-1] # 4E
                self.trace('local file password' + repr(self.smtpPassword))
            except:
                MailSenderAuth.smtpPassword = self.askSmtpPassword()    # 4E

    def askSmtpPassword(self):
        assert False, 'Subclass must define method'

class MailSenderAuthConsole(MailSenderAuth):
    def askSmtpPassword(self):
        import getpass
        prompt = 'Password for %s on %s?' % (self.smtpUser, self.smtpServerName)
        return getpass.getpass(prompt)

class SilentMailSender(SilentMailTool, MailSender):
    pass   # replaces trace</pre>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="MailFetcher Class"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="mailfetcher_class"></a>MailFetcher Class</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The class <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e58942"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e58944"></a><a id="mailt13.11.4"></a><a id="mailf13.11.4"></a>defined in Example 13-24 does the work of
          interfacing with a POP email server—loading, deleting, and
          synchronizing. This class merits a few additional words of
          explanation.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="General usage"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="general_usage"></a>General usage</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>This module deals strictly in email text; parsing email
            after it has been fetched is delegated to a different module in
            the package. Moreover, this module doesn’t cache already loaded
            information; clients must add their own mail-retention tools if
            desired. Clients must also provide password input methods or pass
            one in, if they cannot use the console input subclass here (e.g.,
            GUIs and web-based programs).</p>
<p>The loading and deleting tasks use the standard library
            <code class="epub__literal">poplib</code> module in ways we saw
            earlier in this chapter, but notice that there are interfaces for
            fetching just message header text with the TOP action in POP if
            the mail server supports it. This can save substantial time if
            clients need to fetch only basic details for an email index. In
            addition, the header and full-text fetchers are equipped to load
            just mails newer than a particular number (useful once an initial
            load is run), and to restrict fetches to a fixed-sized set of the
            mostly recently arrived emails (useful for large inboxes with slow
            Internet access or servers).</p>
<p>This module also supports the notion of progress
            indicators—for methods that perform multiple downloads or
            deletions, callers may pass in a function that will be called as
            each mail is processed. This function will receive the current and
            total step numbers. It’s left up to the caller to render this in a
            GUI, console, or other user interface.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Unicode decoding for full mail text on fetches"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="unicode_decoding_for_full_mail_text_on_f"></a>Unicode decoding for full mail text on fetches</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Additionally, this <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e58974"></a>module is where we apply the session-wide message
            bytes Unicode decoding policy required for parsing, as discussed
            earlier in this chapter. This decoding uses an encoding name user
            setting in the <code class="epub__literal">mailconfig</code>
            module, followed by heuristics. Because this decoding is performed
            immediately when a mail is fetched, all clients of this package
            can assume message text is <code class="epub__literal">str</code>
            Unicode strings—including any later parsing, display, or save
            operations. In addition to the <code class="epub__literal">mailconfig</code> setting, we also apply a few
            guesses with common encoding types, though it’s not impossible
            that this may lead to problems if mails decoded by guessing cannot
            be written to mail save fails using the <code class="epub__literal">mailconfig</code> setting.</p>
<p>As described, this session-wide approach to encodings is not
            ideal, but it can be adjusted per client session and reflects the
            current limitations of <code class="epub__literal">email</code> in
            Python 3.1—its parser requires already decoded Unicode strings,
            but fetches return bytes. If this decoding fails, as a last resort
            we attempt to decode headers only, as either ASCII (or other
            common format) text or the platform default, and insert an error
            message in the email <span>body—</span>a
            heuristic that attempts to avoid killing clients with exceptions
            if possible (see file <em class="epub__filename">_test-decoding.py</em> in the examples
            package for a test of this logic). In practice, an 8-bit Unicode
            encoding such as Latin-1 will probably suffice in most cases,
            because ASCII was the original requirement of email
            standards.</p>
<p>In principle, we could try to search for encoding
            information in message headers if it’s present, by parsing mails
            partially ourselves. We might then take a per-message instead of
            per-session approach to decoding full text, and associate an
            encoding type with each mail for later processing such as saves,
            though this raises further complications, as a save file can have
            just one (compatible) encoding, not one per message. Moreover,
            character sets in email headers may refer to individual
            components, not the entire email’s text. Since most mails will
            conform to 7- or 8-bit standards, and since a future <code class="epub__literal">email</code> release will likely address this
            issue, extra complexity is probably not warranted for this case in
            this book.</p>
<p>Also keep in mind that the Unicode decoding performed here
            is for the entire mail text fetched from a server. Really, this is
            just one part of the email encoding story in the Unicode-aware
            world of today. In addition:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Payloads of parsed message parts may still be returned
                as bytes and require special handling or further Unicode
                decoding (see the parser module ahead).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Text parts and attachments in composed mails impose
                encoding choices as well (see the sender module
                earlier).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Message headers have their own encoding conventions, and
                may be both MIME and Unicode encoded if Internationalized (see
                both the parser and sender <span>modules</span>).</p></li></ul>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Inbox synchronization tools"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="inbox_synchronization_tools"></a>Inbox synchronization tools</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>When you start <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e59028"></a>studying this example, you’ll also notice that Example 13-24 devotes
            substantial code to detecting synchronization errors between an
            email list held by a client and the current state of the inbox at
            the POP email server. Normally, POP assigns relative message
            numbers to email in the inbox, and only adds newly arrived emails
            to the end of the inbox. As a result, relative message numbers
            from an earlier fetch may usually be used to delete and fetch in
            the future.</p>
<p>However, although rare, it is not impossible for the
            server’s inbox to change in ways that invalidate previously
            fetched message numbers. For instance, emails may be deleted in
            another client, and the server itself may move mails from the
            inbox to an undeliverable state on download errors (this may vary
            per ISP). In both cases, email may be removed from the middle of
            the inbox, throwing some prior relative message numbers out of
            sync with the server.</p>
<p>This situation can result in fetching the wrong message in
            an email client—users receive a different message than the one
            they thought they had selected. Worse, this can make deletions
            inaccurate—if a mail client uses a relative message number in a
            delete request, the wrong mail may be deleted if the inbox has
            changed since the index was fetched.</p>
<p>To assist clients, Example 13-24 includes tools,
            which match message headers on deletions to ensure accuracy and
            perform general inbox synchronization tests on demand. These tools
            are useful only to clients that retain the fetched email list as
            state information. We’ll use these in the PyMailGUI client in
            Chapter 14. There, deletions use the
            safe interface, and loads run the on-demand synchronization test;
            on detection of synchronization errors, the inbox index is
            automatically reloaded. For now, see Example 13-24 source code and
            comments for more details.</p>
<p>Note that the synchronization tests try a variety of
            matching techniques, but require the complete headers text and, in
            the worst case, must parse headers and match many header fields.
            In many cases, the single previously fetched <code class="epub__literal">message-id</code> header field would be
            sufficient for matching against messages in the server’s inbox.
            However, because this field is optional and can be forged to have
            any value, it might not always be a reliable way to identify
            messages. In other words, a same-valued <code class="epub__literal">message-id</code> may not suffice to guarantee
            a match, although it can be used to identify a mismatch; in Example 13-24, the <code class="epub__literal">message-id</code> is used to rule out a match
            if either message has one, and they differ in value. This test is
            performed before falling back on slower parsing and multiple
            header matches.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id43"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 13-24. PP4E\Internet\Email\mailtools\mailFetcher.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
###############################################################################
retrieve, delete, match mail from a POP server (see __init__ for docs, test)
###############################################################################
"""

import poplib, mailconfig, sys               # client's mailconfig on sys.path
print('user:', mailconfig.popusername)       # script dir, pythonpath, changes

from .mailParser import MailParser                 # for headers matching (4E: .)
from .mailTool   import MailTool, SilentMailTool   # trace control supers (4E: .)

# index/server msgnum out of synch tests
class DeleteSynchError(Exception): pass            # msg out of synch in del
class TopNotSupported(Exception): pass             # can't run synch test
class MessageSynchError(Exception): pass           # index list out of sync

class MailFetcher(MailTool):
    """
    fetch mail: connect, fetch headers+mails, delete mails
    works on any machine with Python+Inet; subclass me to cache
    implemented with the POP protocol; IMAP requires new class;
    4E: handles decoding of full mail text on fetch for parser;
    """
    def __init__(self, popserver=None, popuser=None, poppswd=None, hastop=True):
        self.popServer   = popserver or mailconfig.popservername
        self.popUser     = popuser   or mailconfig.popusername
        self.srvrHasTop  = hastop
        self.popPassword = poppswd  # ask later if None

    def connect(self):
        self.trace('Connecting...')
        self.getPassword()                          # file, GUI, or console
        server = poplib.POP3(self.popServer, timeout=15)
        server.user(self.popUser)                   # connect,login POP server
        server.pass_(self.popPassword)              # pass is a reserved word
        self.trace(server.getwelcome())             # print returned greeting
        return server

    # use setting in client's mailconfig on import search path;
    # to tailor, this can be changed in class or per instance;
    fetchEncoding = mailconfig.fetchEncoding

    def decodeFullText(self, messageBytes):
        """
        4E, Py3.1: decode full fetched mail text bytes to str Unicode string;
        done at fetch, for later display or parsing (full mail text is always
        Unicode thereafter);  decode with per-class or per-instance setting, or
        common types;  could also try headers inspection, or intelligent guess
        from structure; in Python 3.2/3.3, this step may not be required: if so,
        change to return message line list intact; for more details see Chapter 13;

        an 8-bit encoding such as latin-1 will likely suffice for most emails, as
        ASCII is the original standard;  this method applies to entire/full message
        text, which is really just one part of the email encoding story: Message
        payloads and Message headers may also be encoded per email, MIME, and
        Unicode standards; see Chapter 13 and mailParser and mailSender for more;
        """
        text = None
        kinds =  [self.fetchEncoding]             # try user setting first
        kinds += ['ascii', 'latin1', 'utf8']      # then try common types
        kinds += [sys.getdefaultencoding()]       # and platform dflt (may differ)
        for kind in kinds:                        # may cause mail saves to fail
            try:
                text = [line.decode(kind) for line in messageBytes]
                break
            except (UnicodeError, LookupError):   # LookupError: bad name
                pass

        if text == None:
            # try returning headers + error msg, else except may kill client;
            # still try to decode headers per ascii, other, platform default;

            blankline = messageBytes.index(b'')
            hdrsonly  = messageBytes[:blankline]
            commons   = ['ascii', 'latin1', 'utf8']
            for common in commons:
                try:
                    text = [line.decode(common) for line in hdrsonly]
                    break
                except UnicodeError:
                    pass
            else:                                                  # none worked
                try:
                    text = [line.decode() for line in hdrsonly]    # platform dflt?
                except UnicodeError:
                    text = ['From: (sender of unknown Unicode format headers)']
            text += ['', '--Sorry: mailtools cannot decode this mail content!--']
        return text

    def downloadMessage(self, msgnum):
        """
        load full raw text of one mail msg, given its
        POP relative msgnum; caller must parse content
        """
        self.trace('load ' + str(msgnum))
        server = self.connect()
        try:
            resp, msglines, respsz = server.retr(msgnum)
        finally:
            server.quit()
        msglines = self.decodeFullText(msglines)   # raw bytes to Unicode str
        return '\n'.join(msglines)                 # concat lines for parsing

    def downloadAllHeaders(self, progress=None, loadfrom=1):
        """
        get sizes, raw header text only, for all or new msgs
        begins loading headers from message number loadfrom
        use loadfrom to load newly arrived mails only
        use downloadMessage to get a full msg text later
        progress is a function called with (count, total);
        returns: [headers text], [mail sizes], loadedfull?

        4E: add mailconfig.fetchlimit to support large email
        inboxes: if not None, only fetches that many headers,
        and returns others as dummy/empty mail; else inboxes
        like one of mine (4K emails) are not practical to use;
        4E: pass loadfrom along to downloadAllMsgs (a buglet);
        """
        if not self.srvrHasTop:                    # not all servers support TOP
            # naively load full msg text
            return self.downloadAllMsgs(progress, loadfrom)
        else:
            self.trace('loading headers')
            fetchlimit = mailconfig.fetchlimit
            server = self.connect()                # mbox now locked until quit
            try:
                resp, msginfos, respsz = server.list()   # 'num size' lines list
                msgCount = len(msginfos)                 # alt to srvr.stat[0]
                msginfos = msginfos[loadfrom-1:]         # drop already loadeds
                allsizes = [int(x.split()[1]) for x in msginfos]
                allhdrs  = []
                for msgnum in range(loadfrom, msgCount+1):          # poss empty
                    if progress: progress(msgnum, msgCount)         # run callback
                    if fetchlimit and (msgnum &lt;= msgCount - fetchlimit):
                        # skip, add dummy hdrs
                        hdrtext = 'Subject: --mail skipped--\n\n'
                        allhdrs.append(hdrtext)
                    else:
                        # fetch, retr hdrs only
                        resp, hdrlines, respsz = server.top(msgnum, 0)
                        hdrlines = self.decodeFullText(hdrlines)
                        allhdrs.append('\n'.join(hdrlines))
            finally:
                server.quit()                          # make sure unlock mbox
            assert len(allhdrs) == len(allsizes)
            self.trace('load headers exit')
            return allhdrs, allsizes, False

    def downloadAllMessages(self, progress=None, loadfrom=1):
        """
        load full message text for all msgs from loadfrom..N,
        despite any caching that may be being done in the caller;
        much slower than downloadAllHeaders, if just need hdrs;

        4E: support mailconfig.fetchlimit: see downloadAllHeaders;
        could use server.list() to get sizes of skipped emails here
        too, but clients probably don't care about these anyhow;
        """
        self.trace('loading full messages')
        fetchlimit = mailconfig.fetchlimit
        server = self.connect()
        try:
            (msgCount, msgBytes) = server.stat()          # inbox on server
            allmsgs  = []
            allsizes = []
            for i in range(loadfrom, msgCount+1):         # empty if low &gt;= high
                if progress: progress(i, msgCount)
                if fetchlimit and (i &lt;= msgCount - fetchlimit):
                    # skip, add dummy mail
                    mailtext = 'Subject: --mail skipped--\n\nMail skipped.\n'
                    allmsgs.append(mailtext)
                    allsizes.append(len(mailtext))
                else:
                    # fetch, retr full mail
                    (resp, message, respsz) = server.retr(i)  # save text on list
                    message = self.decodeFullText(message)
                    allmsgs.append('\n'.join(message))        # leave mail on server
                    allsizes.append(respsz)                   # diff from len(msg)
        finally:
            server.quit()                                     # unlock the mail box
        assert len(allmsgs) == (msgCount - loadfrom) + 1      # msg nums start at 1
       #assert sum(allsizes) == msgBytes                      # not if loadfrom &gt; 1
        return allmsgs, allsizes, True                        # not if fetchlimit

    def deleteMessages(self, msgnums, progress=None):
        """
        delete multiple msgs off server; assumes email inbox
        unchanged since msgnums were last determined/loaded;
        use if msg headers not available as state information;
        fast, but poss dangerous: see deleteMessagesSafely
        """
        self.trace('deleting mails')
        server = self.connect()
        try:
            for (ix, msgnum) in enumerate(msgnums):   # don't reconnect for each
                if progress: progress(ix+1, len(msgnums))
                server.dele(msgnum)
        finally:                                      # changes msgnums: reload
            server.quit()

    def deleteMessagesSafely(self, msgnums, synchHeaders, progress=None):
        """
        delete multiple msgs off server, but use TOP fetches to
        check for a match on each msg's header part before deleting;
        assumes the email server supports the TOP interface of POP,
        else raises TopNotSupported - client may call deleteMessages;

        use if the mail server might change the inbox since the email
        index was last fetched, thereby changing POP relative message
        numbers;  this can happen if email is deleted in a different
        client;  some ISPs may also move a mail from inbox to the
        undeliverable box in response to a failed download;

        synchHeaders must be a list of already loaded mail hdrs text,
        corresponding to selected msgnums (requires state);  raises
        exception if any out of synch with the email server;  inbox is
        locked until quit, so it should not change between TOP check
        and actual delete: synch check must occur here, not in caller;
        may be enough to call checkSynchError+deleteMessages, but check
        each msg here in case deletes and inserts in middle of inbox;
        """
        if not self.srvrHasTop:
            raise TopNotSupported('Safe delete cancelled')

        self.trace('deleting mails safely')
        errmsg  = 'Message %s out of synch with server.\n'
        errmsg += 'Delete terminated at this message.\n'
        errmsg += 'Mail client may require restart or reload.'

        server = self.connect()                       # locks inbox till quit
        try:                                          # don't reconnect for each
            (msgCount, msgBytes) = server.stat()      # inbox size on server
            for (ix, msgnum) in enumerate(msgnums):
                if progress: progress(ix+1, len(msgnums))
                if msgnum &gt; msgCount:                            # msgs deleted
                    raise DeleteSynchError(errmsg % msgnum)
                resp, hdrlines, respsz = server.top(msgnum, 0)   # hdrs only
                hdrlines = self.decodeFullText(hdrlines)
                msghdrs = '\n'.join(hdrlines)
                if not self.headersMatch(msghdrs, synchHeaders[msgnum-1]):
                    raise DeleteSynchError(errmsg % msgnum)
                else:
                    server.dele(msgnum)               # safe to delete this msg
        finally:                                      # changes msgnums: reload
            server.quit()                             # unlock inbox on way out

    def checkSynchError(self, synchHeaders):
        """
        check to see if already loaded hdrs text in synchHeaders
        list matches what is on the server, using the TOP command in
        POP to fetch headers text; use if inbox can change due to
        deletes in other client, or automatic action by email server;
        raises except if out of synch, or error while talking to server;

        for speed, only checks last in last: this catches inbox deletes,
        but assumes server won't insert before last (true for incoming
        mails); check inbox size first: smaller if just deletes;  else
        top will differ if deletes and newly arrived messages added at
        end;  result valid only when run: inbox may change after return;
        """
        self.trace('synch check')
        errormsg  = 'Message index out of synch with mail server.\n'
        errormsg += 'Mail client may require restart or reload.'
        server = self.connect()
        try:
            lastmsgnum = len(synchHeaders)                      # 1..N
            (msgCount, msgBytes) = server.stat()                # inbox size
            if lastmsgnum &gt; msgCount:                           # fewer now?
                raise MessageSynchError(errormsg)               # none to cmp
            if self.srvrHasTop:
                resp, hdrlines, respsz = server.top(lastmsgnum, 0)  # hdrs only
                hdrlines = self.decodeFullText(hdrlines)
                lastmsghdrs = '\n'.join(hdrlines)
                if not self.headersMatch(lastmsghdrs, synchHeaders[-1]):
                    raise MessageSynchError(errormsg)
        finally:
            server.quit()

    def headersMatch(self, hdrtext1, hdrtext2):
        """"
        may not be as simple as a string compare: some servers add
        a "Status:" header that changes over time; on one ISP, it
        begins as "Status: U" (unread), and changes to "Status: RO"
        (read, old) after fetched once - throws off synch tests if
        new when index fetched, but have been fetched once before
        delete or last-message check;  "Message-id:" line is unique
        per message in theory, but optional, and can be anything if
        forged; match more common: try first; parsing costly: try last
        """
        # try match by simple string compare
        if hdrtext1 == hdrtext2:
            self.trace('Same headers text')
            return True

        # try match without status lines
        split1 = hdrtext1.splitlines()       # s.split('\n'), but no final ''
        split2 = hdrtext2.splitlines()
        strip1 = [line for line in split1 if not line.startswith('Status:')]
        strip2 = [line for line in split2 if not line.startswith('Status:')]
        if strip1 == strip2:
            self.trace('Same without Status')
            return True

        # try mismatch by message-id headers if either has one
        msgid1 = [line for line in split1 if line[:11].lower() == 'message-id:']
        msgid2 = [line for line in split2 if line[:11].lower() == 'message-id:']
        if (msgid1 or msgid2) and (msgid1 != msgid2):
            self.trace('Different Message-Id')
            return False

        # try full hdr parse and common headers if msgid missing or trash
        tryheaders  = ('From', 'To', 'Subject', 'Date')
        tryheaders += ('Cc', 'Return-Path', 'Received')
        msg1 = MailParser().parseHeaders(hdrtext1)
        msg2 = MailParser().parseHeaders(hdrtext2)
        for hdr in tryheaders:                          # poss multiple Received
            if msg1.get_all(hdr) != msg2.get_all(hdr):  # case insens, dflt None
                self.trace('Diff common headers')
                return False

        # all common hdrs match and don't have a diff message-id
        self.trace('Same common headers')
        return True

    def getPassword(self):
        """
        get POP password if not yet known
        not required until go to server
        from client-side file or subclass method
        """
        if not self.popPassword:
            try:
                localfile = open(mailconfig.poppasswdfile)
                self.popPassword = localfile.readline()[:-1]
                self.trace('local file password' + repr(self.popPassword))
            except:
                self.popPassword = self.askPopPassword()

    def askPopPassword(self):
        assert False, 'Subclass must define method'


################################################################################
# specialized subclasses
################################################################################

class MailFetcherConsole(MailFetcher):
    def askPopPassword(self):
        import getpass
        prompt = 'Password for %s on %s?' % (self.popUser, self.popServer)
        return getpass.getpass(prompt)

class SilentMailFetcher(SilentMailTool, MailFetcher):
    pass   # replaces trace</pre>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="MailParser Class"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="mailparser_class"></a>MailParser Class</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Example 13-25
<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e59072"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e59074"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e59076"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e59081"></a>implements the last major class in the <code class="epub__literal">mailtools</code> package—given the (already
          decoded) text of an email message, its tools parse the mail’s
          content into a message object, with headers and decoded parts. This
          module is largely just a wrapper around the standard library’s
          <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package, but it adds
          convenience tools—finding the main text part of a message, filename
          generation for message parts, saving attached parts to files,
          decoding headers, splitting address lists, and so on. See the code
          for more information. Also notice the parts walker here: by coding
          its search logic in one place as a generator function, we guarantee
          that all its three clients here, as well as any others elsewhere,
          implement the same traversal.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Unicode decoding for text part payloads and message headers"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="unicode_decoding_for_text_part_payloads"></a>Unicode decoding for text part payloads and message
            headers</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>This module also <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e59096"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e59101"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e59104"></a>provides support for decoding message headers per
            email standards (both full headers and names in address headers),
            and handles decoding per text part encodings. Headers are decoded
            according to their content, using tools in the <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package; the headers themselves
            give their MIME and Unicode encodings, so no user intervention is
            required. For client convenience, we also perform Unicode decoding
            for main text parts to convert them from <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> to <code class="epub__literal">str</code> here if needed.</p>
<p>The latter main-text decoding merits elaboration. As
            discussed earlier in this chapter, <code class="epub__literal">Message</code> objects (main or attached) may
            return their payloads as <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>
            if we fetch with a <code class="epub__literal">decode=1</code>
            argument, or if they are <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>
            to begin with; in other cases, payloads may be returned as
            <code class="epub__literal">str</code>. We generally need to
            decode <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> in order to treat
            payloads as text.</p>
<p>In <code class="epub__literal">mailtools</code> itself,
            <code class="epub__literal">str</code> text part payloads are
            automatically encoded to <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>
            by <code class="epub__literal">decode=1</code> and then saved to
            binary-mode files to finesse encoding issues, but main-text
            payloads are decoded to <code class="epub__literal">str</code> if
            they are <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>. This main-text
            decoding is performed per the encoding name in the part’s message
            header (if present and correct), the platform default, or a guess.
            As we learned in Chapter 9,
            while GUIs may allow <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> for
            display, <code class="epub__literal">str</code> text generally
            provides broader Unicode support; furthermore, <code class="epub__literal">str</code> is sometimes needed for later
            processing such as line wrapping and webpage generation.</p>
<p>Since this package can’t predict the role of other part
            payloads besides the main text, clients are responsible for
            decoding and encoding as necessary. For instance, other text parts
            which are saved in binary mode here may require that message
            headers be <span>consulted</span> later
            to extract Unicode encoding names for better display. For example,
            Chapter 14’s PyMailGUI will proceed
            this way to open text parts on demand, passing message header
            encoding information on to PyEdit for decoding as text is
            loaded.</p>
<p>Some of the to-text conversions performed here are
            potentially partial solutions (some parts may lack the required
            headers and fail per the platform defaults) and may need to be
            improved; since this seems likely to be addressed in a future
            release of Python’s <code class="epub__literal">email</code>
            package, we’ll settle for our assumptions here.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id44"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 13-25. PP4E\Internet\Email\mailtools\mailParser.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
###############################################################################
parsing and attachment extract, analyse, save (see __init__ for docs, test)
###############################################################################
"""

import os, mimetypes, sys                       # mime: map type to name
import email.parser                             # parse text to Message object
import email.header                             # 4E: headers decode/encode
import email.utils                              # 4E: addr header parse/decode
from email.message import Message               # Message may be traversed
from .mailTool import MailTool                  # 4E: package-relative

class MailParser(MailTool):
    """
    methods for parsing message text, attachments

    subtle thing: Message object payloads are either a simple
    string for non-multipart messages, or a list of Message
    objects if multipart (possibly nested); we don't need to
    distinguish between the two cases here, because the Message
    walk generator always returns self first, and so works fine
    on non-multipart messages too (a single object is walked);

    for simple messages, the message body is always considered
    here to be the sole part of the mail;  for multipart messages,
    the parts list includes the main message text, as well as all
    attachments;  this allows simple messages not of type text to
    be handled like attachments in a UI (e.g., saved, opened);
    Message payload may also be None for some oddball part types;

    4E note: in Py 3.1, text part payloads are returned as bytes
    for decode=1, and might be str otherwise; in mailtools, text
    is stored as bytes for file saves, but main-text bytes payloads
    are decoded to Unicode str per mail header info or platform
    default+guess; clients may need to convert other payloads:
    PyMailGUI uses headers to decode parts saved to binary files;

    4E supports fetched message header auto-decoding per its own
    content, both for general headers such as Subject, as well as
    for names in address header such as From and To; client must
    request this after parse, before display: parser doesn't decode;
    """

    def walkNamedParts(self, message):
        """
        generator to avoid repeating part naming logic;
        skips multipart headers, makes part filenames;
        message is already parsed email.message.Message object;
        doesn't skip oddball types: payload may be None, must
        handle in part saves; some others may warrant skips too;
        """
        for (ix, part) in enumerate(message.walk()):    # walk includes message
            fulltype = part.get_content_type()          # ix includes parts skipped
            maintype = part.get_content_maintype()
            if maintype == 'multipart':                 # multipart/*: container
                continue
            elif fulltype == 'message/rfc822':          # 4E: skip message/rfc822
                continue                                # skip all message/* too?
            else:
                filename, contype = self.partName(part, ix)
                yield (filename, contype, part)

    def partName(self, part, ix):
        """
        extract filename and content type from message part;
        filename: tries Content-Disposition, then Content-Type
        name param, or generates one based on mimetype guess;
        """
        filename = part.get_filename()                # filename in msg hdrs?
        contype  = part.get_content_type()            # lowercase maintype/subtype
        if not filename:
            filename = part.get_param('name')         # try content-type name
        if not filename:
            if contype == 'text/plain':               # hardcode plain text ext
                ext = '.txt'                          # else guesses .ksh!
            else:
                ext = mimetypes.guess_extension(contype)
                if not ext: ext = '.bin'              # use a generic default
            filename = 'part-%03d%s' % (ix, ext)
        return (self.decodeHeader(filename), contype) # oct 2011: decode i18n fnames

    def saveParts(self, savedir, message):
        """
        store all parts of a message as files in a local directory;
        returns [('maintype/subtype', 'filename')] list for use by
        callers, but does not open any parts or attachments here;
        get_payload decodes base64, quoted-printable, uuencoded data;
        mail parser may give us a None payload for oddball types we
        probably should skip over: convert to str here to be safe;
        """
        if not os.path.exists(savedir):
            os.mkdir(savedir)
        partfiles = []
        for (filename, contype, part) in self.walkNamedParts(message):
            fullname = os.path.join(savedir, filename)
            fileobj  = open(fullname, 'wb')             # use binary mode
            content  = part.get_payload(decode=1)       # decode base64,qp,uu
            if not isinstance(content, bytes):          # 4E: need bytes for rb
                content = b'(no content)'               # decode=1 returns bytes,
            fileobj.write(content)                      # but some payloads None
            fileobj.close()                             # 4E: not str(content)
            partfiles.append((contype, fullname))       # for caller to open
        return partfiles

    def saveOnePart(self, savedir, partname, message):
        """
        ditto, but find and save just one part by name
        """
        if not os.path.exists(savedir):
            os.mkdir(savedir)
        fullname = os.path.join(savedir, partname)
        (contype, content) = self.findOnePart(partname, message)
        if not isinstance(content, bytes):          # 4E: need bytes for rb
            content = b'(no content)'               # decode=1 returns bytes,
        open(fullname, 'wb').write(content)         # but some payloads None
        return (contype, fullname)                  # 4E: not str(content)

    def partsList(self, message):
        """"
        return a list of filenames for all parts of an
        already parsed message, using same filename logic
        as saveParts, but do not store the part files here
        """
        validParts = self.walkNamedParts(message)
        return [filename for (filename, contype, part) in validParts]

    def findOnePart(self, partname, message):
        """
        find and return part's content, given its name;
        intended to be used in conjunction with partsList;
        we could also mimetypes.guess_type(partname) here;
        we could also avoid this search by saving in dict;
        4E: content may be str or bytes--convert as needed;
        """
        for (filename, contype, part) in self.walkNamedParts(message):
            if filename == partname:
                content = part.get_payload(decode=1)          # does base64,qp,uu
                return (contype, content)                     # may be bytes text

    def decodedPayload(self, part, asStr=True):
        """
        4E: decode text part bytes to Unicode str for display, line wrap,
        etc.; part is a Message; (decode=1) undoes MIME email encodings
        (base64, uuencode, qp), bytes.decode() performs additional Unicode
        text string decodings; tries charset encoding name in message
        headers first (if present, and accurate), then tries platform
        defaults and a few guesses before giving up with error string;
        """
        payload = part.get_payload(decode=1)           # payload may be bytes
        if asStr and isinstance(payload, bytes):       # decode=1 returns bytes
            tries = []
            enchdr = part.get_content_charset()        # try msg headers first!
            if enchdr:
                tries += [enchdr]                      # try headers first
            tries += [sys.getdefaultencoding()]        # same as bytes.decode()
            tries += ['latin1', 'utf8']                # try 8-bit, incl ascii
            for trie in tries:                         # try utf8 (windows dflt)
                try:
                    payload = payload.decode(trie)     # give it a shot, eh?
                    break
                except (UnicodeError, LookupError):    # lookuperr: bad name
                    pass
            else:
                payload = '--Sorry: cannot decode Unicode text--'
        return payload

    def findMainText(self, message, asStr=True):
        """
        for text-oriented clients, return first text part's str;
        for the payload of a simple message, or all parts of
        a multipart message, looks for text/plain, then text/html,
        then text/*, before deducing that there is no text to
        display;  this is a heuristic, but covers most simple,
        multipart/alternative, and multipart/mixed messages;
        content-type defaults to text/plain if not in simple msg;

        handles message nesting at top level by walking instead
        of list scans;  if non-multipart but type is text/html,
        returns the HTML as the text with an HTML type: caller
        may open in web browser, extract plain text, etc;  if
        nonmultipart and not text, there is  no text to display:
        save/open message content in UI; caveat: does not try
        to concatenate multiple inline text/plain parts if any;
        4E: text payloads may be bytes--decodes to str here;
        4E: asStr=False to get raw bytes for HTML file saves;
        """

        # try to find a plain text
        for part in message.walk():                            # walk visits message
            type = part.get_content_type()                     # if nonmultipart
            if type == 'text/plain':                           # may be base64,qp,uu
                return type, self.decodedPayload(part, asStr)  # bytes to str too?

        # try to find an HTML part
        for part in message.walk():
            type = part.get_content_type()                     # caller renders html
            if type == 'text/html':
                return type, self.decodedPayload(part, asStr)

        # try any other text type, including XML
        for part in message.walk():
            if part.get_content_maintype() == 'text':
                return part.get_content_type(), self.decodedPayload(part, asStr)

        # punt: could use first part, but it's not marked as text
        failtext = '[No text to display]' if asStr else b'[No text to display]'
        return 'text/plain', failtext

    def decodeHeader(self, rawheader):
        """
        4E: decode existing i18n message header text per both email and Unicode
        standards, according to its content; return as is if unencoded or fails;
        client must call this to display: parsed Message object does not decode;
        i18n header example: '=?UTF-8?Q?Introducing=20Top=20Values=20..Savers?=';
        i18n header example: 'Man where did you get that =?UTF-8?Q?assistant=3F?=';

        decode_header handles any line breaks in header string automatically, may
        return multiple parts if any substrings of hdr are encoded, and returns all
        bytes in parts list if any encodings found (with unencoded parts encoded as
        raw-unicode-escape and enc=None) but returns a single part with enc=None
        that is str instead of bytes in Py3.1 if the entire header is unencoded
        (must handle mixed types here); see Chapter 13 for more details/examples;

        the following first attempt code was okay unless any encoded substrings, or
        enc was returned as None (raised except which returned rawheader unchanged):
        hdr, enc = email.header.decode_header(rawheader)[0]
        return hdr.decode(enc) # fails if enc=None: no encoding or encoded substrs
        """
        try:
            parts = email.header.decode_header(rawheader)
            decoded = []
            for (part, enc) in parts:                      # for all substrings
                if enc == None:                            # part unencoded?
                    if not isinstance(part, bytes):        # str: full hdr unencoded
                        decoded += [part]                  # else do unicode decode
                    else:
                        decoded += [part.decode('raw-unicode-escape')]
                else:
                    decoded += [part.decode(enc)]
            return ' '.join(decoded)
        except:
            return rawheader         # punt!

    def decodeAddrHeader(self, rawheader):
        """
        4E: decode existing i18n address header text per email and Unicode,
        according to its content; must parse out first part of email address
        to get i18n part: '"=?UTF-8?Q?Walmart?=" &lt;newsletters@walmart.com&gt;';
        From will probably have just 1 addr, but To, Cc, Bcc may have many;

        decodeHeader handles nested encoded substrings within an entire hdr,
        but we can't simply call it for entire hdr here because it fails if
        encoded name substring ends in " quote instead of whitespace or endstr;
        see also encodeAddrHeader in mailSender module for the inverse of this;

        the following first attempt code failed to handle encoded substrings in
        name, and raised exc for unencoded bytes parts if any encoded substrings;
        namebytes, nameenc = email.header.decode_header(name)[0]  (do email+MIME)
        if nameenc: name = namebytes.decode(nameenc)              (do Unicode?)
        """
        try:
            pairs = email.utils.getaddresses([rawheader])  # split addrs and parts
            decoded = []                                   # handles name commas
            for (name, addr) in pairs:
                try:
                    name = self.decodeHeader(name)                # email+MIME+Uni
                except:
                    name = None   # but uses encooded name if exc in decodeHeader
                joined = email.utils.formataddr((name, addr))     # join parts
                decoded.append(joined)
            return ', '.join(decoded)                             # &gt;= 1 addrs
        except:
            return self.decodeHeader(rawheader)    # try decoding entire string

    def splitAddresses(self, field):
        """
        4E: use comma separator for multiple addrs in the UI, and
        getaddresses to split correctly and allow for comma in the
        name parts of addresses; used by PyMailGUI to split To, Cc,
        Bcc as needed for user inputs and copied headers;  returns
        empty list if field is empty, or any exception occurs;
        """
        try:
            pairs = email.utils.getaddresses([field])                # [(name,addr)]
            return [email.utils.formataddr(pair) for pair in pairs]  # [name &lt;addr&gt;]
        except:
            return ''   # syntax error in user-entered field?, etc.

    # returned when parses fail
    errorMessage = Message()
    errorMessage.set_payload('[Unable to parse message - format error]')

    def parseHeaders(self, mailtext):
        """
        parse headers only, return root email.message.Message object
        stops after headers parsed, even if nothing else follows (top)
        email.message.Message object is a mapping for mail header fields
        payload of message object is None, not raw body text
        """
        try:
            return email.parser.Parser().parsestr(mailtext, headersonly=True)
        except:
            return self.errorMessage

    def parseMessage(self, fulltext):
        """
        parse entire message, return root email.message.Message object
        payload of message object is a string if not is_multipart()
        payload of message object is more Messages if multiple parts
        the call here same as calling email.message_from_string()
        """
        try:
            return email.parser.Parser().parsestr(fulltext)       # may fail!
        except:
            return self.errorMessage     # or let call handle? can check return

    def parseMessageRaw(self, fulltext):
        """
        parse headers only, return root email.message.Message object
        stops after headers parsed, for efficiency (not yet used here)
        payload of message object is raw text of mail after headers
        """
        try:
            return email.parser.HeaderParser().parsestr(fulltext)
        except:
            return self.errorMessage</pre>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Self-Test Script"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="self-test_script"></a>Self-Test Script</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The last file in <a id="mail13.11.6"></a>the <code class="epub__literal">mailtools</code>
          package, Example 13-26,
          lists the self-test code for the package. This code is a separate
          script file, in order to allow for import search path
          manipulation—it emulates a real client, which is assumed to have a
          <code class="epub__literal">mailconfig.py</code> module in its own
          source directory (this module can vary per client).</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id45"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 13-26. PP4E\Internet\Email\mailtools\selftest.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
###############################################################################
self-test when this file is run as a program
###############################################################################
"""

#
# mailconfig normally comes from the client's source directory or
# sys.path; for testing, get it from Email directory one level up
#
import sys
sys.path.append('..')
import mailconfig
print('config:', mailconfig.__file__)

# get these from __init__
from mailtools import (MailFetcherConsole,
                       MailSender, MailSenderAuthConsole,
                       MailParser)

if not mailconfig.smtpuser:
    sender = MailSender(tracesize=5000)
else:
    sender = MailSenderAuthConsole(tracesize=5000)

sender.sendMessage(From      = mailconfig.myaddress,
                   To        = [mailconfig.myaddress],
                   Subj      = 'testing mailtools package',
                   extrahdrs = [('X-Mailer', 'mailtools')],
                   bodytext  = 'Here is my source code\n',
                   attaches  = ['selftest.py'],
                  )

                   # bodytextEncoding='utf-8',          # other tests to try
                   # attachesEncodings=['latin-1'],     # inspect text headers
                   # attaches=['monkeys.jpg'])          # verify Base64 encoded
                   # to='i18n adddr list...',           # test mime/unicode headers


# change mailconfig to test fetchlimit
fetcher = MailFetcherConsole()
def status(*args): print(args)

hdrs, sizes, loadedall = fetcher.downloadAllHeaders(status)
for num, hdr in enumerate(hdrs[:5]):
    print(hdr)
    if input('load mail?') in ['y', 'Y']:
        print(fetcher.downloadMessage(num+1).rstrip(), '\n', '-'*70)

last5 = len(hdrs)-4
msgs, sizes, loadedall = fetcher.downloadAllMessages(status, loadfrom=last5)
for msg in msgs:
    print(msg[:200], '\n', '-'*70)

parser = MailParser()
for i in [0]:                  # try [0 , len(msgs)]
    fulltext = msgs[i]
    message  = parser.parseMessage(fulltext)
    ctype, maintext = parser.findMainText(message)
    print('Parsed:', message['Subject'])
    print(maintext)
input('Press Enter to exit')   # pause if clicked on Windows</pre>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Running the self-test"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="running_the_self-test"></a>Running the self-test</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Here’s a run of the self-test script; it generates a lot of
            output, most of which has been deleted here for presentation in
            this book—as usual, run this on your own for further
            details:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e59219"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Email\mailtools&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>selftest.py</code></strong>
config: ..\mailconfig.py
user: PP4E@learning-python.com
Adding text/x-python
Sending to...['PP4E@learning-python.com']
Content-Type: multipart/mixed; boundary="===============0085314748=="
MIME-Version: 1.0
From: PP4E@learning-python.com
To: PP4E@learning-python.com
Subject: testing mailtools package
Date: Sat, 08 May 2010 19:26:22 −0000
X-Mailer: mailtools

A multi-part MIME format message.

--===============0085314748==
Content-Type: text/plain; charset="us-ascii"
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit

Here is my source code

--===============0085314748==
Content-Type: text/x-python; charset="us-ascii"
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Transfer-Encoding: 7bit
Content-Disposition: attachment; filename="selftest.py"

"""
###############################################################################
self-test when this file is run as a program
###############################################################################
"""
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...more lines omitted...</span></em>

print(maintext)
input('Press Enter to exit')   # pause if clicked on Windows

--===============0085314748==--

Send exit
loading headers
Connecting...
Password for PP4E@learning-python.com on pop.secureserver.net?
b'+OK &lt;28121.1273346862@p3pop01-07.prod.phx3.gdg&gt;'
(1, 7)
(2, 7)
(3, 7)
(4, 7)
(5, 7)
(6, 7)
(7, 7)
load headers exit
Received: (qmail 7690 invoked from network); 5 May 2010 15:29:43 −0000
Received: from unknown (HELO p3pismtp01-026.prod.phx3.secureserver.net) ([10.6.1
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...more lines omitted...</span></em>

load mail?<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y</code></strong>
load 1
Connecting...
b'+OK &lt;29205.1273346957@p3pop01-10.prod.phx3.gdg&gt;'
Received: (qmail 7690 invoked from network); 5 May 2010 15:29:43 −0000
Received: from unknown (HELO p3pismtp01-026.prod.phx3.secureserver.net) ([10.6.1
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...more lines omitted...</span></em>

load mail?
loading full messages
Connecting...
b'+OK &lt;31655.1273347055@p3pop01-25.prod.phx3.secureserver.net&gt;'
(3, 7)
(4, 7)
(5, 7)
(6, 7)
(7, 7)
Received: (qmail 25683 invoked from network); 6 May 2010 14:12:07 −0000
Received: from unknown (HELO p3pismtp01-018.prod.phx3.secureserver.net) ([10.6.1
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...more lines omitted...</span></em>

Parsed: A B C D E F G
Fiddle de dum, Fiddle de dee,
Eric the half a bee.

Press Enter to exit</pre>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Updating the pymail Console Client"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="updating_the_pymail_console_client"></a>Updating the pymail Console Client</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As a final <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e59245"></a><a id="py13.11.7"></a><a id="mail13.11.7"></a>email example in this chapter, and to give a better
          use case for the <code class="epub__literal">mailtools</code> module
          package of the preceding sections, Example 13-27 provides an updated
          version of the <code class="epub__literal">pymail</code> program we
          met earlier (Example 13-20).
          It uses our <code class="epub__literal">mailtools</code> package to
          access email, instead of interfacing with Python’s <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package directly. Compare its code
          to the original <code class="epub__literal">pymail</code> in this
          chapter to see how <code class="epub__literal">mailtools</code> is
          employed here. You’ll find that its mail download and send logic is
          substantially simpler.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id46"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 13-27. PP4E\Internet\Email\pymail2.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">#!/usr/local/bin/python
"""
################################################################################
pymail2 - simple console email interface client in Python;  this version uses
the mailtools package, which in turn uses poplib, smtplib, and the email package
for parsing and composing emails;  displays first text part of mails, not the
entire full text;  fetches just mail headers initially, using the TOP command;
fetches full text of just email selected to be displayed;  caches already
fetched mails; caveat: no way to refresh index;  uses standalone mailtools
objects - they can also be used as superclasses;
################################################################################
"""

import mailconfig, mailtools
from pymail import inputmessage
mailcache = {}

def fetchmessage(i):
    try:
        fulltext = mailcache[i]
    except KeyError:
        fulltext = fetcher.downloadMessage(i)
        mailcache[i] = fulltext
    return fulltext

def sendmessage():
    From, To, Subj, text = inputmessage()
    sender.sendMessage(From, To, Subj, [], text, attaches=None)

def deletemessages(toDelete, verify=True):
    print('To be deleted:', toDelete)
    if verify and input('Delete?')[:1] not in ['y', 'Y']:
        print('Delete cancelled.')
    else:
        print('Deleting messages from server...')
        fetcher.deleteMessages(toDelete)

def showindex(msgList, msgSizes, chunk=5):
    count = 0
    for (msg, size) in zip(msgList, msgSizes):     # email.message.Message, int
        count += 1                                 # 3.x iter ok here
        print('%d:\t%d bytes' % (count, size))
        for hdr in ('From', 'To', 'Date', 'Subject'):
            print('\t%-8s=&gt;%s' % (hdr, msg.get(hdr, '(unknown)')))
        if count % chunk == 0:
            input('[Press Enter key]')             # pause after each chunk

def showmessage(i, msgList):
    if 1 &lt;= i &lt;= len(msgList):
        fulltext = fetchmessage(i)
        message  = parser.parseMessage(fulltext)
        ctype, maintext = parser.findMainText(message)
        print('-' * 79)
        print(maintext.rstrip() + '\n')   # main text part, not entire mail
        print('-' * 79)                   # and not any attachments after
    else:
        print('Bad message number')

def savemessage(i, mailfile, msgList):
    if 1 &lt;= i &lt;= len(msgList):
        fulltext = fetchmessage(i)
        savefile = open(mailfile, 'a', encoding=mailconfig.fetchEncoding)   # 4E
        savefile.write('\n' + fulltext + '-'*80 + '\n')
    else:
        print('Bad message number')

def msgnum(command):
    try:
        return int(command.split()[1])
    except:
        return −1   # assume this is bad

helptext = """
Available commands:
i     - index display
l n?  - list all messages (or just message n)
d n?  - mark all messages for deletion (or just message n)
s n?  - save all messages to a file (or just message n)
m     - compose and send a new mail message
q     - quit pymail
?     - display this help text
"""

def interact(msgList, msgSizes, mailfile):
    showindex(msgList, msgSizes)
    toDelete = []
    while True:
        try:
            command = input('[Pymail] Action? (i, l, d, s, m, q, ?) ')
        except EOFError:
            command = 'q'
        if not command: command = '*'

        if command == 'q':                     # quit
            break

        elif command[0] == 'i':                # index
            showindex(msgList, msgSizes)

        elif command[0] == 'l':                # list
            if len(command) == 1:
                for i in range(1, len(msgList)+1):
                    showmessage(i, msgList)
            else:
                showmessage(msgnum(command), msgList)

        elif command[0] == 's':                # save
            if len(command) == 1:
                for i in range(1, len(msgList)+1):
                    savemessage(i, mailfile, msgList)
            else:
                savemessage(msgnum(command), mailfile, msgList)

        elif command[0] == 'd':                # mark for deletion later
            if len(command) == 1:              # 3.x needs list(): iter
                toDelete = list(range(1, len(msgList)+1))
            else:
                delnum = msgnum(command)
                if (1 &lt;= delnum &lt;= len(msgList)) and (delnum not in toDelete):
                    toDelete.append(delnum)
                else:
                    print('Bad message number')

        elif command[0] == 'm':                # send a new mail via SMTP
            try:
                sendmessage()
            except:
                print('Error - mail not sent')

        elif command[0] == '?':
            print(helptext)
        else:
            print('What? -- type "?" for commands help')
    return toDelete

def main():
    global parser, sender, fetcher
    mailserver = mailconfig.popservername
    mailuser   = mailconfig.popusername
    mailfile   = mailconfig.savemailfile

    parser     = mailtools.MailParser()
    sender     = mailtools.MailSender()
    fetcher    = mailtools.MailFetcherConsole(mailserver, mailuser)

    def progress(i, max):
        print(i, 'of', max)

    hdrsList, msgSizes, ignore = fetcher.downloadAllHeaders(progress)
    msgList = [parser.parseHeaders(hdrtext) for hdrtext in hdrsList]

    print('[Pymail email client]')
    toDelete = interact(msgList, msgSizes, mailfile)
    if toDelete: deletemessages(toDelete)

if __name__ == '__main__': main()</pre>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Running the pymail2 console client"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="running_the_pymail2_console_client"></a>Running the pymail2 console client</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>This program is <a id="pro13.11.7.1"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e59296"></a>used interactively, the same as the original. In
            fact, the output is nearly identical, so we won’t go into further
            details. Here’s a quick look at this script in action; run this on
            your own machine to see it firsthand:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e59302"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Email&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pymail2.py</code></strong>
user: PP4E@learning-python.com
loading headers
Connecting...
Password for PP4E@learning-python.com on pop.secureserver.net?
b'+OK &lt;24460.1273347818@pop15.prod.mesa1.secureserver.net&gt;'
1 of 7
2 of 7
3 of 7
4 of 7
5 of 7
6 of 7
7 of 7
load headers exit
[Pymail email client]
1:      1860 bytes
        From    =&gt;lutz@rmi.net
        To      =&gt;pp4e@learning-python.com
        Date    =&gt;Wed, 5 May 2010 11:29:36 −0400 (EDT)
        Subject =&gt;I'm a Lumberjack, and I'm Okay
2:      1408 bytes
        From    =&gt;lutz@learning-python.com
        To      =&gt;PP4E@learning-python.com
        Date    =&gt;Wed, 05 May 2010 08:33:47 −0700
        Subject =&gt;testing
3:      1049 bytes
        From    =&gt;Eric.the.Half.a.Bee@yahoo.com
        To      =&gt;PP4E@learning-python.com
        Date    =&gt;Thu, 06 May 2010 14:11:07 −0000
        Subject =&gt;A B C D E F G
4:      1038 bytes
        From    =&gt;Eric.the.Half.a.Bee@aol.com
        To      =&gt;nobody.in.particular@marketing.com
        Date    =&gt;Thu, 06 May 2010 14:32:32 −0000
        Subject =&gt;a b c d e f g
5:      957 bytes
        From    =&gt;PP4E@learning-python.com
        To      =&gt;maillist
        Date    =&gt;Thu, 06 May 2010 10:58:40 −0400
        Subject =&gt;test interactive smtplib
[Press Enter key]
6:      1037 bytes
        From    =&gt;Cardinal@hotmail.com
        To      =&gt;PP4E@learning-python.com
        Date    =&gt;Fri, 07 May 2010 20:32:38 −0000
        Subject =&gt;Among our weapons are these
7:      3248 bytes
        From    =&gt;PP4E@learning-python.com
        To      =&gt;PP4E@learning-python.com
        Date    =&gt;Sat, 08 May 2010 19:26:22 −0000
        Subject =&gt;testing mailtools package
[Pymail] Action? (i, l, d, s, m, q, ?) <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>l 7</code></strong>
load 7
Connecting...
b'+OK &lt;20110.1273347827@pop07.prod.mesa1.secureserver.net&gt;'
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Here is my source code

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[Pymail] Action? (i, l, d, s, m, q, ?) <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>d 7</code></strong>
[Pymail] Action? (i, l, d, s, m, q, ?) <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>m</code></strong>
From? <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>lutz@rmi.net</code></strong>
To?   <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>PP4E@learning-python.com</code></strong>
Subj? <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>test pymail2 send</code></strong>
Type message text, end with line="."
<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Run away! Run away!</code></strong>
<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>.</code></strong>
Sending to...['PP4E@learning-python.com']
From: lutz@rmi.net
To: PP4E@learning-python.com
Subject: test pymail2 send
Date: Sat, 08 May 2010 19:44:25 −0000

Run away! Run away!

Send exit
[Pymail] Action? (i, l, d, s, m, q, ?) <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>q</code></strong>
To be deleted: [7]
Delete?<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y</code></strong>
Deleting messages from server...
deleting mails
Connecting...
b'+OK &lt;11553.1273347873@pop17.prod.mesa1.secureserver.net&gt;'</pre>
<p>The messages in our mailbox have quite a few origins now—ISP
            webmail clients, basic SMTP scripts, the Python interactive
            command line, <code class="epub__literal">mailtools</code>
            self-test code, and two console-based email clients; in later
            chapters, we’ll add even more. All their mails look the same to
            our script; here’s a verification of the email we just sent (the
            second fetch finds it already in-cache):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e59343"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Email&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pymail2.py</code></strong>
user: PP4E@learning-python.com
loading headers
Connecting...
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...more lines omitted...</span></em>

[Press Enter key]
6:      1037 bytes
        From    =&gt;Cardinal@hotmail.com
        To      =&gt;PP4E@learning-python.com
        Date    =&gt;Fri, 07 May 2010 20:32:38 −0000
        Subject =&gt;Among our weapons are these
7:      984 bytes
        From    =&gt;lutz@rmi.net
        To      =&gt;PP4E@learning-python.com
        Date    =&gt;Sat, 08 May 2010 19:44:25 −0000
        Subject =&gt;test pymail2 send
[Pymail] Action? (i, l, d, s, m, q, ?) <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>l 7</code></strong>
load 7
Connecting...
b'+OK &lt;31456.1273348189@p3pop01-03.prod.phx3.gdg&gt;'
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Run away! Run away!

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[Pymail] Action? (i, l, d, s, m, q, ?) <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>l 7</code></strong>
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Run away! Run away!

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[Pymail] Action? (i, l, d, s, m, q, ?) <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>q</code></strong></pre>
<p>Study <code class="epub__literal">pymail2</code>’s code for
            more insights. As you’ll see, this version eliminates some
            complexities, such as the manual formatting of composed mail
            message text. It also does a better job of displaying a mail’s
            text—instead of blindly listing the full mail text (attachments
            and all), it uses <code class="epub__literal">mailtools</code> to
            fetch the first text part of the message. The messages we’re using
            are too simple to show the difference, but for a mail with
            attachments, this new version will be more focused about what it
            displays.</p>
<p>Moreover, because the interface to mail is encapsulated in
            the <code class="epub__literal">mailtools</code> package’s
            modules, if it ever must change, it will only need to be changed
            in that module, regardless of how many mail clients use its tools.
            And because the code in <code class="epub__literal">mailtools</code> is shared, if we know it works
            for one client, we can be sure it will work in another; there is
            no need to debug new code.</p>
<p>On the other hand, <code class="epub__literal">pymail2</code> doesn’t really leverage much of
            the power of either <code class="epub__literal">mailtools</code>
            or the underlying <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package
            it uses. For example, things like attachments, Internationalized
            headers, and inbox synchronization are not handled at all, and
            printing of some decoded main text may contain character sets
            incompatible with the console terminal interface. To see the full
            scope of the <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package, we
            need to explore a larger email system, such as PyMailGUI or
            PyMailCGI. The first of these is the topic of the next chapter,
            and the second appears in Chapter 16.
            First, though, let’s quickly survey a handful of additional
            client-side protocol <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e59392"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e59394"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e59396"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e59398"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e59400"></a>tools.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
