<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>NNTP: Accessing Newsgroups</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="NNTP: Accessing Newsgroups"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="nntp_colon_accessing_newsgroups"></a>NNTP: Accessing Newsgroups</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>So far in this chapter, <a id="news13.12"></a><a id="nntp13.12a"></a><a id="client13.12"></a><a id="nntp13.12b"></a><a id="nntp13.12c"></a>we have focused on Python’s FTP and email processing
        tools and have met a handful of client-side scripting modules along
        the way: <code class="epub__literal">ftplib</code>, <code class="epub__literal">poplib</code>, <code class="epub__literal">smtplib</code>, <code class="epub__literal">email</code>, <code class="epub__literal">mimetypes</code>, <code class="epub__literal">urllib</code>, and so on. This set is
        representative of Python’s client-side library tools for transferring
        and processing information over the Internet, but it’s not at all
        complete.</p>
<p>A more or less comprehensive list of Python’s Internet-related
        modules appears at the start of the previous chapter. Among other
        things, Python also includes client-side support libraries for
        Internet news, Telnet, HTTP, XML-RPC, and other standard protocols.
        Most of these are analogous to modules we’ve already met—they provide
        an object-based interface that automates the underlying sockets and
        message structures.</p>
<p>For instance, Python’s <code class="epub__literal">nntplib</code> module supports the client-side
        interface to NNTP—the Network News Transfer Protocol—which is used for
        reading and posting articles to Usenet newsgroups on the Internet.
        Like other protocols, NNTP runs on top of sockets and merely defines a
        standard message protocol; like other modules, <code class="epub__literal">nntplib</code> hides most of the protocol details
        and presents an object-based interface to Python scripts.</p>
<p>We won’t get into full protocol details here, but in brief, NNTP
        servers store a range of articles on the server machine, usually in a
        flat-file database. If you have the domain or IP name of a server
        machine that runs an NNTP server program listening on the NNTP port,
        you can write scripts that fetch or post articles from any machine
        that has Python and an Internet connection. For instance, the script
        in Example 13-28 by default
        fetches and displays the last 10 articles from Python’s Internet
        newsgroup, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>comp.lang.python</em></span>, from the
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>news.rmi.net</em></span> NNTP server at one of my
        ISPs.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id47"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 13-28. PP4E\Internet\Other\readnews.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
fetch and print usenet newsgroup posting from comp.lang.python via the
nntplib module, which really runs on top of sockets; nntplib also supports
posting new messages, etc.; note: posts not deleted after they are read;
"""

listonly = False
showhdrs = ['From', 'Subject', 'Date', 'Newsgroups', 'Lines']
try:
    import sys
    servername, groupname, showcount = sys.argv[1:]
    showcount  = int(showcount)
except:
    servername = nntpconfig.servername       # assign this to your server
    groupname  = 'comp.lang.python'          # cmd line args or defaults
    showcount  = 10                          # show last showcount posts

# connect to nntp server
print('Connecting to', servername, 'for', groupname)
from nntplib import NNTP
connection = NNTP(servername)
(reply, count, first, last, name) = connection.group(groupname)
print('%s has %s articles: %s-%s' % (name, count, first, last))

# get request headers only
fetchfrom = str(int(last) - (showcount-1))
(reply, subjects) = connection.xhdr('subject', (fetchfrom + '-' + last))

# show headers, get message hdr+body
for (id, subj) in subjects:                  # [-showcount:] if fetch all hdrs
    print('Article %s [%s]' % (id, subj))
    if not listonly and input('=&gt; Display?') in ['y', 'Y']:
        reply, num, tid, list = connection.head(id)
        for line in list:
            for prefix in showhdrs:
                if line[:len(prefix)] == prefix:
                    print(line[:80])
                    break
        if input('=&gt; Show body?') in ['y', 'Y']:
            reply, num, tid, list = connection.body(id)
            for line in list:
                print(line[:80])
    print()
print(connection.quit())</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>As for FTP and email tools, the script creates an NNTP object
        and calls its methods to fetch newsgroup information and articles’
        header and body text. The <code class="epub__literal">xhdr</code>
        method, for example, loads selected headers from a range of
        messages.</p>
<p>For NNTP servers that require authentication, you may also have
        to pass a username, a password, and possibly a reader-mode flag to the
        NNTP call. See the Python Library manual for more on other NNTP
        parameters and object methods.</p>
<p>In the interest of space and time, I’ll omit this script’s
        outputs here. When run, it connects to the server and displays each
        article’s subject line, pausing to ask whether it should fetch and
        show the article’s header information lines (headers listed in the
        variable <code class="epub__literal">showhdrs</code> only) and body
        text. We can also pass this script an explicit server name, newsgroup,
        and display count on the command line to apply it in different ways.
        With a little more work, we could turn this script into a full-blown
        news interface. For instance, new articles could be posted from within
        a Python script with code of this form (assuming the local file
        already contains proper NNTP header lines):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e59486"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"># to post, say this (but only if you really want to post!)
connection = NNTP(servername)
localfile = open('filename')      # file has proper headers
connection.post(localfile)        # send text to newsgroup
connection.quit()</pre>
<p>We might also add a tkinter-based GUI frontend to this script to
        make it more usable, but we’ll leave such an extension on the
        suggested exercise heap (see also the PyMailGUI interface’s suggested
        extensions at the end of the next chapter—email and news messages have
        a similar <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e59490"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e59492"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e59494"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e59496"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e59498"></a>structure).</p>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
