<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>HTTP: Accessing Websites</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="HTTP: Accessing Websites"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="http_colon_accessing_web_sites"></a>HTTP: Accessing Websites</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Python’s standard library (the modules <a id="http13.13"></a><a id="web13.13"></a><a id="client13.13"></a>that are installed with the interpreter) also includes
        client-side support for HTTP—the Hypertext Transfer Protocol—a message
        structure and port standard used to transfer information on the World
        Wide Web. In short, this is the protocol that your web browser (e.g.,
        Internet Explorer, Firefox, Chrome, or Safari) uses to fetch web pages
        and run applications on remote servers as you surf the Web.
        Essentially, it’s just bytes sent over port 80.</p>
<p>To really understand HTTP-style transfers, you need to know some
        of the server-side scripting topics covered in Chapter 15 (e.g., script invocations and
        Internet address schemes), so this section may be less useful to
        readers with no such background. <span>Luckily</span>, though, the basic HTTP
        interfaces in Python are simple enough for a cursory understanding
        even at this point in the book, so let’s take a brief look
        here.</p>
<p>Python’s standard <code class="epub__literal">http.client</code>
        module <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e59534"></a>automates much of the protocol defined by HTTP and
        allows scripts to fetch web pages as clients much like web browsers;
        as we’ll see in Chapter 15, <code class="epub__literal">http.server</code> <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e59543"></a>also allows us to implement web servers to handle the
        other side of the dialog. For instance, the script in Example 13-29 can be used to grab
        any file from any server machine running an HTTP web server program.
        As usual, the file (and descriptive header lines) is ultimately
        transferred as formatted messages over a standard socket port, but
        most of the complexity is hidden by the <code class="epub__literal">http.client</code> module (see our raw socket
        dialog with a port 80 HTTP server in Chapter 12 for a comparison).</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id48"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 13-29. PP4E\Internet\Other\http-getfile.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
fetch a file from an HTTP (web) server over sockets via http.client;  the filename
parameter may have a full directory path, and may name a CGI script with ? query
parameters on the end to invoke a remote program;  fetched file data or remote
program output could be saved to a local file to mimic FTP, or parsed with str.find
or html.parser module;  also: http.client request(method, url, body=None, hdrs={});
"""

import sys, http.client
showlines = 6
try:
    servername, filename = sys.argv[1:]           # cmdline args?
except:
    servername, filename = 'learning-python.com', '/index.html'

print(servername, filename)
server = http.client.HTTPConnection(servername)   # connect to http site/server
server.putrequest('GET', filename)                # send request and headers
server.putheader('Accept', 'text/html')           # POST requests work here too
server.endheaders()                               # as do CGI script filenames

reply = server.getresponse()                      # read reply headers + data
if reply.status != 200:                           # 200 means success
    print('Error sending request', reply.status, reply.reason)
else:
    data = reply.readlines()                      # file obj for data received
    reply.close()                                 # show lines with eoln at end
    for line in data[:showlines]:                 # to save, write data to file
        print(line)                               # line already has \n, but bytes</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Desired server names and filenames can be passed on the command
        line to override hardcoded defaults in the script. You need to know
        something of the HTTP protocol to make the most sense of this code,
        but it’s fairly straightforward to decipher. When run on the client,
        this script makes an HTTP object to connect to the server, sends it a
        GET request along with acceptable reply types, and then reads the
        server’s reply. Much like raw email message text, the HTTP server’s
        reply usually begins with a set of <span>descriptive</span> header lines, followed by
        the contents of the requested file. The HTTP object’s <code class="epub__literal">getfile</code> method gives us a file object from
        which we can read the downloaded data.</p>
<p>Let’s fetch a few files with this script. Like all Python
        client-side scripts, this one works on any machine with Python and an
        Internet connection (here it runs on a Windows client). Assuming that
        all goes well, the first few lines of the downloaded file are printed;
        in a more realistic application, the text we fetch would probably be
        saved to a local file, parsed with Python’s <code class="epub__literal">html.parser</code> module (introduced in Chapter 19), and so on. Without arguments, the
        script simply fetches the HTML index page at http://learning-python.com, a domain name I host at a
        commercial service provider:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e59577"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Other&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>http-getfile.py</code></strong>
learning-python.com /index.html
b'&lt;HTML&gt;\n'
b' \n'
b'&lt;HEAD&gt;\n'
b"&lt;TITLE&gt;Mark Lutz's Python Training Services&lt;/TITLE&gt;\n"
b'&lt;!--mstheme--&gt;&lt;link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="_themes/blends/blen...'
b'&lt;/HEAD&gt;\n'</pre>
<p>Notice that in Python 3.X the fetched data comes back as
        <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> strings again, not <code class="epub__literal">str</code>; since the Python<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e59590"></a> <code class="epub__literal">html.parser</code> HTML
        parse we’ll meet in Chapter 19 expects
        <code class="epub__literal">str</code> text strings instead of
        <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>, you’ll likely need to
        resolve a Unicode encoding choice here in order to parse, much the
        same as we did for email message text earlier in this chapter. As
        there, we might decode from <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>
        to <code class="epub__literal">str</code> per a default, user
        preferences or selections, headers inspection, or byte structure
        analysis. Because sockets send raw bytes, we confront this choice
        point whenever data shipped over them is text in nature; unless that
        text’s type is known or always simple in form, Unicode implies extra
        steps.</p>
<p>We can also list a server and file to be fetched on the command
        line, if we want to be more specific. In the following code, we use
        the script to fetch files from two different websites by listing their
        names on the command lines (I’ve truncated some of these lines so they
        fit in this book). Notice that the filename argument can include an
        arbitrary remote directory path to the desired file, as in the last
        fetch here:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e59616"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Other&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>http-getfile.py www.python.org /index.html</code></strong>
www.python.org /index.html
b'&lt;!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3....'
b'\n'
b'\n'
b'&lt;html  xml:lang="en" lang="en"&gt;\n'
b'\n'
b'&lt;head&gt;\n'

C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Other&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>http-getfile.py www.python.org index.html</code></strong>
www.python.org index.html
Error sending request 400 Bad Request

C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Other&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>http-getfile.py www.rmi.net /~lutz</code></strong>
www.rmi.net /~lutz
Error sending request 301 Moved Permanently

C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Other&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>http-getfile.py www.rmi.net /~lutz/index.html</code></strong>
www.rmi.net /~lutz/index.html
b'&lt;HTML&gt;\n'
b'\n'
b'&lt;HEAD&gt;\n'
b"&lt;TITLE&gt;Mark Lutz's Book Support Site&lt;/TITLE&gt;\n"
b'&lt;/HEAD&gt;\n'
b'&lt;BODY BGCOLOR="#f1f1ff"&gt;\n'</pre>
<p>Notice the second and third attempts in this code: if the
        request fails, the script receives and displays an HTTP error code
        from the server (we forgot the leading slash on the second, and the
        “index.html” on the third—required for this server and interface).
        With the raw HTTP interfaces, we need to be precise about what we
        want.</p>
<p>Technically, the string we call <code class="epub__literal">filename</code> in the script can refer to either a
        simple static web page file or a server-side program that generates
        HTML as its output. Those server-side programs are usually called CGI
        scripts—the topic of Chapters 15 and 16. For
        now, keep in mind that when <code class="epub__literal">filename</code> refers to a script, this program
        can be used to invoke another program that resides on a remote server
        machine. In that case, we can also specify parameters (called a query
        string) to be passed to the remote program after a <code class="epub__literal">?</code>.</p>
<p>Here, for instance, we pass a <code class="epub__literal">language=Python</code> parameter to a CGI script we
        will meet in Chapter 15 (to make this
        work, we also need to first spawn a locally running HTTP web server
        coded in Python using a script we first met in Chapter 1 and will revisit in Chapter 15):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e59659"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">In a different window
C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Web&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>webserver.py</code></strong>
webdir ".", port 80

C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Other&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>http-getfile.py localhost</code></strong>
                               <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>/cgi-bin/languages.py?language=Python</code></strong>
localhost /cgi-bin/languages.py?language=Python
b'&lt;TITLE&gt;Languages&lt;/TITLE&gt;\n'
b'&lt;H1&gt;Syntax&lt;/H1&gt;&lt;HR&gt;\n'
b'&lt;H3&gt;Python&lt;/H3&gt;&lt;P&gt;&lt;PRE&gt;\n'
b" print('Hello World')               \n"
b'&lt;/PRE&gt;&lt;/P&gt;&lt;BR&gt;\n'
b'&lt;HR&gt;\n'</pre>
<p>This book has much more to say later about HTML, CGI scripts,
        and the meaning of the HTTP GET request used in Example 13-29 (along with POST, one
        of two way to format information sent to an HTTP server), so we’ll
        skip additional details here.</p>
<p>Suffice it to say, though, that we could use the HTTP interfaces
        to write our own web browsers and build scripts that use websites as
        though they were subroutines. By sending parameters to remote programs
        and parsing their results, websites can take on the role of simple
        in-process functions (albeit, much more slowly and<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e59676"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e59678"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e59680"></a> indirectly).</p>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
