<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Other Client-Side Scripting Options</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Other Client-Side Scripting Options"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="other_client-side_scripting_options"></a>Other Client-Side Scripting Options</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In this chapter, we <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e59974"></a>focused on client-side interfaces to standard protocols
        that run over sockets, but as suggested in an earlier footnote,
        client-side programming can take other forms, too. We outlined many of
        these at the start of Chapter 12—web service
        protocols (including SOAP and XML-RPC); Rich Internet Application
        toolkits (including Flex, Silverlight, and pyjamas); cross-language
        framework integration (including Java and .NET); and more.</p>
<p>As mentioned, most of these serve to extend the functionality of
        web browsers, and so ultimately run on top of the HTTP protocol we
        explored in this chapter. For instance:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Jython</em></span> system, <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e59991"></a>a compiler that supports Python-coded Java
            applets—general-purpose programs downloaded from a server and run
            locally on the client when accessed or referenced by a URL, which
            extend the functionality of web browsers and interactions.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Similarly, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>RIAs</em></span> provide AJAX
            communication and widget toolkits that allow JavaScript to
            implement user interaction within web browsers, which is more
            dynamic and rich than HTML and web browsers otherwise
            support.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In Chapter 19, we’ll also study
            Python’s support for XML—structured text that is used as the data
            transfer medium of client/server dialogs in <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>web
            service</em></span> protocols such as XML-RPC, which transfer
            XML-encoded objects over HTTP, and are <span>supported</span> by Python’s <code class="epub__literal">xmlrpc</code> <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e60017"></a>standard library package. Such protocols can
            simplify the interface to web servers in their clients.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>In deference to time and space, though, we won’t go into further
        details on these and other client-side tools here. If you are
        interested in using Python to script clients, you should take a few
        minutes to become familiar with the list of Internet tools documented
        in the Python library reference manual. All work on similar principles
        but have slightly distinct interfaces.</p>
<p>In Chapter 15, we’ll hop the fence
        to the other side of the Internet world and explore scripts that run
        on server machines. Such programs give rise to the grander notion of
        applications that live entirely on the Web and are launched by web
        browsers. As we take this leap in structure, keep in mind that the
        tools we met in this and the preceding chapter are often sufficient to
        implement all the distributed processing that many applications
        require, and they can work in harmony with scripts that run on a
        server. To completely understand the Web worldview, though, we need to
        explore the server realm, too.</p>
<p>Before we get there, though, the next chapter puts concepts
        we’ve learned here to work by presenting a complete client-side
        program—a full-blown mail client GUI, which ties together many of the
        tools we’ve learned and coded. In fact, much of the email work we’ve
        done in this chapter was designed to lay the groundwork we’ll need to
        tackle the realistically scaled PyMailGUI example of the next chapter.
        Really, much of this book so far has served to build up skills
        required to equip us for this task: as we’ll see, <span>PyMailGUI</span> combines system tools, GUIs,
        and client-side Internet protocols to produce a useful system that
        does real work. As an added bonus, this example will help us
        understand the trade-offs between the client solutions we’ve met here
        and the server-side solutions we’ll study later in this part of the
        book.</p>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
