<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 14. The PyMailGUI Client</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 14. The PyMailGUI Client"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="the_pymailgui_client"></a>Chapter 14. The PyMailGUI Client</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="“Use the Source, Luke”"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="quotation_mark_use_the_source_comma_luke"></a>“Use the Source, Luke”</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The preceding chapter introduced Python’s client-side Internet
        protocols tool set—the standard library modules available for email,
        FTP, network news, HTTP, and more, from within a Python script. This
        chapter picks up where the last one left off and presents a complete
        client-side example—PyMailGUI, a Python program that sends, receives,
        composes, and parses Internet email messages.</p>
<p>Although the end result is a working program that you can
        actually use for your email, this chapter also has a few additional
        agendas worth noting before we get started:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Client-side scripting</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>PyMailGUI <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e60050"></a>implements a full-featured desktop GUI that runs
              on your machine and communicates with your mail servers when
              necessary. As such, it is a network client program that further
              illustrates some of the preceding chapter’s topics, and it will
              help us contrast server-side solutions introduced in the next
              chapter.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Code reuse</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Additionally, PyMailGUI ties together a number of the
              utility modules we’ve been writing in the book so far, and it
              demonstrates the power of code reuse in the <span>process—</span>it uses a thread module to
              allow mail transfers to overlap in time, a set of mail modules
              to process message content and route it across networks, a
              window protocol module to handle icons, a text editor component,
              and so on. Moreover, it inherits the power of tools in the
              Python standard library, such as the <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package; message construction
              and parsing, for example, is nearly trivial here.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Programming in the large</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>And finally, this chapter serves to illustrate realistic
              and large-scale software development in action. Because
              PyMailGUI is a relatively large and complete program, it shows
              by example some of the code structuring techniques that prove
              useful once we leave the realm of the small and artificial. For
              instance, object-oriented programming and modular design work
              well here to divide the system in smaller, self-contained
              units.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Ultimately, though, PyMailGUI serves to illustrate just how far
        the combination of GUIs, networking, and Python can take us. Like all
        Python programs, this system is <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>scriptable</em></span>—once
        you’ve learned its general structure, you can easily change it to work
        as you like, by modifying its source code. And like all Python
        programs, this one is <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>portable</em></span>—you can run it on
        any system with Python and a network connection, without having to
        change its code. Such advantages become automatic when your software
        is coded in an open source, portable, and readable language like
        Python.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Source Code Modules and Size"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="source_code_modules_and_size"></a>Source Code Modules and Size</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>This chapter is something of <a id="py14.1.1"></a>a self-study exercise. Because PyMailGUI is fairly
          large and mostly applies concepts we’ve already learned, we won’t go
          into much detail about its actual code. Instead, it is listed for
          you to read on your own. I encourage you to study the source and
          comments and to run this program live to get a feel for its
          operation; example save-mail files are included so you can even
          experiment offline.</p>
<p>As you study and run this program, you’ll also want to refer
          back to the modules we introduced earlier in the book and are
          reusing here, to gain a full understanding of the system. For
          reference, here are the major examples that will see new action in
          this chapter:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Example 13-21:
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>PP4E.Internet.Email.mailtools</em></span>
              (package)</span></dt><dd>
<p>Server sends and receives, parsing, construction
                (Client-side scripting chapter)</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Example 10-20:
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>PP4E.Gui.Tools.threadtools.py</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Thread queue management for GUI callbacks (GUI tools
                chapter)</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Example 10-16:
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>PP4E.Gui.Tools.windows.py</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Border configuration for top-level window (GUI tools
                chapter)</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Example 11-4:
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>PP4E.Gui.TextEditor.textEditor.py</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Text widget used in mail view windows, and in some pop
                ups (GUI examples chapter)</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Some of these modules in turn use additional examples we coded
          earlier but that are not imported by PyMailGUI itself (<code class="epub__literal">textEditor</code>, for instance, uses <code class="epub__literal">guimaker</code> to create its windows and
          toolbar). Naturally, we’ll also be coding new modules here. The
          following new modules are intended to be potentially useful in other
          programs:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">popuputil.py</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Various pop-up windows, written for general use</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">messagecache.py</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>A cache manager that keeps track of mail already
                loaded</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">wraplines.py</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>A utility for wrapping long lines of messages</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">mailconfig.py</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>User configuration parameters—server names, fonts, and
                so on (augmented here)</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">html2text.py</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>A rudimentary parser for extracting plain text from
                HTML-based emails</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Finally, the following are the new major modules coded in this
          chapter which are specific to the PyMailGUI program. In total,
          PyMailGUI itself consists of the ten modules in this and the
          preceding lists, along with a handful of less prominent source files
          we’ll see in this chapter:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">SharedNames.py</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Program-wide globals used by multiple files</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">ViewWindows.py</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>The implementation of View, Write, Reply, and Forward
                message view windows</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">ListWindows.py</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>The implementation of mail-server and local-file message
                list windows</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">PyMailGuiHelp.py</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>User-oriented help text, opened by the main window’s bar
                button</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">PyMailGui.py</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>The main, top-level file of the program, run to launch
                the main window</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Code size"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="code_size"></a>Code size</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As a realistically scaled system, PyMailGUI’s size is also
            instructive. All told, PyMailGUI is composed of 18 new files: the
            10 new Python modules in the two preceding lists, plus an HTML
            help file, a small configuration file for PyEdit pop ups, a
            currently unused package initialization file, and 5 short Python
            files in a subdirectory used for alternate account
            configuration.</p>
<p>Together, it contains some <span class="epub__strong"><strong>2,400</strong></span> new lines of program source code in
            16 Python files (including comments and whitespace), plus roughly
            1,700 lines of help text in one Python and one HTML file (in two
            flavors). This 4,100 new line total doesn’t include the four other
            book examples listed in the previous section that are reused in
            PyMailGUI. The reused examples themselves constitute 2,600
            additional lines of Python program code—roughly 1,000 lines each
            for PyEdit and <code class="epub__literal">mailtools</code> alone.
            That brings the grand total to <span class="epub__strong"><strong>6,700</strong></span> lines: 4,100 new + 2,600 reused. Of
            this total, <span class="epub__strong"><strong>5,000</strong></span> lines is in
            program code files (2,400 of which are new here) and 1,700 lines
            is help text.<sup>[54]</sup></p>
<p>I obtained these lines counts with PyEdit’s Info pop up, and
            opened the files with the code button in the PyDemos entry for
            this program (the Source button in PyMailGUI’s own text-based help
            window does similar work). For the break down by individual files,
            see the Excel spreadsheet file <em class="epub__filename">linecounts.xls</em> in the <em class="epub__filename">media</em> subdirectory of PyMailGUI; this
            file is also used to test attachment sends and receives, and so
            appears near the end of the emails in file <em class="epub__filename">SavedEmail\version30-4E</em> if opened in
            the GUI (we’ll see how to open mail save files in a
            moment).</p>
<p>Watch for the changes section ahead for size comparisons to
            prior versions. Also see the SLOC counter script in Chapter 6 for an alternative way to
            count source lines that is less manual, but can’t include all
            related files in a single run and doesn’t discriminate between
            program code and help text.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Code Structure"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="code_structure"></a>Code Structure</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As these statistics probably suggest, this is the largest
            example we’ll see in this book, but you shouldn’t be deterred by
            its size. Because it uses modular and OOP techniques, the code is
            simpler than you may think:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Python’s modules allow us to divide the system into
                files that have a cohesive purpose, with minimal coupling
                between them—code is easier to locate and understand if your
                modules have a logical, self-contained structure.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Python’s OOP support allows us to factor code for reuse
                and avoid <span>redundancy—</span>as
                you’ll see, code is customized, not repeated, and the classes
                we will code reflect the actual components of the GUI to make
                them easy to follow.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>For instance, the implementation of mail list windows is
            easy to read and change, because it has been factored into a
            common shared superclass, which is customized by subclasses for
            mail-server and save-file lists; since these are mostly just
            variations on a theme, most of the code appears in just one place.
            Similarly, the code that implements the message view window is a
            superclass shared by write, reply, and forward composition
            windows; subclasses simply tailor it for writing rather than
            viewing.</p>
<p>Although we’ll deploy these techniques in the context of a
            mail processing program here, such techniques will apply to any
            nontrivial program you’ll write in Python.</p>
<p>To help get you started, the <code class="epub__literal">PyMailGuiHelp.py</code> module listed in part
            near the end of this chapter includes a help text string that
            describes how this program is used, as well as its major features.
            You can also view this help live in both text and HTML form when
            the program is run. Experimenting with the system, while referring
            to its code, is probably the best and quickest way to uncover its
            <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e60278"></a>secrets.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Why PyMailGUI?"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="why_pymailgui_question"></a>Why PyMailGUI?</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Before we <a id="py14.1.2"></a>start digging into the code of this relatively large
          system, some context is in order. PyMailGUI is a Python program that
          implements a client-side email processing user interface with the
          standard tkinter GUI toolkit. It is presented both as an instance of
          Python Internet scripting and as a realistically scaled example that
          ties together other tools we’ve already seen, such as threads and
          tkinter GUIs.</p>
<p>Like the <code class="epub__literal">pymail</code>
          console-based program we wrote in Chapter 13, PyMailGUI runs entirely on your
          local computer. Your email is fetched from and sent to remote mail
          servers over sockets, but the program and its user interface run
          locally. As a result, PyMailGUI is <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e60299"></a>called an email client: like <code class="epub__literal">pymail</code>, it employs Python’s client-side
          tools to talk to mail servers from the local machine. Unlike
          <code class="epub__literal">pymail</code>, though, PyMailGUI is a
          full-featured user interface: email operations are performed with
          point-and-click operations and advanced mail processing such as
          attachments, save files, and Internationalization is
          supported.</p>
<p>Like many examples presented in this text, PyMailGUI is a
          practical, useful program. In fact, I run it on all kinds of
          machines to check my email while traveling around the world teaching
          Python classes. Although PyMailGUI won’t put Microsoft Outlook out
          of business anytime soon, it has two key pragmatic features alluded
          to earlier that have nothing to do with email itself—portability and
          scriptability, which are attractive features in their own right and
          merit a few additional words here:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>It’s portable</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>PyMailGUI runs on any machine with sockets and a Python
                with tkinter installed. Because email is transferred with the
                Python libraries, any Internet connection that supports Post
                Office Protocol (POP) and Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP)
                access will do. Moreover, because the user interface is coded
                with tkinter, PyMailGUI should work, unchanged, on Windows,
                the X Window System (Unix, Linux), and the Macintosh (classic
                and OS X), as long as Python 3.X runs there too.</p>
<p>Microsoft Outlook may be a more feature-rich package,
                but it has to be run on Windows, and more specifically, on a
                single Windows machine. Because it generally deletes email
                from a server as it is downloaded by default and stores it on
                the client, you cannot run Outlook on multiple machines
                without spreading your email across all those machines. By
                contrast, PyMailGUI saves and deletes email only on request,
                and so it is a bit friendlier to people who check their email
                in an ad hoc fashion on arbitrary computers (like me).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>It’s scriptable</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>PyMailGUI can become anything you want it to be because
                it is fully programmable. In fact, this is the real killer
                feature of PyMailGUI and of open source software like Python
                in general—because you have full access to PyMailGUI’s source
                code, you are in complete control of where it evolves from
                here. You have nowhere near as much control over commercial,
                closed products like Outlook; you generally get whatever a
                large company decided you need, along with whatever bugs that
                company might have introduced.</p>
<p>As a Python script, PyMailGUI is a much more flexible
                tool. For instance, we can change its layout, disable
                features, and add completely new functionality quickly by
                changing its Python source code. Don’t like the mail-list
                display? Change a few lines of code to customize it. Want to
                save and delete your mail automatically as it is loaded? Add
                some more code and buttons. Tired of seeing junk mail? Add a
                few lines of text processing code to the load function to
                filter spam. These are just a few examples. The point is that
                because PyMailGUI is written in a high-level, easy-to-maintain
                scripting language, such customizations are relatively simple,
                and might even be fun.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>At the end of the day, because of such features, this is a
          realistic Python program that I actually
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>use</em></span>—both as a primary email tool and as a
          fallback option when my ISP’s webmail system goes down (which, as I
          mentioned in the prior chapter, has a way of happening at the worst
          possible times).<sup>[55]</sup> Python scripting is an enabling skill to <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e60341"></a>have.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Running PyMailGUI"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="running_pymailgui"></a>Running PyMailGUI</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Of course, <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e60349"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e60354"></a>to script PyMailGUI on your own, you’ll need to be
          able to run it. PyMailGUI requires only a computer with some sort of
          Internet connectivity (a PC with a broadband or dial-up account will
          do) and an installed Python with the tkinter extension enabled. The
          Windows port of Python has this capability, so Windows PC users
          should be able to run this program immediately by clicking its
          icon.</p>
<p>Two notes on running the system: first, you’ll want to change
          the file <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>mailconfig.py</em></span> in the program’s source
          directory to reflect your account’s parameters, if you wish to send
          or receive mail from a live server; more on this as we interact with
          the system ahead.</p>
<p>Second, you can still experiment with the system without a
          live Internet connection—for a quick look at message view windows,
          use the main window’s Open buttons to open saved-mail files included
          in the program’s <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>SavedMail</em></span> subdirectory. The
          PyDemos launcher script at the top of the book’s examples directory,
          for example, forces PyMailGUI to open saved-mail files by passing
          filenames on the command line. Although you’ll probably want to
          connect to your email servers eventually, viewing saved mails
          offline is enough to sample the system’s flavor and does not require
          any configuration file changes.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Presentation Strategy"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="presentation_strategy"></a>Presentation Strategy</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>PyMailGUI is <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e60375"></a>easily the largest program in this book, but it
          doesn’t introduce many library interfaces that we haven’t already
          seen in this book. For instance:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The PyMailGUI interface is built with Python’s tkinter,
              using the familiar listboxes, buttons, and text widgets we met
              earlier.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Python’s <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package
              is applied to pull-out headers, text, and attachments of
              messages, and to compose the same.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Python’s POP and SMTP library modules are used to fetch,
              send, and delete mail over sockets.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Python threads, if installed in your Python interpreter,
              are put to work to avoid blocking during potentially
              overlapping, long-running mail operations.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>We’re also going to reuse the PyEdit <code class="epub__literal">TextEditor</code> object we wrote in Chapter 11 to view and compose messages and
          to pop up raw text, attachments, and source; the <code class="epub__literal">mailtools</code> package’s tools we wrote in
          Chapter 13 to load, send, and delete
          mail with a server; and the <code class="epub__literal">mailconfig</code> module strategy introduced in
          Chapter 13 to support end-user
          settings. PyMailGUI is largely an exercise in combining existing
          tools.</p>
<p>On the other hand, because this program is so long, we won’t
          exhaustively document all of its code. Instead, we’ll begin with a
          quick look at how PyMailGUI has evolved, and then move on to
          describing how it works today from an end user’s perspective—a brief
          demo of its windows in action. After that, we’ll list the system’s
          new source code modules without many additional comments, for
          further study.</p>
<p>Like most of the longer case studies in this book, this
          section assumes that you already know enough Python to make sense of
          the code on your own. If you’ve been reading this book linearly, you
          should also know enough about tkinter, threads, and mail interfaces
          to understand the library tools applied here. If you get stuck, you
          may wish to brush up on the presentation of these topics earlier in
          the book.</p>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[54] </sup>And remember: you would have to multiply these line
                counts by a factor of four or more to get the equivalent in a
                language like C or C++. If you’ve done much programming, you
                probably recognize that the fact that we can implement a
                fairly full-featured mail processing program in roughly 5,000
                total lines of program code speaks volumes about the power of
                the Python language and its libraries. For comparison, the
                original 1.0 version of this program from the second edition
                of this book was just 745 total lines in 3 new modules, but it
                also was very limited—it did not support PyMailGUI 2.X’s
                attachments, thread overlap, local mail files, and so on, and
                did not have the Internationalization support or other
                features of this edition’s PyMailGUI 3.X.</p>
</div><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[55] </sup>In fact, my ISP’s webmail send system went down the very
              day I had to submit the third edition of this book to my
              publisher! No worries—I fired up PyMailGUI and used it to send
              the book as attachment files through a different server. In a
              sense, this book submitted itself.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
