<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Major PyMailGUI Changes</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Major PyMailGUI Changes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="major_pymailgui_changes"></a>Major PyMailGUI Changes</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Like the PyEdit text <a id="py14.2"></a>editor of Chapter 11,
        PyMailGUI serves as a good example of software evolution in action.
        Because its revisions help document this system’s functionality, and
        because this example is as much about software engineering as about
        Python itself, let’s take a quick look at its recent changes.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="New in Version 2.1 and 2.0 (Third Edition)"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="new_in_version_2.1_and_2.0_open_parenthe"></a>New in Version 2.1 and 2.0 (Third Edition)</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The 2.1 version of PyMailGUI presented in the third edition of
          the book in early 2006 is still largely present and current in this
          fourth edition in 2010. Version 2.1 added a handful of enhancements
          to version 2.0, and version 2.0 was a complete rewrite of the 1.0
          version of the second edition with a radically expanded feature
          set.</p>
<p><a name="second edition"></a>In fact, the second edition’s version 1.0 of this program
          written in early 2000 was only some 685 total program lines long
          (515 lines for the GUI main script and 170 lines in an email
          utilities module), not counting related examples reused, and just 60
          lines in its help text module. Version 1.0 was really something of a
          prototype (if not toy), written mostly to serve as a short book
          example.</p>
<p>Although it did not yet support Internationalized mail content
          or other 3.0 extensions, in the third edition, PyMailGUI 2.1 became
          a much more realistic and feature-rich program that could be used
          for day-to-day email processing. It grew by nearly a factor of three
          to be 1,800 new program source lines (plus 1,700 program lines in
          related modules reused, and 500 additional lines of help text). By
          comparison, version 3.0 by itself grew only by some 30% to be 2,400
          new program source lines as described earlier (plus 2,500 lines in
          related modules, and 1,700 lines of help text). Statistically minded
          readers: consult file <em class="epub__filename">linecounts-prior-version.xls</em> in
          PyMailGUI’s <em class="epub__filename">media</em> subdirectory
          for a line counts breakdown for version 2.1 by file.</p>
<p>In version 2.1, among PyMailGUI’s new weapons were (and still
          are) these:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>MIME multipart mails with attachments may be both viewed
              and composed.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Mail transfers are no longer blocking, and may overlap in
              time.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Mail may be saved and processed offline from a local
              file.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Message parts may now be opened automatically within the
              GUI.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Multiple messages may be selected for processing in list
              windows.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Initial downloads fetch mail headers only; full mails are
              fetched on request.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>View window headers and list window columns are
              configurable.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Deletions are performed immediately, not delayed until
              program exit.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Most server transfers report their progress in the
              GUI.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Long lines are intelligently wrapped in viewed and quoted
              text.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Fonts and colors in list and view windows may be
              configured by the user.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Authenticating SMTP mail-send servers that require login
              are supported.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Sent messages are saved in a local file, which may be
              opened in the GUI.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>View windows intelligently pick a main text part to be
              displayed.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Already fetched mail headers and full mails are cached for
              speed.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Date strings and addresses in composed mails are formatted
              properly.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>View windows now have quick-access buttons for
              attachments/parts (2.1).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Inbox out-of-sync errors are detected on deletes, and on
              index and mail loads (2.1).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Save-mail file loads and deletes are threaded, to avoid
              pauses for large files (2.1).</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>The last three items on this list were added in version 2.1;
          the rest were part of the 2.0 rewrite. Some of these changes were
          made simple by growth in standard library tools (e.g., support for
          attachments is straightforward with the new <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package), but most represented
          changes in PyMailGUI itself. There were also a few genuine fixes:
          addresses were parsed more accurately, and date and time formats in
          sent mails became standards conforming, because these tasks used new
          tools in the <code class="epub__literal">email</code>
          package.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="New in Version 3.0 (Fourth Edition)"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="new_in_version_3.0_open_parenthesis_4th"></a>New in Version 3.0 (Fourth Edition)</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>PyMailGUI version 3.0, presented in this fourth edition of
          this book, inherits all of 2.1’s upgrades described in the prior
          section and adds many of its own. Changes are perhaps less dramatic
          in version 3.0, though some address important usability issues, and
          they seem collectively sufficient to justify assigning this version
          a new major release number. Here’s a summary of what’s new this time
          around:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Python 3.X port</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>The code was updated to run under Python 3.X only;
                Python 2.X is no longer supported without code changes.
                Although some of the task of porting to Python 3.X requires
                only minor coding changes, other idiomatic implications are
                more far reaching. Python 3.X’s new Unicode focus, for
                example, motivated much of the Internationalization support in
                this version of PyMailGUI (discussed ahead).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Layout improvements</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>View window forms are laid out with gridding instead of
                packed column frames, for better appearance and platform
                neutrality of email headers (see Chapter 9 for more details on
                form layout). In addition, list window toolbars are now
                arranged with expanding separators for clarity; this
                effectively groups buttons by their roles and scope. List
                windows are also larger when initially opened to show
                more.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Text editor fix for Tk change</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Both the embedded text editor and some text editor
                instances popped up on demand are now forcibly updated before
                new text is inserted, for accurate initial positioning at line
                1. See PyEdit in Chapter 11 for
                more on this requirement; it stems from a recent change (bug?)
                in either Tk or tkinter.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Text editor upgrades inherited</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Because the PyEdit program is reused in multiple roles
                here, this version of PyMailGUI also acquires all its latest
                fixes by proxy. Most prominently, these include a new Grep
                external files search dialog and support for displaying,
                opening, and saving Unicode text. See Chapter 11 for details.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Workaround for Python 3.1 bug on traceback
              prints</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>In the obscure-but-all-too-typical category: the common
                function in <code class="epub__literal">Shared</code><code class="epub__literal">Names.py</code> that prints traceback
                details had to be changed to work correctly under Python 3.X.
                The <code class="epub__literal">traceback</code> module’s
                <code class="epub__literal">print_tb</code> function can no
                longer print a stack trace to <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code> if the calling program is
                spawned from another on Windows; it still can as before if the
                caller was run normally from a shell prompt. Since this
                function is called from the main thread on worker thread
                exceptions, if allowed to fail any printed error kills the GUI
                entirely when it is spawned from the gadget or demo
                launchers.</p>
<p>To work around this, the function now catches exceptions
                when <code class="epub__literal">print_tb</code> is called and
                in response runs it again with a real file instead of <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code>. This appears to be a
                Python 3.X regression, as the same code worked correctly in
                both contexts in Python 2.5 and 2.6. Unlike some similar
                issues, it has nothing to do with printing Unicode, as stack
                traces are all ASCII text. Even more baffling, directly
                printing to stdout in the same function works fine. Hey, if it
                were easy, they wouldn’t call it “work.”</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Bcc addresses added to envelope but header
              omitted</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Minor change: addresses entered in the user-selectable
                Bcc header line of edit windows are included in the recipients
                list (the “envelope”), but the Bcc header line itself is no
                longer included in the message text sent. Otherwise, Bcc
                recipients might be seen by some email readers and clients
                (including PyMailGUI), which defeats most of this header’s
                purpose.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Avoiding parallel fetches of the same
              mail</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>PyMailGUI loads only mail headers initially, and fetches
                a mail’s full text later when needed for viewing and other
                operations, allowing multiple fetches to overlap in time (they
                are run in parallel threads). Though unlikely, it was not
                impossible for a user to trigger a new fetch for a mail that
                was currently being fetched, by selecting the mail again
                during its download (clicking its list entry twice quickly
                sufficed to kick this off). Although the message cache updates
                performed in the parallel fetch threads appeared to be thread
                safe, this behavior seemed odd and wasted time.</p>
<p>To do better, this version now keeps track of all
                fetches in progress in the main thread, to avoid this overlap
                potential entirely—a message fetch in progress disables all
                new fetch requests that it is a part of, until its fetch
                completes. Multiple overlapping fetches are still allowed, as
                long as their targets do not intersect. A set is used to
                detect nondisjoint fetch requests. Mails already fetched and
                cached are not subject to this check and can always be
                selected irrespective of any fetches in progress.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Multiple recipients separated in GUI by commas,
              not semicolons</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>In the prior edition, “;” was used as the recipient
                character, and addresses were naively split on “;” on a send.
                This attempted to avoid conflicts with “,” commonly used in
                email names. Replies dropped the name part if it contained a
                “;” when extracting a To address, but it was not impossible
                that clashes could still arise if a “;” appeared both as the
                separator and in manually typed address’s name.</p>
<p>To improve, this edition uses “,” as the recipient
                separator, and fully parses email address lists with the
                <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package’s <code class="epub__literal">getaddresses</code> and <code class="epub__literal">parseaddr</code> tools, instead of
                splitting naively. Because these tools fully parse the list’s
                content, “,” characters embedded in email address name parts
                are not mistakenly takes as address separators, and so do not
                clash. Servers and clients generally expect “,” separators,
                too, so this works naturally.</p>
<p>With this fix, commas can appear both as address
                separators as well as embedded in address name components. For
                replies, this is handled automatically: the To field is
                prefilled with the From in the original message. For sends,
                the split happens automatically in email tools for To, Cc, and
                Bcc headers fields (the latter two are ignored if they contain
                just the initial “?” when sent).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>HTML help display</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Help can now be displayed in text form in a GUI window,
                in HTML form in a locally running web browser, or both. User
                settings in the <code class="epub__literal">mailconfig</code>
                module select which form or forms to display. The HTML version
                is new; it uses a simple <span>translation</span> of the help text
                with added links to sections and external sites and Python’s
                <code class="epub__literal">webbrowser</code> module,
                discussed earlier in this book, to open a browser. The text
                help display is now redundant, but it is retained because the
                HTML display currently lacks its ability to open source file
                viewers.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Thread callback queue speedup</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>The global <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e60644"></a>thread queue dispatches GUI update callbacks
                much faster now—up to 100 times per second, instead of the
                prior 10. This is due both to checking more frequently (20
                timer events per second versus 10) and to dispatching more
                callbacks per timer event (5 versus the prior 1). Depending on
                the interleaving of queue puts and gets, this speeds up
                initial loads for larger mailboxes by as much as an order of
                magnitude (factor of 10), at some potential minor cost in CPU
                utilization. On my Windows 7 laptop, though, PyMailGUI still
                shows 0% CPU utilization in Task Manager when idle.</p>
<p>I bumped up the queue’s speed to support an email
                account having 4,800 inbox messages (actually, even more by
                the time I got around to taking screenshots for this chapter).
                Without the speedup, initial header loads for this account
                took 8 minutes to work through the 4,800 progress callbacks
                (4800 ÷ 10 ÷ 60), even though most reflected messages skipped
                immediately by the new mail fetch limits (see the next item).
                With the speedup, the initial load takes just 48
                seconds—perhaps not ideal still, but this initial headers load
                is normally performed only once per session, and this policy
                strikes a balance between CPU resources and responsiveness.
                This email account is an arguably pathological case, of
                course, but most initial loads benefit from the faster
                speed.</p>
<p>See Chapter 10’s <code class="epub__literal">threadtools</code> for most of this
                change’s code, as well as additional background details. We
                could alternatively loop through all queued events on each
                timer event, but this may block the GUI indefinitely if
                updates are queued quickly.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Mail fetch limits</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Since 2.1, PyMailGUI loads only mail headers initially,
                not full mail text, and only loads newly arrived headers
                thereafter. Depending on your Internet and server speeds,
                though, this may still be impractical for very large inboxes
                (as mentioned, one of mine currently has some 4,800 emails).
                To support such cases, a new <code class="epub__literal">mailconfig</code> setting can be used to
                limit the number of headers (or full mails if TOP is
                unsupported) fetched on loads.</p>
<p>Given this setting N, PyMailGUI fetches at most N of the
                most recently arrived mails. Older mails outside this set are
                not fetched from the server, but are displayed as empty/dummy
                emails which are mostly inoperative (though they can generally
                still be fetched on demand).</p>
<p>This feature is inherited from <code class="epub__literal">mailtools</code> code in Chapter 13; see the <code class="epub__literal">mailconfig</code> module ahead for the user
                setting associated with it. Note that even with this fix,
                because the <code class="epub__literal">threadtools</code>
                queue system used here dispatches GUI events such as progress
                updates only up to 100 times per second, a 4,800 mail inbox
                still takes <span>48 seconds</span>
                to complete an initially header load. The queue should either
                run faster still, or I should delete an email once in a
                while!</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>HTML main text extraction
              (prototype)</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>PyMailGUI is still somewhat plain-text biased, despite
                the emergence of<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e60695"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e60700"></a> HTML emails in recent years. When the main (or
                only) text part of a mail is HTML, it is displayed in a
                popped-up web browser. In the prior version, though, its HTML
                text was still displayed in a PyEdit text editor component and
                was still quoted for the main text of replies and
                forwards.</p>
<p>Because most people are not HTML parsers, this edition’s
                version attempts to do better by extracting plain text from
                the part’s HTML with a simple HTML parsing step. The extracted
                plain text is then displayed in the mail view window and used
                as original text in replies and forwards.</p>
<p>This HTML parser is at best a prototype and is largely
                included to provide a first step that you can tailor for your
                tastes and needs, but any result it produces is better than
                showing raw HTML. If this fails to render the plain text well,
                users can still fall back on viewing in the web browser and
                cutting and pasting from there into replies and forwards. See
                also the note about open source alternatives by this parser’s
                source code later in this chapter; this is an already explored
                problem <span>domain</span>.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Reply copies all original recipients by
              default</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>In this version, replies are really reply-to-all by
                default—they automatically prefill the Cc header in the
                replies composition window with all the original recipients of
                the message. To do so, replies extract all addresses among
                both the original To and Cc headers, and remove duplicates as
                well as the new sender’s address by using set operations. The
                net effect is to copy all other recipients on the reply. This
                is in addition to replying to the sender by initializing To
                with the original sender’s <span>address</span>.</p>
<p>This feature is intended to reflect common usage: email
                circulated among groups. Since it might not always be
                desirable, though, it can be disabled in <code class="epub__literal">mailconfig</code> so that replies
                initialize just To headers to reply to the original sender
                only. If enabled, users may need to delete the Cc prefill if
                not wanted; if disabled, users may need to insert Cc addresses
                manually instead. Both cases seem equally likely. Moreover,
                it’s not impossible that the original recipients include mail
                list names, aliases, or spurious addresses that will be either
                incorrect or irrelevant when the reply is sent. Like the Bcc
                prefill described in the next item, the reply’s Cc
                initialization can be edited prior to sends if needed, and
                disabled entirely if preferred. Also see the suggested
                enhancements for this feature at the end of this
                chapter—allowing this to be enabled or disabled in the GUI per
                message might be a better approach.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Other upgrades: Bcc prefills, “Re” and “Fwd”
              case, list size, duplicate recipients</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>In addition, there have been smaller enhancements
                throughout. Among them: Bcc headers in edit windows are now
                prefilled with the sender’s address as a convenience (a common
                role for this header); Reply and Forward now ignore case when
                determining if adding a “Re:” or “Fwd:” to the subject would
                be redundant; mail list window width and height may now be
                configured in <code class="epub__literal">mailconfig</code>;
                duplicates are removed from the recipient address list in
                <code class="epub__literal">mailtools</code> on sends to avoid
                sending anyone multiple copies of the same mail (e.g., if an
                address appears in both To and Cc); and other minor
                improvements which I won’t cover here. Look for “3.0” and “4E”
                in program comments here and in the underlying <code class="epub__literal">mailtools</code> package of Chapter 13 to see other specific code
                changes.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Unicode (Internationalization)
              support</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>I’ve saved the most <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e60753"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e60758"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e60763"></a>significant PyMailGUI 3.0 upgrade for last: it
                now supports Unicode encoding of fetched, saved, and sent
                mails, to the extent allowed by the Python 3.1 <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package. Both text parts of
                messages and message headers are decoded when displayed and
                encoded when sent. Since this is too large a change to explain
                in this format, the next section elaborates.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Version 3.0 Unicode support policies"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="version_3.0_unicode_support_policies"></a>Version 3.0 Unicode support policies</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The last item on the <a id="uni14.2.2.1"></a><a id="py14.2.2.1"></a>preceding list is probably the most substantial. Per
            Chapter 13, a user-configurable
            setting in the <code class="epub__literal">mailconfig</code>
            module is used on a session-wide basis to decode full message
            bytes into Unicode strings when fetched, and to encode and decode
            mail messages stored in text-mode save files.</p>
<p>More visibly, when composing, the main text and attached
            text parts of composed mails may be given explicit Unicode
            encodings in <code class="epub__literal">mailconfig</code> or via
            user input; when viewing, message header information of parsed
            emails is used to determine the Unicode types of both the main
            mail text as well as text parts opened on demand. In addition,
            Internationalized mail headers (e.g., Subject, To, and From) are
            decoded per email, MIME, and Unicode standards when displayed
            according to their own content, and are automatically encoded if
            non-ASCII when sent.</p>
<p>Other Unicode policies (and fixes) of Chapter 13’s <code class="epub__literal">mailtools</code> package are inherited here,
            too; see the prior chapter for more details. In summation, here is
            how all these policies play out in terms of user
            interfaces:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Fetched emails</span></dt><dd>
<p>When <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>fetching</em></span> mails, a
                  session-wide user setting is used to decode full message
                  bytes to Unicode strings, as required by Python’s current
                  email parser; if this fails, a handful of guesses are
                  applied. Most mail text will likely be 7 or 8 bit in nature,
                  since original email standards required ASCII.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Composed text parts</span></dt><dd>
<p>When <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>sending</em></span> new mails, user
                  settings are used to determine Unicode type for the main
                  text part and any text attachment parts. If these are not
                  set in <code class="epub__literal">mailconfig</code>, the
                  user will instead be asked for encoding names in the GUI for
                  each text part. These are ultimately used to add character
                  set headers, and to invoke MIME encoding. In all cases, the
                  program falls back on UTF-8 if the user’s encoding setting
                  or input does not work for the text being sent—for instance,
                  if the user has chosen ASCII for the main text of a reply to
                  or forward of a non-ASCII message or for non-ASCII
                  attachments.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Composed headers</span></dt><dd>
<p>When <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>sending</em></span> new mails, if header
                  lines or the name component of an email address in
                  address-related lines do not encode properly as ASCII text,
                  we first encode the header per email Internationalization
                  standard. This is done per UTF-8 by default, but a <code class="epub__literal">mailconfig</code> setting can request a
                  different encoding. In email address pairs, names which
                  cannot be encoded are dropped, and only the email address is
                  used. It is assumed that servers will respect the encoded
                  names in email addresses.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Displayed text parts</span></dt><dd>
<p>When <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>viewing</em></span> fetched mail,
                  Unicode encoding names in message headers are used to decode
                  whenever possible. The main-text part is decoded into
                  <code class="epub__literal">str</code> Unicode text per
                  header information prior to inserting it into a PyEdit
                  component. The content of all other text parts, as well as
                  all binary parts, is saved in <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> form in binary-mode files,
                  from where the part may be opened later in the GUI on
                  demand. When such on-demand text parts are opened, they are
                  displayed in PyEdit pop-up windows by passing to PyEdit the
                  name of the part’s binary-mode file, as well as the part’s
                  encoding name obtained from part message headers.</p>
<p>If the encoding name in a text part’s header is absent
                  or fails to decode, encoding guesses are tried for main-text
                  parts, and PyEdit’s separate Unicode policies are applied to
                  text parts opened on demand (see Chapter 11—it may prompt for an
                  encoding if not known). In addition to these rules, HTML
                  text parts are saved in binary mode and opened in a web
                  browser, relying on the browser’s own character set support;
                  this may in turn use tags in the HTML itself, guesses, or
                  user encoding selections.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Displayed headers</span></dt><dd>
<p>When <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>viewing</em></span> email, message
                  headers are automatically decoded per email standards. This
                  includes both full headers such as Subject, as well as the
                  name components of all email address fields in
                  address-related headers such as From, To, and Cc, and allows
                  these components to be completely encoded or contain encoded
                  substrings. Because their content gives their MIME and
                  Unicode encodings, no user interaction is required to decode
                  headers.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>In other words, PyMailGUI now supports
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Internationalized</em></span> message display and
            composition for both payloads and headers. For broadest utility,
            this support is distributed across multiple packages and examples.
            For example, Unicode decoding of full message text on fetches
            actually occurs deep in the imported <code class="epub__literal">mailtool</code> package classes. Because of
            this, full (unparsed) message text is always Unicode <code class="epub__literal">str</code> here. Similarly, headers are decoded
            for display here using tools implemented in <code class="epub__literal">mailtools</code>, but headers encoding is both
            initiated and performed within <code class="epub__literal">mailtools</code> itself on sends.</p>
<p>Full text decoding illustrates the types of choices
            required. It is done according to the <code class="epub__literal">fetchEncoding</code> variable in the <code class="epub__literal">mailconfig</code> module. This user setting is
            used across an entire PyMailGUI session to decode fetched message
            <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> to the required <code class="epub__literal">str</code> text prior to parsing, and to save
            and load full message text to save files. Users may set this
            variable to a Unicode encoding name string which works for their
            mails’ encodings; “latin-1”, “utf-8”, and “ascii” are reasonable
            guesses for most emails, as email standards originally called for
            ASCII (though “latin-1” was required to decode some old mail save
            files generated by the prior version). If decoding with this
            encoding name fails, other common encodings are attempted, and as
            a last resort the message is still displayed if its headers can be
            decoded, but its body is changed to an error message; to view such
            unlikely mails, try running PyMailGUI again with a different
            encoding.</p>
<p>In the negatives column, nothing is done about the Unicode
            format for the full text of sent mails, apart from that inherited
            from Python’s libraries (as we learned in Chapter 13, <code class="epub__literal">smtplib</code> attempts to encode per ASCII
            when messages are sent, which is one reason that header encoding
            is required). And while mail content character sets are fully
            supported, the GUI itself still uses English for its labels and
            buttons.</p>
<p>As explained in Chapter 13,
            this program’s Unicode polices are a broad but partial solution,
            because the <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package in
            Python 3.1, upon which PyMailGUI utterly relies for correct
            operation, is in a state of flux for some use cases. An updated
            version which handles the Python 3.X <code class="epub__literal">str</code>/<code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> distinctions more accurately and
            completely is likely to appear in the future; watch this book’s
            updates page (see the Preface) for future
            changes and improvements to this program’s Unicode policies.
            Hopefully, the current email package underlying PyMailGUI 3.0 will
            be available for some time to come.</p>
<p>Although there is still room for improvement (see the list
            at the end of this chapter), the PyMailGUI program is able to
            provide a full-featured email interface, represents the most
            substantial example in this book, and serves to demonstrate a
            realistic application of the Python language and software
            engineering at large. As its users often attest, Python may be fun
            to work with, but it’s also useful for writing practical and
            nontrivial software. This example, more than any other in this
            book, testifies the same. The next section shows <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e60922"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e60924"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e60926"></a>how.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
