<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>PyMailGUI Implementation</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="PyMailGUI Implementation"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="pymailgui_implementation"></a>PyMailGUI Implementation</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Last but not least, we get to the <a id="py14.4"></a>code. PyMailGUI consists of the new modules listed near
        the start of this chapter, along with a handful of peripheral files
        described there. The source code for these modules is listed in this
        section. Before we get started, here are two quick reminders to help
        you study:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Code reuse</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Besides the code here, PyMailGUI also gets a lot of
              mileage out of reusing modules we wrote earlier and won’t repeat
              here: <code class="epub__literal">mailtools</code> for mail
              loads, composition, parsing, and delete operations; <code class="epub__literal">threadtools</code> for managing server and
              local file access threads; the GUI section’s <code class="epub__literal">TextEditor</code> for displaying and editing
              mail message text; and so on. See the example numbers list
              earlier in this chapter.</p>
<p>In addition, standard Python modules and packages such as
              <code class="epub__literal">poplib</code>, <code class="epub__literal">smtplib</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">email</code> hide most of the details of
              pushing bytes around the Net and extracting and building message
              components. As usual, the <code class="epub__literal">tkinter</code> standard library module also
              implements GUI components in a portable fashion.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Code structure</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>As mentioned earlier, PyMailGUI applies code factoring and
              OOP to leverage code reuse. For instance, list view windows are
              implemented as a common superclass that codes most actions,
              along with one subclass for the server inbox list window and one
              for local save-file list windows. The subclasses customize the
              common superclass for their specific mail media.</p>
<p>This design reflects the operation of the GUI
              itself—server list windows load mail over POP, and save-file
              list windows load from local files. The basic operation of list
              window layout and actions, though, is similar for both and is
              shared in the common superclass to avoid redundancy and simplify
              the code. Message view windows are similarly factored: a common
              view window superclass is reused and customized for write,
              reply, and forward view windows.</p>
<p>To make the code easier to follow, it is divided into two
              main modules that reflect the structure of the GUI—one for the
              implementation of list window actions and one for view window
              actions. If you are looking for the implementation of a button
              that appears in a mail view or edit window, for instance, see
              the view window module and search for a method whose name begins
              with the word <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>on</em></span>—the convention used for
              callback handler methods. A specific button’s text can also be
              located in name/callback tables used to build the windows.
              Actions initiated on list windows are coded in the list window
              module instead.</p>
<p>In addition, the message cache is split off into an object
              and module of its own, and potentially reusable tools are coded
              in importable modules (e.g., line wrapping and utility pop ups).
              PyMailGUI also includes a main module that defines startup
              window classes, a simple HTML to plain-text parser, a module
              that contains the help text as a string, the <code class="epub__literal">mailconfig</code> user settings module (a
              version specific to PyMailGUI is used here), and a small handful
              of related files.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>The following subsections present each of PyMailGUI’s source
        code files for you to study. As you read, refer back to the demo
        earlier in this chapter and run the program live to map its behavior
        back to its code.</p>
<p>One accounting note up-front: the only one of PyMailGUI’s 18 new
        source files not listed in this section is its <code class="epub__literal">__init__.py</code> package initialization file.
        This file is mostly empty except for a comment string and is unused in
        the system today. It exists only for future expansion, in case
        PyMailGUI is ever used as a package in the future—some of its modules
        may be useful in other programs. As is, though, same-directory
        internal imports here are not package-relative, so they assume this
        system is either run as a top-level program (to import from “<code class="epub__literal">.</code>”) or is listed on <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code> directly (to use absolute imports).
        In Python 3.X, a package’s directory is not included on <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code> automatically, so future use as a
        package would require changes to internal imports (e.g., moving the
        main script up one level and using <code class="epub__literal">from .
        import module</code> throughout). See resources such as the book
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Learning
        Python</em></span> for more on packages and package <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e62644"></a>imports.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="PyMailGUI: The Main Module"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="pymailgui_colon_the_main_module"></a>PyMailGUI: The Main Module</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Example 14-1
<a id="py14.4.1"></a>defines the file run to start PyMailGUI. It implements
          top-level list windows in the system—combinations of PyMailGUI’s
          application logic and the window protocol superclasses we wrote
          earlier in the text. The latter of these define window titles,
          icons, and close behavior.</p>
<p>The main internal, nonuser documentation is also in this
          module, as well as command-line logic—the program accepts the names
          of one or more save-mail files on the <span>command</span> line, and automatically opens
          them when the GUI starts up. This is used by the PyDemos launcher of
          Chapter 10, for example.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id51"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 14-1. PP4E\Internet\Email\PyMailGui\PyMailGui.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
##################################################################################
PyMailGui 3.0 - A Python/tkinter email client.
A client-side tkinter-based GUI interface for sending and receiving email.

See the help string in PyMailGuiHelp.py for usage details, and a list of
enhancements in this version.

Version 2.0 was a major, complete rewrite.  The changes from 2.0 (July '05)
to 2.1 (Jan '06) were quick-access part buttons on View windows, threaded
loads and deletes of local save-mail files, and checks for and recovery from
message numbers out-of-synch with mail server inbox on deletes, index loads,
and message loads.

Version 3.0 (4E) is a port to Python 3.X; uses grids instead of packed column
frames for better form layout of headers in view windows; runs update() after
inserting into a new text editor for accurate line positioning (see PyEdit
loadFirst changes in Chapter 11); provides an HTML-based version of its help
text; extracts plain-text from HTML main/only parts for display and quoting;
supports separators in toolbars; addresses both message content and header
Unicode/I18N encodings for fetched, sent, and saved mails (see Ch13 and Ch14);
and much more (see Ch14 for the full rundown on 3.0 upgrades); fetched message
decoding happens deep in the mailtools package, on mail cache load operations
here; mailtools also fixes a few email package bugs (see Ch13);

This file implements the top-level windows and interface.  PyMailGui uses a
number of modules that know nothing about this GUI, but perform related tasks,
some of which are developed in other sections of the book.  The mailconfig
module is expanded for this program.

==Modules defined elsewhere and reused here:==

mailtools (package)
    client-side scripting chapter
    server sends and receives, parsing, construction     (Example 13-21+)
threadtools.py
    GUI tools chapter
    thread queue manangement for GUI callbacks           (Example 10-20)
windows.py
    GUI tools chapter
    border configuration for top-level windows           (Example 10-16)
textEditor.py
    GUI programs chapter
    text widget used in mail view windows, some pop ups  (Example 11-4)

==Generally useful modules defined here:==

popuputil.py
    help and busy windows, for general use
messagecache.py
    a cache that keeps track of mail already loaded
wraplines.py
    utility for wrapping long lines of messages
html2text.py
    rudimentary HTML parser for extracting plain text
mailconfig.py
    user configuration parameters: server names, fonts, etc.

==Program-specific modules defined here:==

SharedNames.py
    objects shared between window classes and main file
ViewWindows.py
    implementation of view, write, reply, forward windows
ListWindows.py
    implementation of mail-server and local-file list windows
PyMailGuiHelp.py (see also PyMailGuiHelp.html)
    user-visible help text, opened by main window bar
PyMailGui.py
    main, top-level file (run this), with main window types
##################################################################################
"""

import mailconfig, sys
from SharedNames import appname, windows
from ListWindows import PyMailServer, PyMailFile


###############################################################################
# top-level window classes
#
# View, Write, Reply, Forward, Help, BusyBox all inherit from PopupWindow
# directly: only usage;  askpassword calls PopupWindow and attaches;  the
# order matters here!--PyMail classes redef some method defaults in the
# Window classes, like destroy and okayToExit: must be leftmost;  to use
# PyMailFileWindow standalone, imitate logic in PyMailCommon.onOpenMailFile;
###############################################################################

# uses icon file in cwd or default in tools dir
srvrname = mailconfig.popservername or 'Server'

class PyMailServerWindow(PyMailServer, windows.MainWindow):
    "a Tk, with extra protocol and mixed-in methods"
    def __init__(self):
        windows.MainWindow.__init__(self, appname, srvrname)
        PyMailServer.__init__(self)

class PyMailServerPopup(PyMailServer, windows.PopupWindow):
    "a Toplevel, with extra protocol and mixed-in methods"
    def __init__(self):
        windows.PopupWindow.__init__(self, appname, srvrnane)
        PyMailServer.__init__(self)

class PyMailServerComponent(PyMailServer, windows.ComponentWindow):
    "a Frame, with extra protocol and mixed-in methods"
    def __init__(self):
        windows.ComponentWindow.__init__(self)
        PyMailServer.__init__(self)

class PyMailFileWindow(PyMailFile, windows.PopupWindow):
    "a Toplevel, with extra protocol and mixed-in methods"
    def __init__(self, filename):
        windows.PopupWindow.__init__(self, appname, filename)
        PyMailFile.__init__(self, filename)


###############################################################################
# when run as a top-level program: create main mail-server list window
###############################################################################

if __name__ == '__main__':
    rootwin = PyMailServerWindow()              # open server window
    if len(sys.argv) &gt; 1:                       # 3.0: fix to add len()
        for savename in sys.argv[1:]:
            rootwin.onOpenMailFile(savename)    # open save file windows (demo)
        rootwin.lift()                          # save files loaded in threads
    rootwin.mainloop()</pre>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="SharedNames: Program-Wide Globals"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="sharednames_colon_program-wide_globals"></a>SharedNames: Program-Wide Globals</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e62678"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e62680"></a>module in Example 14-2 implements a shared,
          system-wide namespace that collects resources used in most modules
          in the system and defines global objects that span files. This
          allows other files to avoid redundantly repeating common imports and
          encapsulates the locations of package imports; it is the only file
          that must be updated if paths change in the future. Using globals
          can make programs more difficult to understand in general (the
          source of some names is not as clear), but it is reasonable if all
          such names are collected in a single expected module such as this
          one, because there is only one place to search for unknown
          names.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id52"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 14-2. PP4E\Internet\Email\PyMailGui\SharedNames.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
##############################################################################
objects shared by all window classes and main file: program-wide globals
##############################################################################
"""

# used in all window, icon titles
appname  = 'PyMailGUI 3.0'

# used for list save, open, delete; also for sent messages file
saveMailSeparator = 'PyMailGUI' + ('-'*60) + 'PyMailGUI\n'

# currently viewed mail save files; also for sent-mail file
openSaveFiles = {}                     # 1 window per file,{name:win}

# standard library services
import sys, os, email.utils, email.message, webbrowser, mimetypes
from tkinter import *
from tkinter.simpledialog import askstring
from tkinter.filedialog   import SaveAs, Open, Directory
from tkinter.messagebox   import showinfo, showerror, askyesno

# reuse book examples
from PP4E.Gui.Tools      import windows      # window border, exit protocols
from PP4E.Gui.Tools      import threadtools  # thread callback queue checker
from PP4E.Internet.Email import mailtools    # load,send,parse,build utilities
from PP4E.Gui.TextEditor import textEditor   # component and pop up

# modules defined here
import mailconfig                            # user params: servers, fonts, etc.
import popuputil                             # help, busy, passwd pop-up windows
import wraplines                             # wrap long message lines
import messagecache                          # remember already loaded mail
import html2text                             # simplistic html-&gt;plaintext extract
import PyMailGuiHelp                         # user documentation

def printStack(exc_info):
    """
    debugging: show exception and stack traceback on stdout;
    3.0: change to print stack trace to a real log file if print
    to sys.stdout fails: it does when launched from another program
    on Windows;  without this workaround, PMailGUI aborts and exits
    altogether, as this is called from the main thread on spawned
    thread failures;  likely a Python 3.1 bug: it doesn't occur in
    2.5 or 2.6, and the traceback object works fine if print to file;
    oddly, the print() calls here work (but go nowhere) if spawned;
    """
    print(exc_info[0])
    print(exc_info[1])
    import traceback
    try:
        traceback.print_tb(exc_info[2], file=sys.stdout)   # ok unless spawned!
    except:
        log = open('_pymailerrlog.txt', 'a')               # use a real file
        log.write('-'*80)                                  # else gui may exit
        traceback.print_tb(exc_info[2], file=log)          # in 3.X, not 2.5/6

# thread busy counters for threads run by this GUI
# sendingBusy shared by all send windows, used by main window quit

loadingHdrsBusy = threadtools.ThreadCounter()   # only 1
deletingBusy    = threadtools.ThreadCounter()   # only 1
loadingMsgsBusy = threadtools.ThreadCounter()   # poss many
sendingBusy     = threadtools.ThreadCounter()   # poss many</pre>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="ListWindows: Message List Windows"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="listwindows_colon_message_list_windows"></a>ListWindows: Message List Windows</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The code in Example 14-3 implements
          <a id="py14.4.3"></a>mail index list windows—for the server inbox window
          and for one or more local save-mail file windows. These two types of
          windows look and behave largely the same, and in fact share most of
          their code in common in a superclass. The window subclasses mostly
          just customize the superclass to map mail Load and Delete calls to
          the server or a local file.</p>
<p>List windows are created on program startup (the initial
          server window, and possible save-file windows for command-line
          options), as well as in response to Open button actions in existing
          list windows (for opening new save-file list windows). See the Open
          button’s callback in this example for initiation code.</p>
<p>Notice that the basic mail processing operations in the
          <code class="epub__literal">mailtools</code> package from Chapter 13 are mixed into PyMailGUI in a
          variety of ways. The list window classes in Example 14-3 inherit from the
          <code class="epub__literal">mailtools</code> mail parser class, but
          the server list window class embeds an instance of the message cache
          object, which in turn inherits from the <code class="epub__literal">mailtools</code> mail fetcher. The <code class="epub__literal">mailtools</code> mail sender class is inherited
          by message view write windows, not list windows; view windows also
          inherit from the mail parser.</p>
<p>This is a fairly large file; in principle it could be split
          into three files, one for each class, but these classes are so
          closely related that it is handy to have their code in a single file
          for edits. Really, this is one class, with two minor
          extensions.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id53"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 14-3. PP4E\Internet\Email\PyMailGui\ListWindows.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
###############################################################################
Implementation of mail-server and save-file message list main windows:
one class per kind.  Code is factored here for reuse: server and file
list windows are customized versions of the PyMailCommon list window class;
the server window maps actions to mail transferred from a server, and the
file window applies actions to a local file.

List windows create View, Write, Reply, and Forward windows on user actions.
The server list window is the main window opened on program startup by the
top-level file;  file list windows are opened on demand via server and file
list window "Open".  Msgnums may be temporarily out of sync with server if
POP inbox changes (triggers full reload here).

Changes here in 2.1:
-now checks on deletes and loads to see if msg nums in sync with server
-added up to N attachment direct-access buttons on view windows
-threaded save-mail file loads, to avoid N-second pause for big files
-also threads save-mail file deletes so file write doesn't pause GUI

TBD:
-save-mail file saves still not threaded: may pause GUI briefly, but
 uncommon - unlike load and delete, save/send only appends the local file.
-implementation of local save-mail files as text files with separators
 is mostly a prototype: it loads all full mails into memory, and so limits
 the practical size of these files; better alternative: use 2 DBM keyed
 access files for hdrs and fulltext, plus a list to map keys to position;
 in this scheme save-mail files become directories, no longer readable.
###############################################################################
"""

from SharedNames import *     # program-wide global objects
from ViewWindows import ViewWindow, WriteWindow, ReplyWindow, ForwardWindow


###############################################################################
# main frame - general structure for both file and server message lists
###############################################################################


class PyMailCommon(mailtools.MailParser):
    """
    an abstract widget package, with main mail listbox;
    mixed in with a Tk, Toplevel, or Frame by top-level window classes;
    must be customized in mode-specific subclass with actions() and other;
    creates view and write windows on demand: they serve as MailSenders;
    """
    # class attrs shared by all list windows
    threadLoopStarted = False                     # started by first window
    queueChecksPerSecond = 20                     # tweak if CPU use too high
    queueDelay = 1000 // queueChecksPerSecond     # min msecs between timer events
    queueBatch = 5                                # max callbacks per timer event

    # all windows use same dialogs: remember last dirs
    openDialog = Open(title=appname + ': Open Mail File')
    saveDialog = SaveAs(title=appname + ': Append Mail File')

    # 3.0: avoid downloading (fetching) same message in parallel
    beingFetched = set()

    def __init__(self):
        self.makeWidgets()                        # draw my contents: list,tools
        if not PyMailCommon.threadLoopStarted:

            # start thread exit check loop
            # a timer event loop that dispatches queued GUI callbacks;
            # just one loop for all windows: server,file,views can all thread;
            # self is a Tk, Toplevel,or Frame: any widget type will suffice;
            # 3.0/4E: added queue delay/batch for progress speedup: ~100x/sec;

            PyMailCommon.threadLoopStarted = True
            threadtools.threadChecker(self, self.queueDelay, self.queueBatch)

    def makeWidgets(self):
        # add all/none checkbtn at bottom
        tools = Frame(self, relief=SUNKEN, bd=2, cursor='hand2')    # 3.0: configs
        tools.pack(side=BOTTOM, fill=X)
        self.allModeVar = IntVar()
        chk = Checkbutton(tools, text="All")
        chk.config(variable=self.allModeVar, command=self.onCheckAll)
        chk.pack(side=RIGHT)

        # add main buttons at bottom toolbar
        for (title, callback) in self.actions():
            if not callback:
                sep = Label(tools, text=title)                # 3.0: separator
                sep.pack(side=LEFT, expand=YES, fill=BOTH)    # expands with window
            else:
                Button(tools, text=title, command=callback).pack(side=LEFT)

        # add multiselect listbox with scrollbars
        listwide = mailconfig.listWidth  or 74    # 3.0: config start size
        listhigh = mailconfig.listHeight or 15    # wide=chars, high=lines
        mails    = Frame(self)
        vscroll  = Scrollbar(mails)
        hscroll  = Scrollbar(mails, orient='horizontal')
        fontsz   = (sys.platform[:3] == 'win' and 8) or 10      # defaults
        listbg   = mailconfig.listbg   or 'white'
        listfg   = mailconfig.listfg   or 'black'
        listfont = mailconfig.listfont or ('courier', fontsz, 'normal')
        listbox  = Listbox(mails, bg=listbg, fg=listfg, font=listfont)
        listbox.config(selectmode=EXTENDED)
        listbox.config(width=listwide, height=listhigh) # 3.0: init wider
        listbox.bind('&lt;Double-1&gt;', (lambda event: self.onViewRawMail()))

        # crosslink listbox and scrollbars
        vscroll.config(command=listbox.yview, relief=SUNKEN)
        hscroll.config(command=listbox.xview, relief=SUNKEN)
        listbox.config(yscrollcommand=vscroll.set, relief=SUNKEN)
        listbox.config(xscrollcommand=hscroll.set)

        # pack last = clip first
        mails.pack(side=TOP, expand=YES, fill=BOTH)
        vscroll.pack(side=RIGHT,  fill=BOTH)
        hscroll.pack(side=BOTTOM, fill=BOTH)
        listbox.pack(side=LEFT, expand=YES, fill=BOTH)
        self.listBox = listbox

    #################
    # event handlers
    #################

    def onCheckAll(self):
        # all or none click
        if self.allModeVar.get():
            self.listBox.select_set(0, END)
        else:
            self.listBox.select_clear(0, END)

    def onViewRawMail(self):
        # possibly threaded: view selected messages - raw text headers, body
        msgnums = self.verifySelectedMsgs()
        if msgnums:
            self.getMessages(msgnums, after=lambda: self.contViewRaw(msgnums))

    def contViewRaw(self, msgnums, pyedit=True):     # do we need full TextEditor?
        for msgnum in msgnums:                       # could be a nested def
            fulltext = self.getMessage(msgnum)       # fulltext is Unicode decoded
            if not pyedit:
                # display in a scrolledtext
                from tkinter.scrolledtext import ScrolledText
                window  = windows.QuietPopupWindow(appname, 'raw message viewer')
                browser = ScrolledText(window)
                browser.insert('0.0', fulltext)
                browser.pack(expand=YES, fill=BOTH)
            else:
                # 3.0/4E: more useful PyEdit text editor
                wintitle = ' - raw message text'
                browser = textEditor.TextEditorMainPopup(self, winTitle=wintitle)
                browser.update()
                browser.setAllText(fulltext)
                browser.clearModified()

    def onViewFormatMail(self):
        """
        possibly threaded: view selected messages - pop up formatted display
        not threaded if in savefile list, or messages are already loaded
        the after action runs only if getMessages prefetch allowed and worked
        """
        msgnums = self.verifySelectedMsgs()
        if msgnums:
            self.getMessages(msgnums, after=lambda: self.contViewFmt(msgnums))

    def contViewFmt(self, msgnums):
        """
        finish View: extract main text, popup view window(s) to display;
        extracts plain text from html text if required, wraps text lines;
        html mails: show extracted text, then save in temp file and open
        in web browser;  part can also be opened manually from view window
        Split or part button;  if non-multipart, other: part must be opened
        manually with Split or part button;  verify html open per mailconfig;

        3.0: for html-only mails, main text is str here, but save its raw
        bytes in binary mode to finesse encodings;  worth the effort because
        many mails are just html today;  this first tried N encoding guesses
        (utf-8, latin-1, platform dflt), but now gets and saves raw bytes to
        minimize any fidelity loss;  if a part is later opened on demand, it
        is saved in a binary file as raw bytes in the same way;

        caveat: the spawned web browser won't have any original email headers:
        it may still have to guess or be told the encoding, unless the html
        already has its own encoding headers (these take the form of &lt;meta&gt;
        html tags within &lt;head&gt; sections if present; none are inserted in the
        html here, as some well-formed html parts have them);  IE seems to
        handle most html part files anyhow;  always encoding html parts to
        utf-8 may suffice too: this encoding can handle most types of text;
        """
        for msgnum in msgnums:
            fulltext = self.getMessage(msgnum)             # 3.0: str for parser
            message  = self.parseMessage(fulltext)
            type, content = self.findMainText(message)     # 3.0: Unicode decoded
            if type in ['text/html', 'text/xml']:          # 3.0: get plain text
                content = html2text.html2text(content)
            content  = wraplines.wrapText1(content, mailconfig.wrapsz)
            ViewWindow(headermap   = message,
                       showtext    = content,
                       origmessage = message)              # 3.0: decodes headers

            # non-multipart, content-type text/HTML (rude but true!)
            if type == 'text/html':
                if ((not mailconfig.verifyHTMLTextOpen) or
                    askyesno(appname, 'Open message text in browser?')):

                    # 3.0: get post mime decode, pre unicode decode bytes
                    type, asbytes = self.findMainText(message, asStr=False)
                    try:
                        from tempfile import gettempdir # or a Tk HTML viewer?
                        tempname = os.path.join(gettempdir(), 'pymailgui.html')
                        tmp = open(tempname, 'wb')      # already encoded
                        tmp.write(asbytes); tmp.close() # flush output now
                        webbrowser.open_new('file://' + tempname)
                    except:
                        showerror(appname, 'Cannot open in browser')

    def onWriteMail(self):
        """
        compose a new email from scratch, without fetching others;
        nothing to quote here, but adds sig, and prefills Bcc with the
        sender's address if this optional header enabled in mailconfig;
        From may be i18N encoded in mailconfig: view window will decode;
        """
        starttext = '\n'                         # use auto signature text
        if mailconfig.mysignature:
            starttext += '%s\n' % mailconfig.mysignature
        From  = mailconfig.myaddress
        WriteWindow(starttext = starttext,
                    headermap = dict(From=From, Bcc=From))    # 3.0: prefill bcc

    def onReplyMail(self):
        # possibly threaded: reply to selected emails
        msgnums = self.verifySelectedMsgs()
        if msgnums:
            self.getMessages(msgnums, after=lambda: self.contReply(msgnums))

    def contReply(self, msgnums):
        """
        finish Reply: drop attachments, quote with '&gt;', add signature;
        presets initial to/from values from mail or config module;
        don't use original To for From: may be many or a listname;
        To keeps name+&lt;addr&gt; format even if ',' separator in name;
        Uses original From for To, ignores reply-to header is any;
        3.0: replies also copy to all original recipients by default;

        3.0: now uses getaddresses/parseaddr full parsing to separate
        addrs on commas, and handle any commas that appear nested in
        email name parts;  multiple addresses are separated by comma
        in GUI, we copy comma separators when displaying headers, and
        we use getaddresses to split addrs as needed;  ',' is required
        by servers for separator;  no longer uses parseaddr to get 1st
        name/addr pair of getaddresses result: use full From for To;

        3.0: we decode the Subject header here because we need its text,
        but the view window superclass of edit windows performs decoding
        on all displayed headers (the extra Subject decode is a no-op);
        on sends, all non-ASCII hdrs and hdr email names are in decoded
        form in the GUI, but are encoded within the mailtools package;
        quoteOrigText also decodes the initial headers it inserts into
        the quoted text block, and index lists decode for display;
        """
        for msgnum in msgnums:
            fulltext = self.getMessage(msgnum)
            message  = self.parseMessage(fulltext)         # may fail: error obj
            maintext = self.formatQuotedMainText(message)  # same as forward

            # from and to are decoded by view window
            From = mailconfig.myaddress                    # not original To
            To   = message.get('From', '')                 # 3.0: ',' sept
            Cc   = self.replyCopyTo(message)               # 3.0: cc all recipients?
            Subj = message.get('Subject', '(no subject)')
            Subj = self.decodeHeader(Subj)                 # deocde for str
            if Subj[:4].lower() != 're: ':                 # 3.0: unify case
                Subj = 'Re: ' + Subj
            ReplyWindow(starttext = maintext,
                        headermap =
                            dict(From=From, To=To, Cc=Cc, Subject=Subj, Bcc=From))

    def onFwdMail(self):
        # possibly threaded: forward selected emails
        msgnums = self.verifySelectedMsgs()
        if msgnums:
            self.getMessages(msgnums, after=lambda: self.contFwd(msgnums))

    def contFwd(self, msgnums):
        """
        finish Forward: drop attachments, quote with '&gt;', add signature;
        see notes about headers decoding in the Reply action methods;
        view window superclass will decode the From header we pass here;
        """
        for msgnum in msgnums:
            fulltext = self.getMessage(msgnum)
            message  = self.parseMessage(fulltext)
            maintext = self.formatQuotedMainText(message)  # same as reply

            # initial From value from config, not mail
            From = mailconfig.myaddress                    # encoded or not
            Subj = message.get('Subject', '(no subject)')
            Subj = self.decodeHeader(Subj)                 # 3.0: send encodes
            if Subj[:5].lower() != 'fwd: ':                # 3.0: unify case
                Subj = 'Fwd: ' + Subj
            ForwardWindow(starttext = maintext,
                          headermap = dict(From=From, Subject=Subj, Bcc=From))

    def onSaveMailFile(self):
        """
        save selected emails to file for offline viewing;
        disabled if target file load/delete is in progress;
        disabled by getMessages if self is a busy file too;
        contSave not threaded: disables all other actions;
        """
        msgnums = self.selectedMsgs()
        if not msgnums:
            showerror(appname, 'No message selected')
        else:
            # caveat: dialog warns about replacing file
            filename = self.saveDialog.show()             # shared class attr
            if filename:                                  # don't verify num msgs
                filename = os.path.abspath(filename)      # normalize / to \
                self.getMessages(msgnums,
                        after=lambda: self.contSave(msgnums, filename))

    def contSave(self, msgnums, filename):
        # test busy now, after poss srvr msgs load
        if (filename in openSaveFiles.keys() and           # viewing this file?
            openSaveFiles[filename].openFileBusy):         # load/del occurring?
            showerror(appname, 'Target file busy - cannot save')
        else:
            try:                                           # caveat:not threaded
                fulltextlist = []                          # 3.0: use encoding
                mailfile = open(filename, 'a', encoding=mailconfig.fetchEncoding)
                for msgnum in msgnums:                     # &lt; 1sec for N megs
                    fulltext = self.getMessage(msgnum)     # but poss many msgs
                    if fulltext[-1] != '\n': fulltext += '\n'
                    mailfile.write(saveMailSeparator)
                    mailfile.write(fulltext)
                    fulltextlist.append(fulltext)
                mailfile.close()
            except:
                showerror(appname, 'Error during save')
                printStack(sys.exc_info())
            else:                                          # why .keys(): EIBTI
                if filename in openSaveFiles.keys():       # viewing this file?
                    window = openSaveFiles[filename]       # update list, raise
                    window.addSavedMails(fulltextlist)     # avoid file reload
                    #window.loadMailFileThread()           # this was very slow

    def onOpenMailFile(self, filename=None):
        # process saved mail offline
        filename = filename or self.openDialog.show()      # shared class attr
        if filename:
            filename = os.path.abspath(filename)           # match on full name
            if filename in openSaveFiles.keys():           # only 1 win per file
                openSaveFiles[filename].lift()             # raise file's window
                showinfo(appname, 'File already open')     # else deletes odd
            else:
                from PyMailGui import PyMailFileWindow     # avoid duplicate win
                popup = PyMailFileWindow(filename)         # new list window
                openSaveFiles[filename] = popup            # removed in quit
                popup.loadMailFileThread()                 # try load in thread

    def onDeleteMail(self):
        # delete selected mails from server or file
        msgnums = self.selectedMsgs()                      # subclass: fillIndex
        if not msgnums:                                    # always verify here
            showerror(appname, 'No message selected')
        else:
            if askyesno(appname, 'Verify delete %d mails?' % len(msgnums)):
                self.doDelete(msgnums)

    ##################
    # utility methods
    ##################

    def selectedMsgs(self):
        # get messages selected in main listbox
        selections = self.listBox.curselection()  # tuple of digit strs, 0..N-1
        return [int(x)+1 for x in selections]     # convert to ints, make 1..N

    warningLimit = 15
    def verifySelectedMsgs(self):
        msgnums = self.selectedMsgs()
        if not msgnums:
            showerror(appname, 'No message selected')
        else:
            numselects = len(msgnums)
            if numselects &gt; self.warningLimit:
                if not askyesno(appname, 'Open %d selections?' % numselects):
                    msgnums = []
        return msgnums

    def fillIndex(self, maxhdrsize=25):
        """
        fill all of main listbox from message header mappings;
        3.0: decode headers per email/mime/unicode here if encoded;
        3.0: caveat: large chinese characters can break '|' alignment;
        """
        hdrmaps  = self.headersMaps()                   # may be empty
        showhdrs = ('Subject', 'From', 'Date', 'To')    # default hdrs to show
        if hasattr(mailconfig, 'listheaders'):          # mailconfig customizes
            showhdrs = mailconfig.listheaders or showhdrs
        addrhdrs = ('From', 'To', 'Cc', 'Bcc')    # 3.0: decode i18n specially

        # compute max field sizes &lt;= hdrsize
        maxsize = {}
        for key in showhdrs:
            allLens = []                                # too big for a list comp!
            for msg in hdrmaps:
                keyval = msg.get(key, ' ')
                if key not in addrhdrs:
                    allLens.append(len(self.decodeHeader(keyval)))
                else:
                    allLens.append(len(self.decodeAddrHeader(keyval)))
            if not allLens: allLens = [1]
            maxsize[key] = min(maxhdrsize, max(allLens))

        # populate listbox with fixed-width left-justified fields
        self.listBox.delete(0, END)                     # show multiparts with *
        for (ix, msg) in enumerate(hdrmaps):            # via content-type hdr
            msgtype = msg.get_content_maintype()        # no is_multipart yet
            msgline = (msgtype == 'multipart' and '*') or ' '
            msgline += '%03d' % (ix+1)
            for key in showhdrs:
                mysize  = maxsize[key]
                if key not in addrhdrs:
                    keytext = self.decodeHeader(msg.get(key, ' '))
                else:
                    keytext = self.decodeAddrHeader(msg.get(key, ' '))
                msgline += ' | %-*s' % (mysize, keytext[:mysize])
            msgline += '| %.1fK' % (self.mailSize(ix+1) / 1024)   # 3.0: .0 optional
            self.listBox.insert(END, msgline)
        self.listBox.see(END)         # show most recent mail=last line

    def replyCopyTo(self, message):
        """
        3.0: replies copy all original recipients, by prefilling
        Cc header with all addreses in original To and Cc after
        removing duplicates and new sender;  could decode i18n addrs
        here, but the view window will decode to display (and send
        will reencode) and the unique set filtering here will work
        either way, though a sender's i18n address is assumed to be
        in encoded form in mailconfig (else it is not removed here);
        empty To or Cc headers are okay: split returns empty lists;
        """
        if not mailconfig.repliesCopyToAll:
            # reply to sender only
            Cc = ''
        else:
            # copy all original recipients (3.0)
            allRecipients = (self.splitAddresses(message.get('To', '')) +
                             self.splitAddresses(message.get('Cc', '')))
            uniqueOthers  = set(allRecipients) - set([mailconfig.myaddress])
            Cc = ', '.join(uniqueOthers)
        return Cc or '?'

    def formatQuotedMainText(self, message):
        """
        3.0: factor out common code shared by Reply and Forward:
        fetch decoded text, extract text if html, line wrap, add &gt; quote
        """
        type, maintext = self.findMainText(message)       # 3.0: decoded str
        if type in ['text/html', 'text/xml']:             # 3.0: get plain text
            maintext = html2text.html2text(maintext)
        maintext = wraplines.wrapText1(maintext, mailconfig.wrapsz-2) # 2 = '&gt; '
        maintext = self.quoteOrigText(maintext, message)              # add hdrs, &gt;
        if mailconfig.mysignature:
            maintext = ('\n%s\n' % mailconfig.mysignature) + maintext
        return maintext

    def quoteOrigText(self, maintext, message):
        """
        3.0: we need to decode any i18n (internationalizd) headers here too,
        or they show up in email+MIME encoded form in the quoted text block;
        decodeAddrHeader works on one addr or all in a comma-separated list;
        this may trigger full text encoding on sends, but the main text is
        also already in fully decoded form: could be in any Unicode scheme;
        """
        quoted = '\n-----Original Message-----\n'
        for hdr in ('From', 'To', 'Subject', 'Date'):
            rawhdr = message.get(hdr, '?')
            if hdr not in ('From', 'To'):
                dechdr = self.decodeHeader(rawhdr)       # full value
            else:
                dechdr = self.decodeAddrHeader(rawhdr)   # name parts only
            quoted += '%s: %s\n' % (hdr, dechdr)
        quoted += '\n' + maintext
        quoted  = '\n' + quoted.replace('\n', '\n&gt; ')
        return quoted

    ########################
    # subclass requirements
    ########################

    def getMessages(self, msgnums, after):        # used by view,save,reply,fwd
        after()                                   # redef if cache, thread test

    # plus okayToQuit?, any unique actions
    def getMessage(self, msgnum): assert False    # used by many: full mail text
    def headersMaps(self): assert False           # fillIndex: hdr mappings list
    def mailSize(self, msgnum): assert False      # fillIndex: size of msgnum
    def doDelete(self): assert False              # onDeleteMail: delete button


###############################################################################
# main window - when viewing messages in local save file (or sent-mail file)
###############################################################################


class PyMailFile(PyMailCommon):
    """
    customize PyMailCommon for viewing saved-mail file offline;
    mixed with a Tk, Toplevel, or Frame, adds main mail listbox;
    maps load, fetch, delete actions to local text file storage;
    file opens and deletes here run in threads for large files;

    save and send not threaded, because only append to file; save
    is disabled if source or target file busy with load/delete;
    save disables load, delete, save just because it is not run
    in a thread (blocks GUI);

    TBD: may need thread and O/S file locks if saves ever do run in
    threads: saves could disable other threads with openFileBusy, but
    file may not be open in GUI;  file locks not sufficient, because
    GUI updated too;  TBD: appends to sent-mail file may require O/S
    locks: as is, user gets error pop up if sent during load/del;

    3.0: mail save files are now Unicode text, encoded per an encoding
    name setting in the mailconfig module; this may not support worst
    case scenarios of unusual or mixed encodings, but most full mail
    text is ascii, and the Python 3.1 email package is partly broken;
    """
    def actions(self):
        return [ ('Open',   self.onOpenMailFile),
                 ('Write',  self.onWriteMail),
                 ('  ',     None),                           # 3.0:  separators
                 ('View',   self.onViewFormatMail),
                 ('Reply',  self.onReplyMail),
                 ('Fwd',    self.onFwdMail),
                 ('Save',   self.onSaveMailFile),
                 ('Delete', self.onDeleteMail),
                 ('  ',     None),
                 ('Quit',   self.quit) ]

    def __init__(self, filename):
        # caller: do loadMailFileThread next
        PyMailCommon.__init__(self)
        self.filename = filename
        self.openFileBusy = threadtools.ThreadCounter()      # one per window

    def loadMailFileThread(self):
        """
        load or reload file and update window index list;
        called on Open, startup, and possibly on Send if
        sent-mail file appended is currently open;  there
        is always a bogus first item after the text split;
        alt: [self.parseHeaders(m) for m in self.msglist];
        could pop up a busy dialog, but quick for small files;

        2.1: this is now threaded--else runs &lt; 1sec for N meg
        files, but can pause GUI N seconds if very large file;
        Save now uses addSavedMails to append msg lists for
        speed, not this reload;  still called from Send just
        because msg text unavailable - requires refactoring;
        delete threaded too: prevent open and delete overlap;
        """
        if self.openFileBusy:
            # don't allow parallel open/delete changes
            errmsg = 'Cannot load, file is busy:\n"%s"' % self.filename
            showerror(appname, errmsg)
        else:
            #self.listBox.insert(END, 'loading...')      # error if user clicks
            savetitle = self.title()                     # set by window class
            self.title(appname + ' - ' + 'Loading...')
            self.openFileBusy.incr()
            threadtools.startThread(
                action   = self.loadMailFile,
                args     = (),
                context  = (savetitle,),
                onExit   = self.onLoadMailFileExit,
                onFail   = self.onLoadMailFileFail)

    def loadMailFile(self):
        # run in a thread while GUI is active
        # open, read, parser may all raise excs: caught in thread utility
        file = open(self.filename, 'r', encoding=mailconfig.fetchEncoding)   # 3.0
        allmsgs = file.read()
        self.msglist  = allmsgs.split(saveMailSeparator)[1:]       # full text
        self.hdrlist  = list(map(self.parseHeaders, self.msglist)) # msg objects

    def onLoadMailFileExit(self, savetitle):
        # on thread success
        self.title(savetitle)         # reset window title to filename
        self.fillIndex()              # updates GUI: do in main thread
        self.lift()                   # raise my window
        self.openFileBusy.decr()

    def onLoadMailFileFail(self, exc_info, savetitle):
        # on thread exception
        showerror(appname, 'Error opening "%s"\n%s\n%s' %
                           ((self.filename,) +  exc_info[:2]))
        printStack(exc_info)
        self.destroy()                # always close my window?
        self.openFileBusy.decr()      # not needed if destroy

    def addSavedMails(self, fulltextlist):
        """
        optimization: extend loaded file lists for mails
        newly saved to this window's file; in past called
        loadMailThread to reload entire file on save - slow;
        must be called in main GUI thread only: updates GUI;
        sends still reloads sent file if open: no msg text;
        """
        self.msglist.extend(fulltextlist)
        self.hdrlist.extend(map(self.parseHeaders, fulltextlist))  # 3.x iter ok
        self.fillIndex()
        self.lift()

    def doDelete(self, msgnums):
        """
        simple-minded, but sufficient: rewrite all
        nondeleted mails to file; can't just delete
        from self.msglist in-place: changes item indexes;
        Py2.3 enumerate(L) same as zip(range(len(L)), L)
        2.1: now threaded, else N sec pause for large files
        """
        if self.openFileBusy:
            # dont allow parallel open/delete changes
            errmsg = 'Cannot delete, file is busy:\n"%s"' % self.filename
            showerror(appname, errmsg)
        else:
            savetitle = self.title()
            self.title(appname + ' - ' + 'Deleting...')
            self.openFileBusy.incr()
            threadtools.startThread(
                action   = self.deleteMailFile,
                args     = (msgnums,),
                context  = (savetitle,),
                onExit   = self.onDeleteMailFileExit,
                onFail   = self.onDeleteMailFileFail)

    def deleteMailFile(self, msgnums):
        # run in a thread while GUI active
        indexed = enumerate(self.msglist)
        keepers = [msg for (ix, msg) in indexed if ix+1 not in msgnums]
        allmsgs = saveMailSeparator.join([''] + keepers)
        file = open(self.filename, 'w', encoding=mailconfig.fetchEncoding)   # 3.0
        file.write(allmsgs)
        self.msglist = keepers
        self.hdrlist = list(map(self.parseHeaders, self.msglist))

    def onDeleteMailFileExit(self, savetitle):
        self.title(savetitle)
        self.fillIndex()              # updates GUI: do in main thread
        self.lift()                   # reset my title, raise my window
        self.openFileBusy.decr()

    def onDeleteMailFileFail(self, exc_info, savetitle):
        showerror(appname, 'Error deleting "%s"\n%s\n%s' %
                           ((self.filename,) +  exc_info[:2]))
        printStack(exc_info)
        self.destroy()                # always close my window?
        self.openFileBusy.decr()      # not needed if destroy

    def getMessages(self, msgnums, after):
        """
        used by view,save,reply,fwd: file load and delete
        threads may change the msg and hdr lists, so disable
        all other operations that depend on them to be safe;
        this test is for self: saves also test target file;
        """
        if self.openFileBusy:
            errmsg = 'Cannot fetch, file is busy:\n"%s"' % self.filename
            showerror(appname, errmsg)
        else:
            after()                      # mail already loaded

    def getMessage(self, msgnum):
        return self.msglist[msgnum-1]    # full text of 1 mail

    def headersMaps(self):
        return self.hdrlist              # email.message.Message objects

    def mailSize(self, msgnum):
        return len(self.msglist[msgnum-1])

    def quit(self):
        # don't destroy during update: fillIndex next
        if self.openFileBusy:
            showerror(appname, 'Cannot quit during load or delete')
        else:
            if askyesno(appname, 'Verify Quit Window?'):
                # delete file from open list
                del openSaveFiles[self.filename]
                Toplevel.destroy(self)


###############################################################################
# main window - when viewing messages on the mail server
###############################################################################


class PyMailServer(PyMailCommon):
    """
    customize PyMailCommon for viewing mail still on server;
    mixed with a Tk, Toplevel, or Frame, adds main mail listbox;
    maps load, fetch, delete actions to email server inbox;
    embeds a MessageCache, which is a mailtools MailFetcher;
    """
    def actions(self):
        return [ ('Load',   self.onLoadServer),
                 ('Open',   self.onOpenMailFile),
                 ('Write',  self.onWriteMail),
                 ('  ',     None),                           # 3.0:  separators
                 ('View',   self.onViewFormatMail),
                 ('Reply',  self.onReplyMail),
                 ('Fwd',    self.onFwdMail),
                 ('Save',   self.onSaveMailFile),
                 ('Delete', self.onDeleteMail),
                 ('  ',     None),
                 ('Quit',   self.quit) ]

    def __init__(self):
        PyMailCommon.__init__(self)
        self.cache = messagecache.GuiMessageCache()    # embedded, not inherited
       #self.listBox.insert(END, 'Press Load to fetch mail')

    def makeWidgets(self):                             # help bar: main win only
        self.addHelpBar()
        PyMailCommon.makeWidgets(self)

    def addHelpBar(self):
        msg = 'PyMailGUI - a Python/tkinter email client  (help)'
        title = Button(self, text=msg)
        title.config(bg='steelblue', fg='white', relief=RIDGE)
        title.config(command=self.onShowHelp)
        title.pack(fill=X)

    def onShowHelp(self):
        """
        load,show text block string
        3.0: now uses HTML and webbrowser module here too
        user setting in mailconfig selects text, HTML, or both
        always displays one or the other: html if both false
        """
        if mailconfig.showHelpAsText:
            from PyMailGuiHelp import helptext
            popuputil.HelpPopup(appname, helptext, showsource=self.onShowMySource)

        if mailconfig.showHelpAsHTML or (not mailconfig.showHelpAsText):
            from PyMailGuiHelp import showHtmlHelp
            showHtmlHelp()    # 3.0: HTML version without source file links

    def onShowMySource(self, showAsMail=False):
        """
        display my sourcecode file, plus imported modules here &amp; elsewhere
        """
        import PyMailGui, ListWindows, ViewWindows, SharedNames, textConfig
        from PP4E.Internet.Email.mailtools import (    # mailtools now a pkg
             mailSender, mailFetcher, mailParser)      # can't use * in def
        mymods = (
            PyMailGui, ListWindows, ViewWindows, SharedNames,
            PyMailGuiHelp, popuputil, messagecache, wraplines, html2text,
            mailtools, mailFetcher, mailSender, mailParser,
            mailconfig, textConfig, threadtools, windows, textEditor)
        for mod in mymods:
            source = mod.__file__
            if source.endswith('.pyc'):
                source = source[:-4] + '.py'       # assume a .py in same dir
            if showAsMail:
                # this is a bit cheesey...
                code   = open(source).read()       # 3.0: platform encoding
                user   = mailconfig.myaddress
                hdrmap = {'From': appname, 'To': user, 'Subject': mod.__name__}
                ViewWindow(showtext=code,
                           headermap=hdrmap,
                           origmessage=email.message.Message())
            else:
                # more useful PyEdit text editor
                # 4E: assume in UTF8 Unicode encoding (else PeEdit may ask!)
                wintitle = ' - ' + mod.__name__
                textEditor.TextEditorMainPopup(self, source, wintitle, 'utf-8')

    def onLoadServer(self, forceReload=False):
        """
        threaded: load or reload mail headers list on request;
        Exit,Fail,Progress run by threadChecker after callback via queue;
        load may overlap with sends, but disables all but send;
        could overlap with loadingMsgs, but may change msg cache list;
        forceReload on delete/synch fail, else loads recent arrivals only;
        2.1: cache.loadHeaders may do quick check to see if msgnums
        in synch with server, if we are loading just newly arrived hdrs;
        """
        if loadingHdrsBusy or deletingBusy or loadingMsgsBusy:
            showerror(appname, 'Cannot load headers during load or delete')
        else:
            loadingHdrsBusy.incr()
            self.cache.setPopPassword(appname) # don't update GUI in the thread!
            popup = popuputil.BusyBoxNowait(appname, 'Loading message headers')
            threadtools.startThread(
                action     = self.cache.loadHeaders,
                args       = (forceReload,),
                context    = (popup,),
                onExit     = self.onLoadHdrsExit,
                onFail     = self.onLoadHdrsFail,
                onProgress = self.onLoadHdrsProgress)

    def onLoadHdrsExit(self, popup):
        self.fillIndex()
        popup.quit()
        self.lift()
        loadingHdrsBusy.decr()                     # allow other actions to run

    def onLoadHdrsFail(self, exc_info, popup):
        popup.quit()
        showerror(appname, 'Load failed: \n%s\n%s' % exc_info[:2])
        printStack(exc_info)                       # send stack trace to stdout
        loadingHdrsBusy.decr()
        if exc_info[0] == mailtools.MessageSynchError:    # synch inbox/index
            self.onLoadServer(forceReload=True)           # new thread: reload
        else:
            self.cache.popPassword = None          # force re-input next time

    def onLoadHdrsProgress(self, i, n, popup):
        popup.changeText('%d of %d' % (i, n))

    def doDelete(self, msgnumlist):
        """
        threaded: delete from server now - changes msg nums;
        may overlap with sends only, disables all except sends;
        2.1: cache.deleteMessages now checks TOP result to see
        if headers match selected mails, in case msgnums out of
        synch with mail server: poss if mail deleted by other client,
        or server deletes inbox mail automatically - some ISPs may
        move a mail from inbox to undeliverable on load failure;
        """
        if loadingHdrsBusy or deletingBusy or loadingMsgsBusy:
            showerror(appname, 'Cannot delete during load or delete')
        else:
            deletingBusy.incr()
            popup = popuputil.BusyBoxNowait(appname, 'Deleting selected mails')
            threadtools.startThread(
                action     = self.cache.deleteMessages,
                args       = (msgnumlist,),
                context    = (popup,),
                onExit     = self.onDeleteExit,
                onFail     = self.onDeleteFail,
                onProgress = self.onDeleteProgress)

    def onDeleteExit(self, popup):
        self.fillIndex()                     # no need to reload from server
        popup.quit()                         # refill index with updated cache
        self.lift()                          # raise index window, release lock
        deletingBusy.decr()

    def onDeleteFail(self, exc_info, popup):
        popup.quit()
        showerror(appname, 'Delete failed: \n%s\n%s' % exc_info[:2])
        printStack(exc_info)
        deletingBusy.decr()                  # delete or synch check failure
        self.onLoadServer(forceReload=True)  # new thread: some msgnums changed

    def onDeleteProgress(self, i, n, popup):
        popup.changeText('%d of %d' % (i, n))

    def getMessages(self, msgnums, after):
        """
        threaded: prefetch all selected messages into cache now;
        used by save, view, reply, and forward to prefill cache;
        may overlap with other loadmsgs and sends, disables delete,load;
        only runs "after" action if the fetch allowed and successful;
        2.1: cache.getMessages tests if index in synch with server,
        but we only test if we have to go to server, not if cached;

        3.0: see messagecache note: now avoids potential fetch of mail
        currently being fetched, if user clicks again while in progress;
        any message being fetched by any other request in progress must
        disable entire toLoad batch: else, need to wait for N other loads;
        fetches are still allowed to overlap in time, as long as disjoint;
        """
        if loadingHdrsBusy or deletingBusy:
            showerror(appname, 'Cannot fetch message during load or delete')
        else:
            toLoad = [num for num in msgnums if not self.cache.isLoaded(num)]
            if not toLoad:
                after()         # all already loaded
                return          # process now, no wait pop up
            else:
                if set(toLoad) &amp; self.beingFetched:   # 3.0: any in progress?
                    showerror(appname, 'Cannot fetch any message being fetched')
                else:
                    self.beingFetched |= set(toLoad)
                    loadingMsgsBusy.incr()
                    from popuputil import BusyBoxNowait
                    popup = BusyBoxNowait(appname, 'Fetching message contents')
                    threadtools.startThread(
                        action     = self.cache.getMessages,
                        args       = (toLoad,),
                        context    = (after, popup, toLoad),
                        onExit     = self.onLoadMsgsExit,
                        onFail     = self.onLoadMsgsFail,
                        onProgress = self.onLoadMsgsProgress)

    def onLoadMsgsExit(self, after, popup, toLoad):
        self.beingFetched -= set(toLoad)
        popup.quit()
        after()
        loadingMsgsBusy.decr()    # allow other actions after onExit done

    def onLoadMsgsFail(self, exc_info, after, popup, toLoad):
        self.beingFetched -= set(toLoad)
        popup.quit()
        showerror(appname, 'Fetch failed: \n%s\n%s' % exc_info[:2])
        printStack(exc_info)
        loadingMsgsBusy.decr()
        if exc_info[0] == mailtools.MessageSynchError:      # synch inbox/index
            self.onLoadServer(forceReload=True)             # new thread: reload

    def onLoadMsgsProgress(self, i, n, after, popup, toLoad):
        popup.changeText('%d of %d' % (i, n))

    def getMessage(self, msgnum):
        return self.cache.getMessage(msgnum)                # full mail text

    def headersMaps(self):
        # list of email.message.Message objects, 3.x requires list() if map()
        # return [self.parseHeaders(h) for h in self.cache.allHdrs()]
        return list(map(self.parseHeaders, self.cache.allHdrs()))

    def mailSize(self, msgnum):
        return self.cache.getSize(msgnum)

    def okayToQuit(self):
        # any threads still running?
        filesbusy = [win for win in openSaveFiles.values() if win.openFileBusy]
        busy = loadingHdrsBusy or deletingBusy or sendingBusy or loadingMsgsBusy
        busy = busy or filesbusy
        return not busy</pre>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="ViewWindows: Message View Windows"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="viewwindows_colon_message_view_windows"></a>ViewWindows: Message View Windows</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Example 14-4 lists
          <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e62744"></a><a id="py14.4.4"></a>the implementation of mail view and edit windows.
          These windows are created in response to actions in list
          windows—View, Write, Reply, and Forward buttons. See the callbacks
          for these actions in the list window module of Example 14-3 for view window
          initiation calls.</p>
<p>As in the prior module (Example 14-3), this file is
          really one common class and a handful of customizations. The mail
          view window is nearly identical to the mail edit window, used for
          Write, Reply, and Forward requests. Consequently, this example
          defines the common appearance and behavior in the view window
          superclass, and extends it by subclassing for edit windows.</p>
<p>Replies and forwards are hardly different from the write
          window here, because their details (e.g., From and To addresses and
          quoted message text) are worked out in the list window
          implementation before an edit window is created.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id54"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 14-4. PP4E\Internet\Email\PyMailGui\ViewWindows.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
###############################################################################
Implementation of View, Write, Reply, Forward windows: one class per kind.
Code is factored here for reuse: a Write window is a customized View window,
and Reply and Forward are custom Write windows.  Windows defined in this
file are created by the list windows, in response to user actions.

Caveat:'split' pop ups for opening parts/attachments feel nonintuitive.
2.1: this caveat was addressed, by adding quick-access attachment buttons.
New in 3.0: platform-neutral grid() for mail headers, not packed col frames.
New in 3.0: supports Unicode encodings for main text + text attachments sent.
New in 3.0: PyEdit supports arbitrary Unicode for message parts viewed.
New in 3.0: supports Unicode/mail encodings for headers in  mails sent.

TBD: could avoid verifying quits unless text area modified (like PyEdit2.0),
but these windows are larger, and would not catch headers already changed.
TBD: should Open dialog in write windows be program-wide? (per-window now).
###############################################################################
"""

from SharedNames import *     # program-wide global objects


###############################################################################
# message view window - also a superclass of write, reply, forward
###############################################################################


class ViewWindow(windows.PopupWindow, mailtools.MailParser):
    """
    a Toplevel, with extra protocol and embedded TextEditor;
    inherits saveParts,partsList from mailtools.MailParser;
    mixes in custom subclass logic by direct inheritance here;
    """
    # class attributes
    modelabel       = 'View'                   # used in window titles
    from mailconfig import okayToOpenParts     # open any attachments at all?
    from mailconfig import verifyPartOpens     # ask before open each part?
    from mailconfig import maxPartButtons      # show up to this many + '...'
    from mailconfig import skipTextOnHtmlPart  # 3.0: just browser, not PyEdit?
    tempPartDir     = 'TempParts'              # where 1 selected part saved

    # all view windows use same dialog: remembers last dir
    partsDialog = Directory(title=appname + ': Select parts save directory')

    def __init__(self, headermap, showtext, origmessage=None):
        """
        header map is origmessage, or custom hdr dict for writing;
        showtext is main text part of the message: parsed or custom;
        origmessage is parsed email.message.Message for view mail windows
        """
        windows.PopupWindow.__init__(self, appname, self.modelabel)
        self.origMessage = origmessage
        self.makeWidgets(headermap, showtext)

    def makeWidgets(self, headermap, showtext):
        """
        add headers, actions, attachments, text editor
        3.0: showtext is assumed to be decoded Unicode str here;
        it will be encoded on sends and saves as directed/needed;
        """
        actionsframe = self.makeHeaders(headermap)
        if self.origMessage and self.okayToOpenParts:
            self.makePartButtons()
        self.editor  = textEditor.TextEditorComponentMinimal(self)
        myactions    = self.actionButtons()
        for (label, callback) in myactions:
            b = Button(actionsframe, text=label, command=callback)
            b.config(bg='beige', relief=RIDGE, bd=2)
            b.pack(side=TOP, expand=YES, fill=BOTH)

        # body text, pack last=clip first
        self.editor.pack(side=BOTTOM)               # may be multiple editors
        self.update()                               # 3.0: else may be @ line2
        self.editor.setAllText(showtext)            # each has own content
        lines = len(showtext.splitlines())
        lines = min(lines + 3, mailconfig.viewheight or 20)
        self.editor.setHeight(lines)                # else height=24, width=80
        self.editor.setWidth(80)                    # or from PyEdit textConfig
        if mailconfig.viewbg:
            self.editor.setBg(mailconfig.viewbg)    # colors, font in mailconfig
        if mailconfig.viewfg:
            self.editor.setFg(mailconfig.viewfg)
        if mailconfig.viewfont:                     # also via editor Tools menu
            self.editor.setFont(mailconfig.viewfont)

    def makeHeaders(self, headermap):
        """
        add header entry fields, return action buttons frame;
        3.0: uses grid for platform-neutral layout of label/entry rows;
        packed row frames with fixed-width labels would work well too;

        3.0: decoding of i18n headers (and email names in address headers)
        is performed here if still required as they are added to the GUI;
        some may have been decoded already for reply/forward windows that
        need to use decoded text, but the extra decode here is harmless for
        these, and is required for other headers and cases such as fetched
        mail views;  always, headers are in decoded form when displayed in
        the GUI, and will be encoded within mailtools on Sends if they are
        non-ASCII (see Write);  i18n header decoding also occurs in list
        window mail indexes, and for headers added to quoted mail text;
        text payloads in the mail body are also decoded for display and
        encoded for sends elsewhere in the system (list windows, Write);

        3.0: creators of edit windows prefill Bcc header with sender email
        address to be picked up here, as a convenience for common usages if
        this header is enabled in mailconfig;  Reply also now prefills the
        Cc header with all unique original recipients less From, if enabled;
        """
        top    = Frame(self); top.pack   (side=TOP,   fill=X)
        left   = Frame(top);  left.pack  (side=LEFT,  expand=NO,  fill=BOTH)
        middle = Frame(top);  middle.pack(side=LEFT,  expand=YES, fill=X)

        # headers set may be extended in mailconfig (Bcc, others?)
        self.userHdrs = ()
        showhdrs = ('From', 'To', 'Cc', 'Subject')
        if hasattr(mailconfig, 'viewheaders') and mailconfig.viewheaders:
            self.userHdrs = mailconfig.viewheaders
            showhdrs += self.userHdrs
        addrhdrs = ('From', 'To', 'Cc', 'Bcc')    # 3.0: decode i18n specially

        self.hdrFields = []
        for (i, header) in enumerate(showhdrs):
            lab = Label(middle, text=header+':', justify=LEFT)
            ent = Entry(middle)
            lab.grid(row=i, column=0, sticky=EW)
            ent.grid(row=i, column=1, sticky=EW)
            middle.rowconfigure(i, weight=1)
            hdrvalue = headermap.get(header, '?')    # might be empty
            # 3.0: if encoded, decode per email+mime+unicode
            if header not in addrhdrs:
                hdrvalue = self.decodeHeader(hdrvalue)
            else:
                hdrvalue = self.decodeAddrHeader(hdrvalue)
            ent.insert('0', hdrvalue)
            self.hdrFields.append(ent)               # order matters in onSend
        middle.columnconfigure(1, weight=1)
        return left

    def actionButtons(self):                         # must be method for self
        return [('Cancel', self.destroy),            # close view window silently
                ('Parts',  self.onParts),            # multiparts list or the body
                ('Split',  self.onSplit)]

    def makePartButtons(self):
        """
        add up to N buttons that open attachments/parts
        when clicked; alternative to Parts/Split (2.1);
        okay that temp dir is shared by all open messages:
        part file not saved till later selected and opened;
        partname=partname is required in lambda in Py2.4;
        caveat: we could try to skip the main text part;
        """
        def makeButton(parent, text, callback):
            link = Button(parent, text=text, command=callback, relief=SUNKEN)
            if mailconfig.partfg: link.config(fg=mailconfig.partfg)
            if mailconfig.partbg: link.config(bg=mailconfig.partbg)
            link.pack(side=LEFT, fill=X, expand=YES)

        parts = Frame(self)
        parts.pack(side=TOP, expand=NO, fill=X)
        for (count, partname) in enumerate(self.partsList(self.origMessage)):
            if count == self.maxPartButtons:
                makeButton(parts, '...', self.onSplit)
                break
            openpart = (lambda partname=partname: self.onOnePart(partname))
            makeButton(parts, partname, openpart)

    def onOnePart(self, partname):
        """
        locate selected part for button and save and open;
        okay if multiple mails open: resaves each time selected;
        we could probably just use web browser directly here;
        caveat: tempPartDir is relative to cwd - poss anywhere;
        caveat: tempPartDir is never cleaned up: might be large,
        could use tempfile module (just like the HTML main text
        part display code in onView of the list window class);
        """
        try:
            savedir  = self.tempPartDir
            message  = self.origMessage
            (contype, savepath) = self.saveOnePart(savedir, partname, message)
        except:
            showerror(appname, 'Error while writing part file')
            printStack(sys.exc_info())
        else:
            self.openParts([(contype, os.path.abspath(savepath))])   # reuse

    def onParts(self):
        """
        show message part/attachments in pop-up window;
        uses same file naming scheme as save on Split;
        if non-multipart, single part = full body text
        """
        partnames = self.partsList(self.origMessage)
        msg = '\n'.join(['Message parts:\n'] + partnames)
        showinfo(appname, msg)

    def onSplit(self):
        """
        pop up save dir dialog and save all parts/attachments there;
        if desired, pop up HTML and multimedia parts in web browser,
        text in TextEditor, and well-known doc types on windows;
        could show parts in View windows where embedded text editor
        would provide a save button, but most are not readable text;
        """
        savedir = self.partsDialog.show()          # class attr: at prior dir
        if savedir:                                # tk dir chooser, not file
            try:
                partfiles = self.saveParts(savedir, self.origMessage)
            except:
                showerror(appname, 'Error while writing part files')
                printStack(sys.exc_info())
            else:
                if self.okayToOpenParts: self.openParts(partfiles)

    def askOpen(self, appname, prompt):
        if not self.verifyPartOpens:
            return True
        else:
            return askyesno(appname, prompt)   # pop-up dialog

    def openParts(self, partfiles):
        """
        auto-open well known and safe file types, but only if verified
        by the user in a pop up; other types must be opened manually
        from save dir;  at this point, the named parts have been already
        MIME-decoded and saved as raw bytes in binary-mode files, but text
        parts may be in any Unicode encoding;  PyEdit needs to know the
        encoding to decode, webbrowsers may have to guess or be told;

        caveat: punts for type application/octet-stream even if it has
        safe filename extension such as .html; caveat: image/audio/video
        could be opened with the book's playfile.py; could also do that
        if text viewer fails: would start notepad on Windows via startfile;
        webbrowser may handle most cases here too, but specific is better;
        """

        def textPartEncoding(fullfilename):
            """
            3.0: map a text part filename back to charset param in content-type
            header of part's Message, so we can pass this on to the PyEdit
            constructor for proper text display;  we could return the charset
            along with content-type from mailtools for text parts, but fewer
            changes are needed if this is handled as a special case here;

            part content is saved in binary mode files by mailtools to avoid
            encoding issues, but here the original part Message is not directly
            available; we need this mapping step to extract a Unicode encoding
            name if present; 4E's PyEdit now allows an explicit encoding name for
            file opens, and resolves encoding on saves; see Chapter 11 for PyEdit
            policies: it may ask user for an encoding if charset absent or fails;
            caveat: move to mailtools.mailParser to reuse for &lt;meta&gt; in PyMailCGI?
            """
            partname = os.path.basename(fullfilename)
            for (filename, contype, part) in self.walkNamedParts(self.origMessage):
                if filename == partname:
                    return part.get_content_charset()     # None if not in header
            assert False, 'Text part not found'           # should never happen

        for (contype, fullfilename) in partfiles:
            maintype  = contype.split('/')[0]                      # left side
            extension = os.path.splitext(fullfilename)[1]          # not [-4:]
            basename  = os.path.basename(fullfilename)             # strip dir

            # HTML and XML text, web pages, some media
            if contype  in ['text/html', 'text/xml']:
                browserOpened = False
                if self.askOpen(appname, 'Open "%s" in browser?' % basename):
                    try:
                        webbrowser.open_new('file://' + fullfilename)
                        browserOpened = True
                    except:
                        showerror(appname, 'Browser failed: trying editor')
                if not browserOpened or not self.skipTextOnHtmlPart:
                    try:
                        # try PyEdit to see encoding name and effect
                        encoding = textPartEncoding(fullfilename)
                        textEditor.TextEditorMainPopup(parent=self,
                                   winTitle=' - %s email part' % (encoding or '?'),
                                   loadFirst=fullfilename, loadEncode=encoding)
                    except:
                        showerror(appname, 'Error opening text viewer')

            # text/plain, text/x-python, etc.; 4E: encoding, may fail
            elif maintype == 'text':
                if self.askOpen(appname, 'Open text part "%s"?' % basename):
                    try:
                        encoding = textPartEncoding(fullfilename)
                        textEditor.TextEditorMainPopup(parent=self,
                                   winTitle=' - %s email part' % (encoding or '?'),
                                   loadFirst=fullfilename, loadEncode=encoding)
                    except:
                        showerror(appname, 'Error opening text viewer')

            # multimedia types: Windows opens mediaplayer, imageviewer, etc.
            elif maintype in ['image', 'audio', 'video']:
                if self.askOpen(appname, 'Open media part "%s"?' % basename):
                    try:
                        webbrowser.open_new('file://' + fullfilename)
                    except:
                        showerror(appname, 'Error opening browser')

            # common Windows documents: Word, Excel, Adobe, archives, etc.
            elif (sys.platform[:3] == 'win' and
                  maintype == 'application' and                      # 3.0: +x types
                  extension in ['.doc', '.docx', '.xls', '.xlsx',    # generalize me
                                '.pdf', '.zip',  '.tar', '.wmv']):
                    if self.askOpen(appname, 'Open part "%s"?' % basename):
                        os.startfile(fullfilename)

            else:  # punt!
                msg = 'Cannot open part: "%s"\nOpen manually in: "%s"'
                msg = msg % (basename, os.path.dirname(fullfilename))
                showinfo(appname, msg)


###############################################################################
# message edit windows - write, reply, forward
###############################################################################


if mailconfig.smtpuser:                              # user set in mailconfig?
    MailSenderClass = mailtools.MailSenderAuth       # login/password required
else:
    MailSenderClass = mailtools.MailSender


class WriteWindow(ViewWindow, MailSenderClass):
    """
    customize view display for composing new mail
    inherits sendMessage from mailtools.MailSender
    """
    modelabel = 'Write'

    def __init__(self, headermap, starttext):
        ViewWindow.__init__(self, headermap, starttext)
        MailSenderClass.__init__(self)
        self.attaches   = []                     # each win has own open dialog
        self.openDialog = None                   # dialog remembers last dir

    def actionButtons(self):
        return [('Cancel', self.quit),           # need method to use self
                ('Parts',  self.onParts),        # PopupWindow verifies cancel
                ('Attach', self.onAttach),
                ('Send',   self.onSend)]         # 4E: don't pad: centered

    def onParts(self):
        # caveat: deletes not currently supported
        if not self.attaches:
            showinfo(appname, 'Nothing attached')
        else:
            msg = '\n'.join(['Already attached:\n'] + self.attaches)
            showinfo(appname, msg)

    def onAttach(self):
        """
        attach a file to the mail: name added here will be
        added as a part on Send, inside the mailtools pkg;
        4E: could ask Unicode type here instead of on send
        """
        if not self.openDialog:
            self.openDialog = Open(title=appname + ': Select Attachment File')
        filename = self.openDialog.show()        # remember prior dir
        if filename:
            self.attaches.append(filename)       # to be opened in send method

    def resolveUnicodeEncodings(self):
        """
        3.0/4E: to prepare for send, resolve Unicode encoding for text parts:
        both main text part, and any text part attachments;  the main text part
        may have had a known encoding if this is a reply or forward, but not for
        a write, and it may require a different encoding after editing anyhow;
        smtplib in 3.1 requires that full message text be encodable per ASCII
        when sent (if it's a str), so it's crucial to get this right here; else
        fails if reply/fwd to UTF8 text when config=ascii if any non-ascii chars;
        try user setting and reply but fall back on general UTF8 as a last resort;
        """

        def isTextKind(filename):
            contype, encoding = mimetypes.guess_type(filename)
            if contype is None or encoding is not None:    # 4E utility
                return False                               # no guess, compressed?
            maintype, subtype = contype.split('/', 1)      # check for text/?
            return maintype == 'text'

        # resolve many body text encoding
        bodytextEncoding = mailconfig.mainTextEncoding
        if bodytextEncoding == None:
            asknow = askstring('PyMailGUI', 'Enter main text Unicode encoding name')
            bodytextEncoding = asknow or 'latin-1'    # or sys.getdefaultencoding()?

        # last chance: use utf-8 if can't encode per prior selections
        if bodytextEncoding != 'utf-8':
            try:
                bodytext = self.editor.getAllText()
                bodytext.encode(bodytextEncoding)
            except (UnicodeError, LookupError):       # lookup: bad encoding name
                bodytextEncoding = 'utf-8'            # general code point scheme

        # resolve any text part attachment encodings
        attachesEncodings = []
        config = mailconfig.attachmentTextEncoding
        for filename in self.attaches:
            if not isTextKind(filename):
                attachesEncodings.append(None)        # skip non-text: don't ask
            elif config != None:
                attachesEncodings.append(config)      # for all text parts if set
            else:
                prompt = 'Enter Unicode encoding name for %' % filename
                asknow = askstring('PyMailGUI', prompt)
                attachesEncodings.append(asknow or 'latin-1')

            # last chance: use utf-8 if can't decode per prior selections
            choice = attachesEncodings[-1]
            if choice != None and choice != 'utf-8':
                try:
                    attachbytes = open(filename, 'rb').read()
                    attachbytes.decode(choice)
                except (UnicodeError, LookupError, IOError):
                    attachesEncodings[-1] = 'utf-8'
        return bodytextEncoding, attachesEncodings

    def onSend(self):
        """
        threaded: mail edit window Send button press;
        may overlap with any other thread, disables none but quit;
        Exit,Fail run by threadChecker via queue in after callback;
        caveat: no progress here, because send mail call is atomic;
        assumes multiple recipient addrs are separated with ',';
        mailtools module handles encodings, attachments, Date, etc;
        mailtools module also saves sent message text in a local file

        3.0: now fully parses To,Cc,Bcc (in mailtools) instead of
        splitting on the separator naively;  could also use multiline
        input widgets instead of simple entry;  Bcc added to envelope,
        not headers;

        3.0: Unicode encodings of text parts is resolved here, because
        it may require GUI prompts;  mailtools performs the actual
        encoding for parts as needed and requested;

        3.0: i18n headers are already decoded in the GUI fields here;
        encoding of any non-ASCII i18n headers is performed in mailtools,
        not here, because no GUI interaction is required;
        """

        # resolve Unicode encoding for text parts;
        bodytextEncoding, attachesEncodings = self.resolveUnicodeEncodings()

        # get components from GUI; 3.0: i18n headers are decoded
        fieldvalues = [entry.get() for entry in self.hdrFields]
        From, To, Cc, Subj = fieldvalues[:4]
        extraHdrs = [('Cc', Cc), ('X-Mailer', appname + ' (Python)')]
        extraHdrs += list(zip(self.userHdrs, fieldvalues[4:]))
        bodytext = self.editor.getAllText()

        # split multiple recipient lists on ',', fix empty fields
        Tos = self.splitAddresses(To)
        for (ix, (name, value)) in enumerate(extraHdrs):
            if value:                                           # ignored if ''
                if value == '?':                                # ? not replaced
                    extraHdrs[ix] = (name, '')
                elif name.lower() in ['cc', 'bcc']:             # split on ','
                    extraHdrs[ix] = (name, self.splitAddresses(value))

        # withdraw to disallow send during send
        # caveat: might not be foolproof - user may deiconify if icon visible
        self.withdraw()
        self.getPassword()      # if needed; don't run pop up in send thread!
        popup = popuputil.BusyBoxNowait(appname, 'Sending message')
        sendingBusy.incr()
        threadtools.startThread(
            action  = self.sendMessage,
            args    = (From, Tos, Subj, extraHdrs, bodytext, self.attaches,
                                         saveMailSeparator,
                                         bodytextEncoding,
                                         attachesEncodings),
            context = (popup,),
            onExit  = self.onSendExit,
            onFail  = self.onSendFail)

    def onSendExit(self, popup):
        """
        erase wait window, erase view window, decr send count;
        sendMessage call auto saves sent message in local file;
        can't use window.addSavedMails: mail text unavailable;
        """
        popup.quit()
        self.destroy()
        sendingBusy.decr()

        # poss \ when opened, / in mailconfig
        sentname = os.path.abspath(mailconfig.sentmailfile)  # also expands '.'
        if sentname in openSaveFiles.keys():                 # sent file open?
            window = openSaveFiles[sentname]                 # update list,raise
            window.loadMailFileThread()

    def onSendFail(self, exc_info, popup):
        # pop-up error, keep msg window to save or retry, redraw actions frame
        popup.quit()
        self.deiconify()
        self.lift()
        showerror(appname, 'Send failed: \n%s\n%s' % exc_info[:2])
        printStack(exc_info)
        MailSenderClass.smtpPassword = None        # try again; 3.0/4E: not on self
        sendingBusy.decr()

    def askSmtpPassword(self):
        """
        get password if needed from GUI here, in main thread;
        caveat: may try this again in thread if no input first
        time, so goes into a loop until input is provided; see
        pop paswd input logic for a nonlooping alternative
        """
        password = ''
        while not password:
            prompt = ('Password for %s on %s?' %
                     (self.smtpUser, self.smtpServerName))
            password = popuputil.askPasswordWindow(appname, prompt)
        return password


class ReplyWindow(WriteWindow):
    """
    customize write display for replying
    text and headers set up by list window
    """
    modelabel = 'Reply'


class ForwardWindow(WriteWindow):
    """
    customize reply display for forwarding
    text and headers set up by list window
    """
    modelabel = 'Forward'</pre>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="messagecache: Message Cache Manager"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="messagecache_colon_message_cache_manager"></a>messagecache: Message Cache Manager</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e62772"></a><a id="py14.4.5"></a>class in Example 14-5 implements a cache
          for already loaded messages. Its logic is split off into this file
          in order to avoid further complicating list window implementations.
          The server list window creates and embeds an instance of this class
          to interface with the mail server and to keep track of already
          loaded mail headers and full text. In this version, the server list
          window also keeps track of mail fetches in progress, to avoid
          attempting to load the same mail more than once in parallel. This
          task isn’t performed here, because it may require GUI
          operations.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id55"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 14-5. PP4E\Internet\Email\PyMailGui\messagecache.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
##############################################################################
manage message and header loads and context, but not GUI;
a MailFetcher, with a list of already loaded headers and messages;
the caller must handle any required threading or GUI interfaces;

3.0 change: use full message text  Unicode encoding name in local
mailconfig module; decoding happens deep in mailtools, when a message
is fetched - mail text is always Unicode str from that point on;
this may change in a future Python/email: see Chapter 13 for details;

3.0 change: inherits the new mailconfig.fetchlimit feature of mailtools,
which can be used to limit the maximum number of most recent headers or
full mails (if no TOP) fetched on each load request; note that this
feature is independent of the loadfrom used here to limit loads to
newly-arrived mails only, though it is applied at the same time: at
most fetchlimit newly-arrived mails are loaded;

3.0 change: though unlikely, it's not impossible that a user may trigger a
new fetch of a message that is currently being fetched in a thread, simply
by clicking the same message again (msg fetches, but not full index loads,
may overlap with other fetches and sends); this seems to be thread safe here,
but can lead to redundant and possibly parallel downloads of the same mail
which are pointless and seem odd (selecting all mails and pressing View
twice downloads most messages twice!); fixed by keeping track of fetches in
progress in the main GUI thread so that this overlap is no longer possible:
a message being fetched disables any fetch request which it is part of, and
parallel fetches are still allowed as long as their targets do not intersect;
##############################################################################
"""

from PP4E.Internet.Email import mailtools
from popuputil import askPasswordWindow


class MessageInfo:
    """
    an item in the mail cache list
    """
    def __init__(self, hdrtext, size):
        self.hdrtext  = hdrtext            # fulltext is cached msg
        self.fullsize = size               # hdrtext is just the hdrs
        self.fulltext = None               # fulltext=hdrtext if no TOP


class MessageCache(mailtools.MailFetcher):
    """
    keep track of already loaded headers and messages;
    inherits server transfer methods from MailFetcher;
    useful in other apps: no GUI or thread assumptions;

    3.0: raw mail text bytes are decoded to str to be
    parsed with Py3.1's email pkg and saved to files;
    uses the local mailconfig module's encoding setting;
    decoding happens automatically in mailtools on fetch;
    """
    def __init__(self):
        mailtools.MailFetcher.__init__(self)   # 3.0: inherits fetchEncoding
        self.msglist = []                      # 3.0: inherits fetchlimit

    def loadHeaders(self, forceReloads, progress=None):
        """
        three cases to handle here: the initial full load,
        load newly arrived, and forced reload after delete;
        don't refetch viewed msgs if hdrs list same or extended;
        retains cached msgs after a delete unless delete fails;
        2.1: does quick check to see if msgnums still in sync
        3.0: this is now subject to mailconfig.fetchlimit max;
        """
        if forceReloads:
            loadfrom = 1
            self.msglist = []                         # msg nums have changed
        else:
            loadfrom = len(self.msglist)+1            # continue from last load

        # only if loading newly arrived
        if loadfrom != 1:
            self.checkSynchError(self.allHdrs())      # raises except if bad

        # get all or newly arrived msgs
        reply = self.downloadAllHeaders(progress, loadfrom)
        headersList, msgSizes, loadedFull = reply

        for (hdrs, size) in zip(headersList, msgSizes):
            newmsg = MessageInfo(hdrs, size)
            if loadedFull:                            # zip result may be empty
                newmsg.fulltext = hdrs                # got full msg if no 'top'
            self.msglist.append(newmsg)

    def getMessage(self, msgnum):                     # get raw msg text
        cacheobj = self.msglist[msgnum-1]             # add to cache if fetched
        if not cacheobj.fulltext:                     # harmless if threaded
            fulltext = self.downloadMessage(msgnum)   # 3.0: simpler coding
            cacheobj.fulltext = fulltext
        return cacheobj.fulltext

    def getMessages(self, msgnums, progress=None):
        """
        prefetch full raw text of multiple messages, in thread;
        2.1: does quick check to see if msgnums still in sync;
        we can't get here unless the index list already loaded;
        """
        self.checkSynchError(self.allHdrs())          # raises except if bad
        nummsgs = len(msgnums)                        # adds messages to cache
        for (ix, msgnum) in enumerate(msgnums):       # some poss already there
             if progress: progress(ix+1, nummsgs)     # only connects if needed
             self.getMessage(msgnum)                  # but may connect &gt; once

    def getSize(self, msgnum):                        # encapsulate cache struct
        return self.msglist[msgnum-1].fullsize        # it changed once already!

    def isLoaded(self, msgnum):
        return self.msglist[msgnum-1].fulltext

    def allHdrs(self):
        return [msg.hdrtext for msg in self.msglist]

    def deleteMessages(self, msgnums, progress=None):
        """
        if delete of all msgnums works, remove deleted entries
        from mail cache, but don't reload either the headers list
        or already viewed mails text: cache list will reflect the
        changed msg nums on server;  if delete fails for any reason,
        caller should forceably reload all hdrs next, because _some_
        server msg nums may have changed, in unpredictable ways;
        2.1: this now checks msg hdrs to detect out of synch msg
        numbers, if TOP supported by mail server; runs in thread
        """
        try:
            self.deleteMessagesSafely(msgnums, self.allHdrs(), progress)
        except mailtools.TopNotSupported:
            mailtools.MailFetcher.deleteMessages(self, msgnums, progress)

        # no errors: update index list
        indexed = enumerate(self.msglist)
        self.msglist = [msg for (ix, msg) in indexed if ix+1 not in msgnums]


class GuiMessageCache(MessageCache):
    """
    add any GUI-specific calls here so cache usable in non-GUI apps
    """

    def setPopPassword(self, appname):
        """
        get password from GUI here, in main thread
        forceably called from GUI to avoid pop ups in threads
        """
        if not self.popPassword:
            prompt = 'Password for %s on %s?' % (self.popUser, self.popServer)
            self.popPassword = askPasswordWindow(appname, prompt)

    def askPopPassword(self):
        """
        but don't use GUI pop up here: I am run in a thread!
        when tried pop up in thread, caused GUI to hang;
        may be called by MailFetcher superclass, but only
        if passwd is still empty string due to dialog close
        """
        return self.popPassword</pre>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="popuputil: General-Purpose GUI Pop Ups"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="popuputil_colon_general-purpose_gui_pop"></a>popuputil: General-Purpose GUI Pop Ups</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Example 14-6
          implements <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e62795"></a><a id="py14.4.6"></a>a handful of utility pop-up windows in a module, in
          case they ever prove useful in other programs. Note that the same
          windows utility module is imported here, to give a common
          look-and-feel to the pop ups (icons, titles, and <span>so on</span>).</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id56"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 14-6. PP4E\Internet\Email\PyMailGui\popuputil.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
#############################################################################
utility windows - may be useful in other programs
#############################################################################
"""

from tkinter import *
from PP4E.Gui.Tools.windows import PopupWindow


class HelpPopup(PopupWindow):
    """
    custom Toplevel that shows help text as scrolled text
    source button runs a passed-in callback handler
    3.0 alternative: use HTML file and webbrowser module
    """
    myfont = 'system'  # customizable
    mywidth = 78       # 3.0: start width

    def __init__(self, appname, helptext, iconfile=None, showsource=lambda:0):
        PopupWindow.__init__(self, appname, 'Help', iconfile)
        from tkinter.scrolledtext import ScrolledText    # a nonmodal dialog
        bar  = Frame(self)                               # pack first=clip last
        bar.pack(side=BOTTOM, fill=X)
        code = Button(bar, bg='beige', text="Source", command=showsource)
        quit = Button(bar, bg='beige', text="Cancel", command=self.destroy)
        code.pack(pady=1, side=LEFT)
        quit.pack(pady=1, side=LEFT)
        text = ScrolledText(self)                   # add Text + scrollbar
        text.config(font=self.myfont)
        text.config(width=self.mywidth)             # too big for showinfo
        text.config(bg='steelblue', fg='white')     # erase on btn or return
        text.insert('0.0', helptext)
        text.pack(expand=YES, fill=BOTH)
        self.bind("&lt;Return&gt;", (lambda event: self.destroy()))


def askPasswordWindow(appname, prompt):
    """
    modal dialog to input password string
    getpass.getpass uses stdin, not GUI
    tkSimpleDialog.askstring echos input
    """
    win = PopupWindow(appname, 'Prompt')               # a configured Toplevel
    Label(win, text=prompt).pack(side=LEFT)
    entvar = StringVar(win)
    ent = Entry(win, textvariable=entvar, show='*')    # display * for input
    ent.pack(side=RIGHT, expand=YES, fill=X)
    ent.bind('&lt;Return&gt;', lambda event: win.destroy())
    ent.focus_set(); win.grab_set(); win.wait_window()
    win.update()                                       # update forces redraw
    return entvar.get()                                # ent widget is now gone


class BusyBoxWait(PopupWindow):
    """
    pop up blocking wait message box: thread waits
    main GUI event thread stays alive during wait
    but GUI is inoperable during this wait state;
    uses quit redef here because lower, not leftmost;
    """
    def __init__(self, appname, message):
        PopupWindow.__init__(self, appname, 'Busy')
        self.protocol('WM_DELETE_WINDOW', lambda:0)        # ignore deletes
        label = Label(self, text=message + '...')          # win.quit() to erase
        label.config(height=10, width=40, cursor='watch')  # busy cursor
        label.pack()
        self.makeModal()
        self.message, self.label = message, label
    def makeModal(self):
        self.focus_set()                                   # grab application
        self.grab_set()                                    # wait for threadexit
    def changeText(self, newtext):
        self.label.config(text=self.message + ': ' + newtext)
    def quit(self):
        self.destroy()                                     # don't verify quit

class BusyBoxNowait(BusyBoxWait):
    """
    pop up nonblocking wait window
    call changeText to show progress, quit to close
    """
    def makeModal(self):
        pass

if __name__ == '__main__':
    HelpPopup('spam', 'See figure 1...\n')
    print(askPasswordWindow('spam', 'enter password'))
    input('Enter to exit')  # pause if clicked</pre>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="wraplines: Line Split Tools"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="wraplines_colon_line_split_tools"></a>wraplines: Line Split Tools</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e62820"></a><a id="py14.4.7"></a>module in Example 14-7 implements general
          tools for wrapping long lines, at either a fixed column or the first
          delimiter at or before a fixed column. PyMailGUI uses this file’s
          <code class="epub__literal">wrapText1</code> function for text in
          view, reply, and forward windows, but this code is potentially
          useful in other programs. Run the file as a script to watch its
          self-test code at work, and study its functions to see its
          text-processing logic.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id57"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 14-7. PP4E\Internet\Email\PyMailGui\wraplines.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
###############################################################################
split lines on fixed columns or at delimiters before a column;
see also: related but different textwrap standard library module (2.3+);
4E caveat: this assumes str; supporting bytes might help avoid some decodes;
###############################################################################
"""

defaultsize = 80

def wrapLinesSimple(lineslist, size=defaultsize):
    "split at fixed position size"
    wraplines = []
    for line in lineslist:
        while True:
            wraplines.append(line[:size])         # OK if len &lt; size
            line = line[size:]                    # split without analysis
            if not line: break
    return wraplines

def wrapLinesSmart(lineslist, size=defaultsize, delimiters='.,:\t '):
    "wrap at first delimiter left of size"
    wraplines = []
    for line in lineslist:
        while True:
            if len(line) &lt;= size:
                wraplines += [line]
                break
            else:
                for look in range(size-1, size // 2, −1):       # 3.0: need // not /
                    if line[look] in delimiters:
                        front, line = line[:look+1], line[look+1:]
                        break
                else:
                    front, line = line[:size], line[size:]
                wraplines += [front]
    return wraplines

###############################################################################
# common use case utilities
###############################################################################

def wrapText1(text, size=defaultsize):         # better for line-based txt: mail
    "when text read all at once"               # keeps original line brks struct
    lines = text.split('\n')                   # split on newlines
    lines = wrapLinesSmart(lines, size)        # wrap lines on delimiters
    return '\n'.join(lines)                    # put back together

def wrapText2(text, size=defaultsize):         # more uniform across lines
    "same, but treat as one long line"         # but loses original line struct
    text  = text.replace('\n', ' ')            # drop newlines if any
    lines = wrapLinesSmart([text], size)       # wrap single line on delimiters
    return lines                               # caller puts back together

def wrapText3(text, size=defaultsize):
    "same, but put back together"
    lines = wrapText2(text, size)              # wrap as single long line
    return '\n'.join(lines) + '\n'             # make one string with newlines

def wrapLines1(lines, size=defaultsize):
    "when newline included at end"
    lines = [line[:-1] for line in lines]      # strip off newlines (or .rstrip)
    lines = wrapLinesSmart(lines, size)        # wrap on delimiters
    return [(line + '\n') for line in lines]   # put them back

def wrapLines2(lines, size=defaultsize):       # more uniform across lines
    "same, but concat as one long line"        # but loses original structure
    text  = ''.join(lines)                     # put together as 1 line
    lines = wrapText2(text)                    # wrap on delimiters
    return [(line + '\n') for line in lines]   # put newlines on ends

###############################################################################
# self-test
###############################################################################

if __name__ == '__main__':
    lines = ['spam ham ' * 20 + 'spam,ni' * 20,
             'spam ham ' * 20,
             'spam,ni'   * 20,
             'spam ham.ni' * 20,
             '',
             'spam'*80,
             ' ',
             'spam ham eggs']

    sep = '-' * 30
    print('all', sep)
    for line in lines: print(repr(line))
    print('simple', sep)
    for line in wrapLinesSimple(lines): print(repr(line))
    print('smart', sep)
    for line in wrapLinesSmart(lines): print(repr(line))

    print('single1', sep)
    for line in wrapLinesSimple([lines[0]], 60): print(repr(line))
    print('single2', sep)
    for line in wrapLinesSmart([lines[0]], 60): print(repr(line))
    print('combined text', sep)
    for line in wrapLines2(lines): print(repr(line))
    print('combined lines', sep)
    print(wrapText1('\n'.join(lines)))

    assert ''.join(lines) == ''.join(wrapLinesSimple(lines, 60))
    assert ''.join(lines) == ''.join(wrapLinesSmart(lines, 60))
    print(len(''.join(lines)), end=' ')
    print(len(''.join(wrapLinesSimple(lines))), end=' ')
    print(len(''.join(wrapLinesSmart(lines))), end=' ')
    print(len(''.join(wrapLinesSmart(lines, 60))), end=' ')
    input('Press enter')   # pause if clicked</pre>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="html2text: Extracting Text from HTML (Prototype, Preview)"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="html2text_colon_extracting_text_from_htm"></a>html2text: Extracting Text from HTML (Prototype,
          Preview)</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Example 14-8 lists
          <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e62846"></a><a id="py14.4.8"></a>the code of the simple-minded HTML parser that
          PyMailGUI uses to extract plain text from mails whose main (or only)
          text part is in HTML form. This extracted text is used both for
          display and for the initial text in replies and forwards. Its
          original HTML form is also displayed in its full glory in a
          popped-up web browser as before.</p>
<p>This is a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>prototype</em></span>. Because PyMailGUI is
          oriented toward plain text today, this parser is intended as a
          temporary workaround until a HTML viewer/editor widget solution is
          found. Because of that, this is at best a first cut which has not
          been polished to any significant extent. Robustly parsing HTML in
          its entirety is a task well beyond the scope of this chapter and
          book. When this parser fails to render good plain text (and it
          will!), users can still view and cut-and-paste the properly
          formatted text from the web browser.</p>
<p>This is also a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>preview</em></span>. HTML parsing is
          not covered until Chapter 19 of this book,
          so you’ll have to take this on faith until we refer back to it in
          that later chapter. Unfortunately, this feature was added to
          PyMailGUI late in the book project, and avoiding this forward
          reference didn’t seem to justify omitting the improvement
          altogether. For more details on HTML parsing, stay tuned for (or
          flip head to) Chapter 19.</p>
<p>In short, the class here provides handler methods that receive
          callbacks from an HTML parser, as tags and their content is
          recognized; we use this model here to save text we’re interested in
          along the way. Besides the parser class, we could also use Python’s
          <code class="epub__literal">html.entities</code> module to map more
          entity types than are hardcoded here—another tool we will meet in
          Chapter 19.</p>
<p>Despite its limitations, this example serves as a rough guide
          to help get you started, and any result it produces is certainly an
          improvement upon the prior edition’s display and quoting of raw
          HTML.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id58"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 14-8. PP4E\Internet\Email\PyMailGui\html2text.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
################################################################
*VERY* preliminary html-to-text extractor, for text to be
quoted in replies and forwards, and displayed in the main
text display component.  Only used when the main text part
is HTML (i.e., no alternative or other text parts to show).
We also need to know if this is HTML or not, but findMainText
already returns the main text's content type.

This is mostly provided as a first cut, to help get you started
on a more complete solution.  It hasn't been polished, because
any result is better than displaying raw HTML, and it's probably
a better idea to migrate to an HTML viewer/editor widget in the
future anyhow.  As is, PyMailGUI is still plain-text biased.

If (really, when) this parser fails to render well, users can
instead view and cut-and-paste from the web browser popped up
to display the HTML.  See Chapter 19 for more on HTML parsing.
################################################################
"""
from html.parser import HTMLParser     # Python std lib parser (sax-like model)

class Parser(HTMLParser):              # subclass parser, define callback methods
    def __init__(self):                # text assumed to be str, any encoding ok
        HTMLParser.__init__(self)
        self.text = '[Extracted HTML text]'
        self.save = 0
        self.last = ''

    def addtext(self, new):
        if self.save &gt; 0:
            self.text += new
            self.last = new

    def addeoln(self, force=False):
        if force or self.last != '\n':
            self.addtext('\n')

    def handle_starttag(self, tag, attrs):    # + others imply content start?
        if tag in ('p', 'div', 'table', 'h1', 'h2', 'li'):
            self.save += 1
            self.addeoln()
        elif tag == 'td':
            self.addeoln()
        elif tag == 'style':                  # + others imply end of prior?
            self.save -= 1
        elif tag == 'br':
            self.addeoln(True)
        elif tag == 'a':
            alts = [pair for pair in attrs if pair[0] == 'alt']
            if alts:
                name, value = alts[0]
                self.addtext('[' + value.replace('\n', '') + ']')

    def handle_endtag(self, tag):
        if tag in ('p', 'div', 'table', 'h1', 'h2', 'li'):
            self.save -= 1
            self.addeoln()
        elif tag == 'style':
            self.save += 1

    def handle_data(self, data):
        data = data.replace('\n', '')          # what about &lt;PRE&gt;?
        data = data.replace('\t', ' ')
        if data != ' ' * len(data):
            self.addtext(data)

    def handle_entityref(self, name):
        xlate = dict(lt='&lt;', gt='&gt;', amp='&amp;', nbsp='').get(name, '?')
        if xlate:
            self.addtext(xlate)     # plus many others: show ? as is

def html2text(text):
    try:
        hp = Parser()
        hp.feed(text)
        return(hp.text)
    except:
        return text

if __name__ == '__main__':

    # to test me: html2text.py media\html2text-test\htmlmail1.html
    # parse file name in commandline, display result in tkinter Text
    # file assumed to be in Unicode platform default, but text need not be

    import sys, tkinter
    text = open(sys.argv[1], 'r').read()
    text = html2text(text)
    t = tkinter.Text()
    t.insert('1.0', text)
    t.pack()
    t.mainloop()</pre>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__note" title="Note"><h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p>After this example and chapter had been written and
            finalized, I did a search for HTML-to-text translators on the Web
            to try to find better options, and I discovered a Python-coded
            solution which is much more complete and robust than the simple
            prototype script here. Regrettably, I also discovered that this
            system is named the same as the script <span>listed here</span>!</p>
<p>This was unintentional and unforeseen (alas, developers are
            predisposed to think alike). For details on this more widely
            tested and much better alternative, search the Web for
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>html2text</em></span>. It’s open source, but follows the
            GPL license, and is available only for Python 2.X at this writing
            (e.g., it uses the 2.X <code class="epub__literal">sgmllib</code>
            which has been removed in favor of the new <code class="epub__literal">html.parser</code> in 3.X). Unfortunately, its
            GPL license may raise copyright concerns if shipped with PyMailGUI
            in this book’s example package or otherwise; worse, its 2.X status
            means it cannot be used at all with this book’s 3.X examples
            today.</p>
<p>There are additional plain-text extractor options on the Web
            worth checking out, including BeautifulSoup and yet another named
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>html2text.py</em></span> (no, really!). They also appear
            to be available for just 2.X today, though naturally, this story
            may change by the time you read this note. There’s no reason to
            reinvent the wheel, unless existing wheels don’t fit your
            cart!</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="mailconfig: User Configurations"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="mailconfig_colon_user_configurations"></a>mailconfig: User Configurations</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In Example 14-9,
          PyMailGUI’s <code class="epub__literal">mailconfig</code> user
          <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e62916"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e62919"></a><a id="py14.4.9"></a>settings module is listed. This program has its own
          version of this module because many of its settings are unique for
          PyMailGUI. To use the program for reading your own email, set its
          initial variables to reflect your POP and SMTP server names and
          login parameters. The variables in this module also allow the user
          to tailor the appearance and operation of the program without
          finding and editing actual program logic.</p>
<p>As is, this is a single-account configuration. We could
          generalize this module’s code to allow for multiple email accounts,
          selected by input at the console when first imported; in an upcoming
          section we’ll see a different approach that allows this module to be
          extended externally.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id59"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 14-9. PP4E\Internet\Email\PyMailGui\mailconfig.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
################################################################################
PyMailGUI user configuration settings.

Email scripts get their server names and other email config options from
this module: change me to reflect your machine names, sig, and preferences.
This module also specifies some widget style preferences applied to the GUI,
as well as message Unicode encoding policy and more in version 3.0.  See
also: local textConfig.py, for customizing PyEdit pop-ups made by PyMailGUI.

Warning: PyMailGUI won't run without most variables here: make a backup copy!
Caveat: somewhere along the way this started using mixed case inconsistently...;
TBD: we could get some user settings from the command line too, and a configure
dialog GUI would be better, but this common module file suffices for now.
################################################################################
"""

#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# (required for load, delete) POP3 email server machine, user;
#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

#popservername = '?Please set your mailconfig.py attributes?'

popservername = 'pop.secureserver.net'             # see altconfigs/ for others
popusername   = 'PP4E@learning-python.com'

#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# (required for send) SMTP email server machine name;
# see Python smtpd module for a SMTP server class to run locally ('localhost');
# note: your ISP may require that you be directly connected to their system:
# I once could email through Earthlink on dial up, but not via Comcast cable;
#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

smtpservername = 'smtpout.secureserver.net'

#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# (optional) personal information used by PyMailGUI to fill in edit forms;
# if not set, does not fill in initial form values;
# signature  -- can be a triple-quoted block, ignored if empty string;
# address    -- used for initial value of "From" field if not empty,
# no longer tries to guess From for replies--varying success;
#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

myaddress   = 'PP4E@learning-python.com'
mysignature = ('Thanks,\n'
               '--Mark Lutz  (http://learning-python.com, http://rmi.net/~lutz)')

#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# (may be required for send) SMTP user/password if authenticated;
# set user to None or '' if no login/authentication is required, and set
# pswd to name of a file holding your SMTP password, or an empty string to
# force programs to ask (in a console, or GUI)
#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

smtpuser  = None                           # per your ISP
smtppasswdfile  = ''                       # set to '' to be asked

#smtpuser = popusername

#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# (optional) PyMailGUI: name of local one-line text file with your POP
# password; if empty or file cannot be read, pswd is requested when first
# connecting; pswd not encrypted: leave this empty on shared machines;
# PyMailCGI always asks for pswd (runs on a possibly remote server);
#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

poppasswdfile  = r'c:\temp\pymailgui.txt'      # set to '' to be asked

#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# (required) local file where sent messages are always saved;
# PyMailGUI 'Open' button allows this file to be opened and viewed;
# don't use '.' form if may be run from another dir: e.g., pp4e demos
#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

#sentmailfile = r'.\sentmail.txt'             # . means in current working dir

#sourcedir    = r'C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Email\PyMailGui\'
#sentmailfile = sourcedir + 'sentmail.txt'

# determine automatically from one of my source files
import wraplines, os
mysourcedir   = os.path.dirname(os.path.abspath(wraplines.__file__))
sentmailfile  = os.path.join(mysourcedir, 'sentmail.txt')

#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# (defunct) local file where pymail saves POP mail (full text);
# PyMailGUI instead asks for a name in GUI with a pop-up dialog;
# Also asks for Split directory, and part buttons save in ./TempParts;
#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

#savemailfile = r'c:\temp\savemail.txt'       # not used in PyMailGUI: dialog

#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# (optional) customize headers displayed in PyMailGUI list and view windows;
# listheaders replaces default, viewheaders extends it; both must be tuple of
# strings, or None to use default hdrs;
#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

listheaders = ('Subject', 'From', 'Date', 'To', 'X-Mailer')
viewheaders = ('Bcc',)

#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# (optional) PyMailGUI fonts and colors for text server/file message list
# windows, message content view windows, and view window attachment buttons;
# use ('family', size, 'style') for font; 'colorname' or hexstr '#RRGGBB' for
# color (background, foreground);  None means use defaults;  font/color of
# view windows can also be set interactively with texteditor's Tools menu;
# see also the setcolor.py example in the GUI part (ch8) for custom colors;
#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

listbg   = 'indianred'                  # None, 'white', '#RRGGBB'
listfg   = 'black'
listfont = ('courier', 9, 'bold')       # None, ('courier', 12, 'bold italic')
                                        # use fixed-width font for list columns
viewbg     = 'light blue'               # was '#dbbedc'
viewfg     = 'black'
viewfont   = ('courier', 10, 'bold')
viewheight = 18                         # max lines for height when opened (20)

partfg   = None
partbg   = None

# see Tk color names: aquamarine paleturquoise powderblue goldenrod burgundy ....
#listbg = listfg = listfont = None
#viewbg = viewfg = viewfont = viewheight = None      # to use defaults
#partbg = partfg = None

#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# (optional) column at which mail's original text should be wrapped for view,
# reply, and forward;  wraps at first delimiter to left of this position;
# composed text is not auto-wrapped: user or recipient's mail tool must wrap
# new text if desired; to disable wrapping, set this to a high value (1024?);
#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

wrapsz = 90

#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# (optional) control how PyMailGUI opens mail parts in the GUI;
# for view window Split actions and attachment quick-access buttons;
# if not okayToOpenParts, quick-access part buttons will not appear in
# the GUI, and Split saves parts in a directory but does not open them;
# verifyPartOpens used by both Split action and quick-access buttons:
# all known-type parts open automatically on Split if this set to False;
# verifyHTMLTextOpen used by web browser open of HTML main text part:
#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

okayToOpenParts    = True      # open any parts/attachments at all?
verifyPartOpens    = False     # ask permission before opening each part?
verifyHTMLTextOpen = False     # if main text part is HTML, ask before open?

#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# (optional) the maximum number of quick-access mail part buttons to show
# in the middle of view windows; after this many, a "..." button will be
# displayed, which runs the "Split" action to extract additional parts;
#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

maxPartButtons = 8             # how many part buttons in view windows


# *** 3.0 additions follow ***
#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# (required, for fetch) the Unicode encoding used to decode fetched full message
# bytes, and to encode and decode message text stored in text-mode save files; see
# the book's Chapter 13 for details: this is a limited and temporary approach to
# Unicode encodings until a new bytes-friendly email package parser is provided
# which can handle Unicode encodings more accurately on a message-level basis;
# note: 'latin1' (an 8-bit encoding which is a superset of 7-bit ascii) was
# required to decode message in some old email save files I had, not 'utf8';
#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

fetchEncoding = 'latin-1'    # how to decode and store full message text (ascii?)

#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# (optional, for send) Unicode encodings for composed mail's main text plus all
# text attachments; set these to None to be prompted for encodings on mail send,
# else uses values here across entire session; default='latin-1' if GUI Cancel;
# in all cases, falls back on UTF-8 if your encoding setting or input does not
# work for the text being sent (e.g., ascii chosen for reply to non-ascii text,
# or non-ascii attachments); the email package is pickier than Python about
# names: latin-1 is known (uses qp MIME), but latin1 isn't (uses base64 MIME);
# set these to sys.getdefaultencoding() result to choose the platform default;
# encodings of text parts of fetched email are automatic via message headers;
#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

mainTextEncoding       = 'ascii'   # main mail body text part sent (None=ask)
attachmentTextEncoding = 'ascii'   # all text part attachments sent (utf-8, latin-1)

#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# (optional, for send) set this to a Unicode encoding name to be applied to
# non-ASCII headers, as well as non-ASCII names in email addresses in headers,
# in composed messages when they are sent;  None means use the UTF-8 default,
# which should work for most use cases; email names that fail to decode are
# dropped (the address part is used);  note that header decoding is performed
# automatically for display, according to header content, not user setting;
#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

headersEncodeTo = None     # how to encode non-ASCII headers sent (None=UTF-8)

#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# (optional) select text, HTML, or both versions of the help document;
# always shows one or the other: displays HTML if both of these are turned off
#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

showHelpAsText = True      # scrolled text, with button for opening source files
showHelpAsHTML = True      # HTML in a web browser, without source file links

#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# (optional) if True, don't show a selected HTML text message part in a PyEdit
# popup too if it is being displayed in a web browser; if False show both, to
# see Unicode encoding name and effect in a  text widget (browser may not know);
#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

skipTextOnHtmlPart = False       # don't show html part in PyEdit popup too

#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# (optional) the maximum number of mail headers or messages that will be
# downloaded on each load request; given this setting N, PyMailGUI fetches at
# most N of the most recently arrived mails; older mails outside this set are
# not fetched from the server, but are displayed as empty/dummy emails; if this
# is assigned to None (or 0), loads will have no such limit; use this if you
# have very many mails in your inbox, and your Internet or mail server speed
# makes full loads too slow to be practical; PyMailGUI also loads only
# newly-arrived headers, but this setting is independent of that feature;
#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

fetchlimit = 50            # maximum number headers/emails to fetch on loads

#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# (optional) initial width, height of mail index lists (chars x lines);  just
# a convenience, since the window can be resized/expanded freely once opened;
#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

listWidth = None           # None = use default 74
listHeight = None          # None = use default 15

#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
# (optional, for reply) if True, the Reply operation prefills the reply's Cc
# with all original mail recipients, after removing duplicates and the new sender;
# if False, no CC prefill occurs, and the reply is configured to reply to the
# original sender only; the Cc line may always be edited later, in either case.
#-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

repliesCopyToAll = True   # True=reply to sender + all recipients, else sender

#end</pre>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="textConfig: Customizing Pop-Up PyEdit Windows"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="textconfig_colon_customizing_pop-up_pyed"></a>textConfig: Customizing Pop-Up PyEdit Windows</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The prior <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e62941"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e62943"></a>section’s <code class="epub__literal">mailconfig</code> module provides user settings
          for tailoring the PyEdit component used to view and edit main mail
          text, but PyMailGUI also uses PyEdit to display other kinds of
          pop-up text, including raw mail text, some text attachments, and
          source code in its help system. To customize display for these pop
          ups, PyMailGUI relies on PyEdit’s own utility, which attempts to
          load a module like that in Example 14-10 from the client
          application’s own directory. By contrast, PyEdit’s Unicode settings
          are loaded from the single <code class="epub__literal">textConfig</code> module in its own package’s
          directory since they are not expected to vary across a platform (see
          Chapter 11 for more details).</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_solidus_internet_solidus_email"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 14-10. PP4E\Internet\Email\PyMailGui\textConfig.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
customize PyEdit pop-up windows other than the main mail text component;
this module (not its package) is assumed to be on the path for these settings;
PyEdit Unicode settings come from its own package's textConfig.py, not this;
"""

bg = 'beige'                        # absent=white; colorname or RGB hexstr
fg = 'black'                        # absent=black;  e.g., 'beige', '#690f96'

# etc -- see PP4E\Gui\TextEditor\textConfig.py
# font = ('courier', 9, 'normal')
# height = 20                       # Tk default: 24 lines
# width  = 80                       # Tk default: 80 characters</pre>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="PyMailGUIHelp: User Help Text and Display"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="pymailguihelp_colon_user_help_text_and_d"></a>PyMailGUIHelp: User Help Text and Display</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Finally, Example 14-11
          lists the <a id="py14.4.11a"></a><a id="py14.4.11b"></a>module that defines the text displayed in PyMailGUI’s
          help pop up as one triple-quoted string, as well as a function for
          displaying the HTML rendition of this text. The HTML version of help
          itself is in a separate file not listed in full here but included in
          the book’s examples package.</p>
<p>In fact, I’ve omitted most of the help text string, too, to
          conserve space here (it spanned 11 pages in the prior edition, and
          would be longer in this one!). For the full story, see this module
          in the examples package, or run PyMailGUI live and click the help
          bar at the top of its main server list window to learn more about
          how PyMailGUI’s interface operates. If fact, you probably should;
          the help display may explain some properties of PyMailGUI not
          introduced by the demo and other material earlier in this
          chapter.</p>
<p>The HTML rendition of help includes section links, and is
          popped up in a web browser. Because the text version also is able to
          pop up source files and minimizes external dependencies (HTML fails
          if no browser can be located), both the text and HTML versions are
          provided and selected by users in the <code class="epub__literal">mailconfig</code> module. Other schemes are
          possible (e.g., converting HTML to text by parsing as a fallback
          option), but they are left as suggested improvements.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id60"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 14-11. PP4E\Internet\PyMailGui\PyMailGuiHelp.py (partial)</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
##########################################################################
PyMailGUI help text string and HTML display function;

History: this display began as an info box pop up which had to be
narrow for Linux; it later grew to use scrolledtext with buttons
instead; it now also displays an HTML rendition in a web browser;

2.1/3E: the help string is stored in this separate module to avoid
distracting from executable code.  As coded, we throw up this text
in a simple scrollable text box; in the future, we might instead
use an HTML file opened with a browser (use webbrowser module, or
run a "browser help.html" or DOS "start help.html" with os.system);

3.0/4E: the help text is now also popped up in a web browser in HTML
form, with lists, section links, and separators; see the HTML file
PyMailGuiHelp.html in the examples package for the simple HTML
translation of the help text string here, popped up in a browser;
both the scrolled text widget and HTML browser forms are currently
supported: change mailconfig.py to use the flavor(s) you prefer;
##########################################################################
"""


# new HTML help for 3.0/4E
helpfile = 'PyMailGuiHelp.html'     # see book examples package

def showHtmlHelp(helpfile=helpfile):
    """
    3.0: popup HTML version of help file in a local web browser via webbrowser;
    this module is importable, but html file might not be in current working dir
    """
    import os, webbrowser
    mydir = os.path.dirname(__file__)       # dir of this module's filename
    mydir = os.path.abspath(mydir)          # make absolute: may be .., etc
    webbrowser.open_new('file://' + os.path.join(mydir, helpfile))


##########################################################################
# string for older text display: client responsible for GUI construction
##########################################################################

helptext = """PyMailGUI, version 3.0
May, 2010 (2.1 January, 2006)
Programming Python, 4th Edition
Mark Lutz, for O'Reilly Media, Inc.

PyMailGUI is a multiwindow interface for processing email, both online and
offline.  Its main interfaces include one list window for the mail server,
zero or more list windows for mail save files, and multiple view windows for
composing or viewing emails selected in a list window.  On startup, the main
(server) list window appears first, but no mail server connection is attempted
until a Load or message send request.  All PyMailGUI windows may be resized,
which is especially useful in list windows to see additional columns.

Note: To use PyMailGUI to read and write email of your own, you must change
the POP and SMTP server names and login details in the file mailconfig.py,
located in PyMailGUI's source-code directory.  See section 11 for details.

Contents:
0)  VERSION ENHANCEMENTS
1)  LIST WINDOW ACTIONS
2)  VIEW WINDOW ACTIONS
3)  OFFLINE PROCESSING
4)  VIEWING TEXT AND ATTACHMENTS
5)  SENDING TEXT AND ATTACHMENTS
6)  MAIL TRANSFER OVERLAP
7)  MAIL DELETION
8)  INBOX MESSAGE NUMBER SYNCHRONIZATION
9)  LOADING EMAIL
10) UNICODE AND INTERNATIONALIZATION SUPPORT
11) THE mailconfig CONFIGURATION MODULE
12) DEPENDENCIES
13) MISCELLANEOUS HINTS ("Cheat Sheet")

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...rest of file omitted...</span></em>

13) MISCELLANEOUS HINTS ("Cheat Sheet")

- Use ',' between multiple addresses in To, Cc, and Bcc headers.
- Addresses may be given in the full '"name" &lt;addr&gt;' form.
- Payloads and headers are decoded on fetches and encoded on sends.
- HTML mails show extracted plain text plus HTML in a web browser.
- To, Cc, and Bcc receive composed mail, but no Bcc header is sent.
- If enabled in mailconfig, Bcc is prefilled with sender address.

- Reply and Fwd automatically quote the original mail text.
- If enabled, replies prefill Cc with all original recipients.
- Attachments may be added for sends and are encoded as required.
- Attachments may be opened after View via Split or part buttons.
- Double-click a mail in the list index to view its raw text.
- Select multiple mails to process as a set: Ctrl|Shift + click, or All.

- Sent mails are saved to a file named in mailconfig: use Open to view.
- Save pops up a dialog for selecting a file to hold saved mails.
- Save always appends to the chosen save file, rather than erasing it.
- Split asks for a save directory; part buttons save in ./TempParts.
- Open and save dialogs always remember the prior directory.
- Use text editor's Save to save a draft of email text being composed.

- Passwords are requested if/when needed, and not stored by PyMailGUI.
- You may list your password in a file named in mailconfig.py.
- To print emails, "Save" to a text file and print with other tools.
- See the altconfigs directory for using with multiple email accounts.

- Emails are never deleted from the mail server automatically.
- Delete does not reload message headers, unless it fails.
- Delete checks your inbox to make sure it deletes the correct mail.
- Fetches detect inbox changes and may automatically reload the index.
- Any number of sends and disjoint fetches may overlap in time.

- Click this window's Source button to view PyMailGUI source-code files.
- Watch http://www.rmi.net/~lutz for updates and patches
- This is an Open Source system: change its code as you like.
"""

if __name__ == '__main__':
    print(helptext)                   # to stdout if run alone
    input('Press Enter key')          # pause in DOS console pop ups</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>See the examples package for the HTML help file, the first few
          lines of which are shown in Example 14-12; it’s a simple
          translation of the module’s help text string (adding a bit more
          pizzazz to this page is left in the suggested exercise
          column).</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id61"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 14-12. PP4E\Internet\PyMailGui\PyMailGuiHelp.html
            (partial)</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&lt;HTML&gt;
&lt;TITLE&gt;PyMailGUI 3.0 Help&lt;/TITLE&gt;
&lt;!-- TO DO: add pictures, screen shots, and such --!&gt;
&lt;BODY&gt;

&lt;H1 align=center&gt;PyMailGUI, Version 3.0&lt;/H1&gt;
&lt;P align=center&gt;
&lt;B&gt;&lt;I&gt;May, 2010 (2.1 January, 2006)&lt;/I&gt;&lt;/B&gt;&lt;BR&gt;
&lt;B&gt;&lt;I&gt;Programming Python, 4th Edition&lt;/I&gt;&lt;/B&gt;&lt;BR&gt;
&lt;B&gt;&lt;I&gt;Mark Lutz, for O'Reilly Media, Inc.&lt;/I&gt;&lt;/B&gt;

&lt;P&gt;
&lt;I&gt;PyMailGUI&lt;/I&gt; is a multiwindow interface for processing email, both online and
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...rest of file omitted...</span></em></pre>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="altconfigs: Configuring for Multiple Accounts"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="altconfigs_colon_configuring_for_multipl"></a>altconfigs: Configuring for Multiple Accounts</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Though <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e63017"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e63019"></a><a id="py14.4.12"></a>not an “official” part of the system, I use a few
          additional short files to launch and test it. If you have multiple
          email accounts, it can be inconvenient to change a configuration
          file every time you want to open one in particular. Moreover, if you
          open multiple PyMailGUI sessions for your accounts at the same time,
          it would be better if they could use custom appearance and behavior
          schemes to make them distinct.</p>
<p>To address this, the <code class="epub__literal">altconfigs</code> directory in the examples
          source directory provides a simple way to select an account and
          configurations for it at start-up time. It defines a new top-level
          script which tailors the module import search path, along with a
          <code class="epub__literal">mailconfig</code> that prompts for and
          loads a custom configuration module whose suffix is named by console
          input. A launcher script is also provided to run without module
          search path configurations—from PyGadgets or a desktop shortcut, for
          example, without requiring PYTHONPATH settings for the PP4E root.
          Examples 14-13 through 14-17 list the files involved.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id62"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 14-13. PP4E\Internet\PyMailGui\altconfigs\PyMailGui.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import sys                             # ..\PyMailGui.py or 'book' for book configs
sys.path.insert(1, '..')               # add visibility for real dir
exec(open('../PyMailGui.py').read())   # do this, but get mailconfig here</pre>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id63"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 14-14. PP4E\Internet\PyMailGui\altconfigs\mailconfig.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">above = open('../mailconfig.py').read()       # copy version above here (hack?)
open('mailconfig_book.py', 'w').write(above)  # used for 'book' and as others' base
acct = input('Account name?')                 # book, rmi, train
exec('from mailconfig_%s import *' % acct)    # . is first on sys.path</pre>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id64"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 14-15. PP4E\Internet\PyMailGui\altconfigs\mailconfig_rmi.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from mailconfig_book import *                 # get base in . (copied from ..)
popservername = 'pop.rmi.net'                 # this is a big inbox: 4800 emails!
popusername   = 'lutz'
myaddress     = 'lutz@rmi.net'
listbg = 'navy'
listfg = 'white'
listHeight = 20         # higher initially
viewbg = '#dbbedc'
viewfg = 'black'
wrapsz = 80             # wrap at 80 cols
fetchlimit = 300        # load more headers</pre>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id65"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 14-16. PP4E\Internet\PyMailGui\altconfigs\mailconfig_train.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from mailconfig_book import *                 # get base in . (copied from ..)
popusername = 'lutz@learning-python.com'
myaddress   = 'lutz@learning-python.com'
listbg = 'wheat'                              # goldenrod, dark green, beige
listfg = 'navy'                               # chocolate, brown,...
viewbg = 'aquamarine'
viewfg = 'black'
wrapsz = 80
viewheaders = None      # no Bcc
fetchlimit = 100        # load more headers</pre>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id66"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 14-17. PP4E\Internet\PyMailGui\altconfigs\launch_PyMailGui.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting"># to run without PYTHONPATH setup (e.g., desktop)
import os                                         # Launcher.py is overkill
os.environ['PYTHONPATH'] = r'..\..\..\..\..'      # hmm; generalize me
os.system('PyMailGui.py')                         # inherits path env var</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Account files like those in Examples 14-15 and 14-16 can import the base “book” module
          (to extend it) or not (to replace it entirely). To use these
          alternative account configurations, run a command line like the
          following or run the <span>self</span>-<span>configuring</span> launcher script in Example 14-17 from any location.
          Either way, you can open these account’s windows to view the
          included saved mails, but be sure to change configurations for your
          own email accounts and preferences first if you wish to fetch or
          send mail from these clients:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e63080"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Internet\Email\PyMailGui\altconfigs&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>PyMailGui.py</code></strong>
Account name?<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rmi</code></strong></pre>
<p>Add a “start” to the beginning of this command to keep your
          console alive on Windows so you can open multiple accounts (try a
          “&amp;” at the end on Unix). Figure 14-45 earlier shows the
          scene with all three of my accounts open in PyMailGUI. I keep them
          open perpetually on my desktop, since a Load fetches just newly
          arrived headers no matter how long the GUI may have sat dormant, and
          a Send requires nothing to be loaded at all. While they’re open, the
          alternative color schemes make the accounts’ windows distinct. A
          desktop shortcut to the launcher script makes opening my accounts
          even easier.</p>
<p>As is, account names are only requested when this special
          <em class="epub__filename">PyMailGui.py</em> file is run
          directly, and not when the original file is run directly or by
          program launchers (in which case there may be no <code class="epub__literal">stdin</code> to read). Extending a module like
          <code class="epub__literal">mailconfig</code> which might be
          imported in multiple places this way turns out to be an interesting
          task (which is largely why I don’t consider its quick solution here
          to be an official end-user feature). For instance, there are other
          ways to allow for multiple accounts, including:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Changing the single <code class="epub__literal">mailconfig</code> module in-place</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Importing alternative modules and storing them as key
              “mailconfig” in <code class="epub__literal">sys.modules</code></p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Copying alternative module variables to <code class="epub__literal">mailconfig</code> attributes using <code class="epub__literal">__dict__</code> and <code class="epub__literal">setattr</code></p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Using a class for configuration to better support
              customization in subclasses</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Issuing a pop-up in the GUI to prompt for an account name
              after or before the main window appears</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>And so on. The separate subdirectory scheme used here was
          chosen to minimize impacts on existing code in general; to avoid
          changes to the existing <code class="epub__literal">mailconfig</code> module specifically (which
          works fine for the single account case); to avoid requiring extra
          user input of any kind in single account cases; and to allow for the
          fact that an “import module1 as module2” statement doesn’t prevent
          “module1” from being imported directly later. This last point is
          more fraught with peril than you might expect—importing a customized
          version of a module is not merely a matter of using the “as”
          renaming extension:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e63137"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import m1 as m2      # custom import: load m1 as m2 alternative
print(m2.attr)       # prints attr in m1.py

import m2            # later imports: loads m2.py anyhow!
print(m2.attr)       # prints attr in m2.py</pre>
<p>In other words, this is a quick-and-dirty solution that I
          originally wrote for testing purposes, and it seems a prime
          candidate for improvement—along with the other ideas in the next
          section’s chapter <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e63141"></a>wrap up.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
