<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Ideas for Improvement</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Ideas for Improvement"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="ideas_for_improvement"></a>Ideas for Improvement</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Although I <a id="py14.5"></a>use the 3.0 version of PyMailGUI as is on a regular
        basis for both personal and business communications, there is always
        room for improvement to software, and this system is no exception. If
        you wish to experiment with its code, here are a few suggested
        projects to close out this chapter:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Column sorts and list layout</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Mail list windows could be sorted by columns on demand.
              This may require a more sophisticated list window structure
              which presents columns more distinctly. The current display of
              mail lists seems like the most obvious candidate for cosmetic
              upgrade in general, and any column sorting solution would likely
              address this as well. tkinter extensions such as the<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e63163"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e63166"></a> Tix <code class="epub__literal">HList</code>
              widget may show promise here, and the third-party <code class="epub__literal">TkinterTreectrl</code> <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e63178"></a>supports multicolumn sortable listboxes, too, but
              is available only for Python 2.X today; consult the Web and
              other resources for pointers and details.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Mail save file (and sent file)
            size</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>The implementation of <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>save-mail</em></span> files
              limits their size by loading them into memory all at once; a DBM
              keyed-access implementation may work around this constraint. See
              the list windows module comments for ideas. This also applies to
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>sent-mail</em></span> save files, though the user can
              limit their sizes with periodic deletions; users might also
              benefit from a prompt for deletions if they grow too
              large.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Embedded links</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Hyperlink URLs within<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e63202"></a> <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e63206"></a>messages could be highlighted visually and made to
              spawn a web browser automatically when clicked by using the
              launcher tools we met in the GUI and system parts of this book
              (tkinter’s text widget supports links directly).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Help text redundancy</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>In this version, the help text had grown so large that it
              is also implemented as HTML and displayed in a web browser using
              Python’s <code class="epub__literal">webbrowser</code> module
              (instead of or in addition to text, per <code class="epub__literal">mailconfig</code> settings). That means there
              are currently two copies of the basic help text: simple text and
              HTML. This is less than ideal from a maintenance perspective
              going forward.</p>
<p>We may want to either drop the simple text version
              altogether, or attempt to extract the simple text from the HTML
              with Python’s <code class="epub__literal">html.parser</code>
              module to avoid redundant copies; see Chapter 19 for more on HTML parsing in
              general, and see PyMailGUI’s new <code class="epub__literal">html2text</code> <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e63235"></a>module for a plain-text extraction tool prototype.
              The HTML help version also does not include links to display
              source files; these could be inserted into the HTML
              automatically with string formatting, though it’s not clear what
              all browsers will do with Python source code (some may try to
              run it).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>More threading contexts</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Message Save and Split file writes could also be threaded
              for worst-case scenarios. For pointers on making Saves parallel,
              see the comments in the file class of <code class="epub__literal">ListWindows.py</code>; <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e63253"></a>there may be some subtle issues that require both
              thread locks and general file locking for potentially concurrent
              updates. List window index fills might also be threaded for
              pathologically large mailboxes and woefully slow machines
              (optimizing to avoid reparsing headers may help here,
              too).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Attachment list deletes</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>There is currently no way to delete an attachment once it
              has been added in compose windows. This might be supported by
              adding quick-access part buttons to compose windows, too, which
              could verify and delete the part when clicked.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Spam filtering</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>We could add an automatic spam <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e63275"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e63278"></a>filter for mails fetched, in addition to any
              provided at the email server or ISP. The Python-based
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>SpamBayes</em></span> might help. This is often better
              implemented by servers than clients, but not all ISPs filter
              spam.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Improve multiple account usage</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Per the prior section, the current system selects one of
              multiple email accounts and uses its corresponding mail
              configuration module by running special code in the<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e63294"></a> <code class="epub__literal">altconfigs</code>
              subdirectory. This works for a book example, but it would be
              fairly straightforward to improve for broader audiences.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Increased visibility for sent
            file</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>We may want to add an explicit button for opening the
              sent-mails file. PyMailGUI already does save sent messages to a
              text file automatically, which may be opened currently with the
              list window’s Open button. Frankly, though, this feature may be
              a too-well-kept secret—I forgot about it myself when I revisited
              the program for this edition! It might also be useful to allow
              sent-mail saves to be <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e63312"></a>disabled in <code class="epub__literal">mailconfig</code> for users who might never
              delete from this file (it can grow large fairly quickly; see the
              earlier prompt-for-deletion suggestion as well).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Thread queue speed tuning</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>As mentioned when describing version 3.0 changes, the
              thread queue has been sped up by as much as a factor of 10 in
              this version to quicken initial header downloads. This is
              achieved both by running more than one callback per timer event
              and scheduling timer events to occur twice as often as before.
              Checking the queue too often, however, might increase CPU
              utilization beyond acceptable levels on some machines. On my
              Windows laptop, this overhead is negligible (the program’s CPU
              utilization is 0% when idle), but you may want to tune this if
              it’s significant on your platform.</p>
<p>See the list windows code for speed settings, and
              <em class="epub__filename">threadtools.py</em> in Chapter 10 for the base code. In
              general, increasing the number of callbacks per event and
              decreasing timer frequency will decrease CPU drain without
              sacrificing responsiveness. (And if I had a nickel for every
              time I said that…)</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Mailing lists</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>We could add support for mailing lists, allowing users to
              associate multiple email addresses with a saved list name. On
              sends to a list name, the mail would be sent to all on the list
              (the To addresses passed to <code class="epub__literal">smtplib</code>), but the email list could be
              used for the email’s To header line. See Chapter 13’s SMTP coverage for mailing
              list–related examples.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>HTML main text views and edits</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>PyMailGUI is still oriented toward supporting only plain
              text for the main text of a message, despite the fact that some
              mailers today are more HTML-biased in this regard. This partly
              stems from the fact that PyMailGUI uses a simple
              tkinter<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e63357"></a> <code class="epub__literal">Text</code> widget
              for main text composition. PyMailGUI can display such messages’
              HTML in a popped-up web browser, and it attempts to extract text
              from the HTML for display per the next note, but it doesn’t come
              with its own HTML editor. Fully supporting HTML for main message
              text will likely require a tkinter extension (or, regrettably, a
              port to another GUI toolkit with working support for this
              feature).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>HTML parser honing</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>On a related note, as described earlier, this version
              includes a simple-minded HTML parser, applied to extract text
              from HTML main (or only) text parts when they are displayed or
              quoted in replies and forwards. As also mentioned earlier, this
              parser is nowhere near complete or robust; for production-level
              quality, this would have to be improved by testing over a large
              set of HTML emails. Better yet, watch for a Python
              3.X–compatible version of more robust and complete open source
              alternatives, such as the <em class="epub__filename">html2text.py</em> same-named third-party
              utility described in this chapter’s earlier note. The open
              source BeautifulSoup <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e63376"></a>system offers another lenient and forgiving HTML
              parser, but is based on SGMLParser tools available in 2.X only
              (removed in 3.X).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Text/HTML alternative mails</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Also in the HTML department, there is presently no support
              for sending both text and HTML versions of a mail as a MIME
              multipart/alternative message—a popular scheme which supports
              both text- and HTML-based clients and allows users to choose
              which to use. Such messages can be viewed (both parts are
              offered in the GUI), but cannot be composed. Again, since there
              is no support for HTML editing anyhow, this is a moot point; if
              such an editor is ever added, we’d need to support this sort of
              mail structure in <code class="epub__literal">mailtools</code>
              message object construction code and refactor parts of its
              current send logic so that it can be shared.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Internationalized headers throw list columns
            off</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>As is so often true in software, one feature added in this
              version broke another already present: the fonts used for
              display of some non-ASCII Unicode header fields is large enough
              to throw off the fixed-width columns in mail index list windows.
              They rely on the assumption that N characters is always the same
              width among all mails, and this is no longer true for some
              Chinese and other character set encodings.</p>
<p>This isn’t a showstopper—it only occurs when some i18n
              headers are displayed, and simply means that “|” column
              separators are askew for such mails only, but could still be
              addressed. The fix here is probably to move to a more
              sophisticated list display, and might be resolved as a side
              effect of allowing for the column sorts described
              earlier.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Address books</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>PyMailGUI has no notion of automatically filling in an
              email address from an address book, as many modern email clients
              do. Adding this would be an interesting extension; low-level
              keyboard event binding may allow matching as addresses are
              typed, and Python’s<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e63406"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e63411"></a> <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> and
              <code class="epub__literal">shelve</code> modules of Chapters
              1 and 17 might come in handy for data
              storage.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Spelling checker</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>There is currently no <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e63434"></a>spelling checker of the sort most email programs
              have today. This could be added in PyMailGUI, but it would
              probably be more appropriate to add it in the PyEdit text edit
              component/program that it uses, so the spell-checking would be
              inherited by all PyEdit clients. A quick web search reveals a
              variety of options, including the interesting <code class="epub__literal">PyEnchant</code> <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e63441"></a>third-party package, none of which we have space
              to explore here.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Mail searches</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Similarly, there is no support for searching emails’
              content (headers or bodies) for a given string. It’s not clear
              how this should be provided given that the system fetches and
              caches just message headers until a mail is requested, but
              searching large inboxes can be convenient. As is, this can be
              performed manually by running a Save to store fetched mails in a
              text file and searching in that file externally.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Frozen binary distribution</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>As a desktop <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e63459"></a>program, PyMailGUI seems an ideal candidate for
              packing as a self-contained frozen binary executable, using
              tools such as PyInstaller, Py2Exe, and others. When distributed
              this way, users need not install Python, since the Python
              runtime is embedded in the executable.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Selecting Reply versus Reply-All in the
            GUI</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>As described in the 3.0 changes overview earlier, in this
              version, Reply by default now copies all the original mail’s
              recipients by prefilling the Cc line, in addition to replying to
              the original sender. This Cc feature can be turned off in
              <code class="epub__literal">mailconfig</code> because it may not
              be desirable in all cases. Ideally, though, this should be
              selectable in the GUI on a mail-by-mail basis, not per session.
              Adding another button to list windows for ReplyAll would
              suffice; since this feature was added too late in this project
              for GUI changes, though, this will have to be relegated to the
              domain of suggested exercise.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Propagating attachments?</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>When replying to or <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e63480"></a>forwarding an email, PyMailGUI discards any
              attachments on the original message. This is by design, partly
              because there is currently no way to delete attached parts in
              the GUI prior to sending (you couldn’t remove selectively and
              couldn’t remove all), and partly because this system’s current
              sole user prefers to work this way.</p>
<p>Users can work around this by running a Split to save all
              parts in a directory, and then adding any desired attachments to
              the mail from there. Still, it might be better to allow the user
              to choose that this happen automatically for replies and
              forwards. Similarly, forwarding HTML mails well currently
              requires saving and attaching the HTML part to avoid quoting the
              text; this might be similarly addressed by parts propagation in
              general.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Disable editing for viewed
            mails?</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Mail text is editable in message view windows, even though
              a new mail is not being composed. This is deliberate—users can
              annotate the message’s text and save it in a text file with the
              Save button at the bottom of the window, or simply cut-and-paste
              portions of it into other windows. This might be confusing,
              though, and is redundant (we can also edit and save by clicking
              on the main text’s quick-access part button). Removing edit
              tools would require extending PyEdit. Using PyEdit for display
              in general is a useful design—users also have access to all of
              PyEdit’s tools for the mail text, including save, find, goto,
              grep, replace, undo/redo, and so, though edits might be
              superfluous in this context.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Automatic periodic new mail
            check?</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>It would be straightforward to add the ability to
              automatically check for and fetch new incoming email
              periodically, by registering long-duration timer events with
              either the <code class="epub__literal">after</code> widget
              method or the <code class="epub__literal">threading</code>
              module’s timer object. I haven’t done so because I have a
              personal bias against being surprised by software, but your
              mileage may vary.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Reply and Forward buttons on view windows,
            too?</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Minor potential ergonomic improvement: we could include
              Reply and Forward buttons on the message view windows, too,
              instead of requiring these operations to be selected in mail
              list windows only. As this system’s sole user, I prefer the
              uncluttered appearance and conceptual simplicity of the current
              latter approach; GUIs have a way of getting out of hand when
              persistent pop-up windows start nesting too deeply. It would be
              trivial to have Reply/Forward on view windows, too, though; they
              could probably fetch mail components straight from the GUI
              instead of reparsing a message.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Omit Bcc header in view windows?</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Minor nit: mail view windows may be better off omitting
              the Bcc header even if it’s enabled in the configuration file.
              Since it shouldn’t be present once a mail is sent, it really
              needs to be included in composition windows only. It’s displayed
              as is anyhow, to verify that Bcc is omitted on sends (the prior
              edition did not), to maintain a uniform look for all mail
              windows, to avoid special-casing this in the code, and to avoid
              making such ergonomic decisions in the absence of actual user
              feedback.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Check for empty Subject lines?</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Minor usability issue: it would be straightforward to add
              a check for an empty Subject field on sends and to pop up a
              verification dialog to give the user a second chance to fill the
              field in. A blank subject is probably unintended. We could do
              the same for the To field as well, though there may be valid use
              cases for omitting this from mail headers (the mail is still
              sent to Cc and Bcc recipients).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Removing duplicate recipients more
            accurately?</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>As is, the send operation attempts to remove duplicate
              recipients using set operations. This works, but it may be
              inaccurate if the same email address appears twice with a
              different name component (e.g., “<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>name1</em></span>
              &lt;eml&gt;, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>name2</em></span> &lt;eml&gt;”). To do
              better, we could fully parse the recipient addresses to extract
              and compare just the address portion of the full email address.
              Arguably, though, it’s not clear what
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>should</em></span> be done if the same recipient
              address appears with different names. Could multiple people be
              using the same email account? If not, which name should we
              choose to use?</p>
<p>For now, end user or mail server intervention may be
              required in the rare cases where this might crop up. In most
              cases, other email clients will likely handle names in
              consistent ways that make this a moot point. On related notes,
              Reply removes duplicates in Cc prefills in the same simplistic
              way, and both sends and replies could use case-insensitive
              string comparisons when filtering for duplicates.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Handling newsgroup messages,
            too?</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Because Internet <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e63555"></a>newsgroup posts are similar in structure to emails
              (header lines plus body text; see the <code class="epub__literal">nntplib</code> example in Chapter 13), this script could in
              principle be extended to display both email messages and news
              articles. Classifying such a mutation as clever generalization
              or diabolical hack is left as an exercise in itself.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>SMTP sends may not work in some network
            configurations?</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>On my home/office network, SMTP works fine and as shown
              for sending emails, but I have occasionally seen sends have
              issues on public networks of the sort available in hotels and
              airports. In some cases, mail sends can fail with exceptions and
              error messages in the GUI; in worst cases, such sends might fail
              with no exception at all and without reporting an error in the
              GUI. The mail simply goes nowhere, which is obviously less than
              ideal if its content matters.</p>
<p>It’s not clear if these issues are related to limitations
              of the networks used, of Python’s<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e63575"></a> <code class="epub__literal">smtplib</code>, or of
              the ISP-provided SMTP server I use. Unfortunately, I ran out of
              time to recreate the problem and investigate further (again, a
              system with a single user also has just a single tester).</p>
<p>Resolving any such issues is left as an exercise for the
              reader, but as a caution: if you wish to use the system to send
              important emails, you should first test sends in a new network
              environment to ensure that they will be routed correctly.
              Sending an email to yourself and verifying receipt should
              suffice.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Performance tuning?</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Almost all of the <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e63593"></a>work done on this system to date has been related
              to its functionality. The system does allow some operation
              threads to run in parallel, and optimizes mail downloads by
              fetching just headers initially and caching already-fetched full
              mail text to avoid refetching. Apart from this, though, its
              performance in terms of CPU utilization and memory requirements
              has not been explored in any meaningful way at all. That’s for
              the best—in general we code for utility and clarity first in
              Python, and deal with performance later if and only if needed.
              Having said that, a broader audience for this program might
              mandate some performance analysis and improvement.</p>
<p>For example, although the full text of fetched mails is
              kept just once in a cache, each open view of a message retains a
              copy of the parsed mail in memory. For large mails, this may
              impact memory growth. Caching parsed mails as well might help
              decrease memory footprints, though these will still not be small
              for large mails, and the cache might hold onto memory longer
              than required if not intelligently designed. Storing messages or
              their parts in files (perhaps as pickled objects) instead of in
              memory might alleviate some growth, too, though that may also
              require a mechanism for reaping temporary files. As is, Python’s
              garbage collector should reclaim all such message space
              eventually as windows are closed, but this can depend upon how
              and where we retain object references. See also the <code class="epub__literal">gc</code> standard library modules for
              possible pointers on finer-grained garbage collection
              control.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Unicode model tuning?</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>As discussed in <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e63611"></a>brief at the start of this chapter and in full in
              Chapter 13, PyMailGUI’s support
              for Unicode encoding of message text and header components is
              broad, but not necessarily as general or universally applicable
              as it might be. Some Unicode limitations here stem from the
              limitations of the <code class="epub__literal">email</code>
              package in <span>Python 3.1</span> upon
              which PyMailGUI heavily depends. It may be difficult for
              Python-coded email clients to support some features better until
              Python’s libraries do, too.</p>
<p>Moreover, the Unicode support that is present in this
              program has been tested neither widely nor rigorously. Just like
              Chapter 11’s PyEdit, this is
              currently still a single-user system designed to work as a book
              example, not an open source project. Because of that, some of
              the current Unicode policies are partially heuristic in nature
              and may have to be honed with time and practice.</p>
<p>For example, it may prove better in the end to use UTF-8
              encoding (or none at all) for sends in general, instead of
              supporting some of the many user options which are included in
              this book for illustration purposes. Since UTF-8 can represent
              most Unicode code points, it’s broadly applicable.</p>
<p>More subtly, we might also consider propagating the main
              text part’s Unicode encoding to the embedded PyEdit component in
              view and edit windows, so it can be used as a known encoding by
              the PyEdit Save button. As is, users can pop up the main text’s
              part in view windows to save with a known encoding
              automatically, but saves of drafts for mails being edited fall
              back on PyEdit’s own Unicode policies and GUI prompts. The
              ambiguous encoding for saved drafts may be unavoidable,
              though—users might enter characters from any character set, both
              while writing new mails from scratch and while editing the text
              of replies and forwards (just like headers in replies and
              forwards, the initial known encoding of the original main text
              part may no longer apply after arbitrary edits).</p>
<p>In addition, there is no support for non-ASCII encodings
              of full mail text, it’s not impossible that i18n encoded text
              might appear in other contexts in rare emails (e.g., in
              attachment filenames, whose undecoded form may or may not be
              valid on the receiving platform’s filesystem, and may require
              renaming if allowed at all), and although Internationalization
              is supported for mail content, the GUI itself still uses English
              for its buttons, labels, and titles—something that a truly
              location-neutral program may wish to address.</p>
<p>In other words, if this program were to ever take the leap
              to commercial-grade or broadly used software, its Unicode story
              would probably have to be revisited. Also discussed in Chapter 13, a future release of the
              <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package may solve some
              Unicode issues automatically, though PyMailGUI may also require
              updates for the solutions, as well as for incompatibilities
              introduced by them. For now, this will have to stand as a useful
              object lesson in itself: for both better and worse, such changes
              will always be a fact of life in the constantly evolving world
              of software development.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>And so on—because this software is open source, it is also
        necessarily open-ended. Ultimately, writing a complete email client is
        a substantial undertaking, and we’ve taken this example as far as we
        can in this book. To move PyMailGUI further along, we’d probably have
        to consider the suitability of both the underlying Python 3.1 <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package, as well as the tkinter GUI
        toolkit. Both are fully sufficient for the utility we’ve implemented
        here, but they might limit further progress.</p>
<p>For example, the current lack of an HTML viewer widget in the
        base tkinter toolkit precludes HTML mail viewing and composition in
        the GUI itself. Moreover, although PyMailGUI broadly supports
        Internationalization today, it must rely on workarounds to get
        <code class="epub__literal">email</code> to work at all. To be fair,
        some of the<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e63652"></a> <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package’s
        issues described in this book will likely be fixed by the time you
        read about them, and email in general is probably close to a worst
        case for Internationalization issues brought into the spotlight by
        Unicode prominence in Python 3.X. Still, such tool constraints might
        impede further system evolution.</p>
<p>On the other hand, despite any limitations in the tools it
        deploys, PyMailGUI does achieve all its goals—it’s an arguably
        full-featured and remarkably quick desktop email client, which works
        surprisingly well for my emails and preferences and performs admirably
        on the cases I’ve tested to date. It may not satisfy your tastes or
        constraints, but it is open to customization and imitation. Suggested
        exercises and further tweaking are therefore officially delegated to
        your imagination; this is Python, after all.</p>
<p>This concludes our tour of Python client-side protocols
        programming. In the next chapter, we’ll hop the fence to the other
        side of the Internet world and explore scripts that run on server
        machines. Such programs give rise to the grander notion of
        applications that live entirely on the Web and are launched by web
        browsers. As we take this leap in structure, keep in mind that the
        tools we met in this and the previous chapter are often sufficient to
        implement all the distributed processing that many applications
        require, and they can work in harmony with scripts that run on a
        server. To completely understand the Web world view, though, we need
        to explore the server <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e63665"></a>realm, too.</p>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
