<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 15. Server-Side Scripting</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 15. Server-Side Scripting"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="server-side_scripting"></a>Chapter 15. Server-Side Scripting</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="“Oh, What a Tangled Web We Weave”"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="quotation_mark_oh_what_a_tangled_web_we"></a>“Oh, What a Tangled Web We Weave”</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>This chapter is the fourth part of <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e63676"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e63681"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e63686"></a>our look at Python Internet programming. In the last
        three chapters, we explored sockets and basic client-side programming
        interfaces such as FTP and email. In this chapter, our main focus will
        be on writing server-side scripts in Python—a type of program usually
        referred to as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>CGI scripts</em></span>. Though something of a
        lowest common denominator for web development today, such scripts
        still provide a simple way to get started with implementing
        interactive websites in Python.</p>
<p>Server-side scripting and its derivatives are at the heart of
        much of the interaction that happens on the Web. This is true both
        when scripting manually with CGI and when using the higher-level
        frameworks that automate some of the work. Because of that, the
        fundamental web model we’ll explore here in the context of CGI
        scripting is prerequisite knowledge for programming the Web well,
        regardless of the tools you choose to deploy.</p>
<p>As we’ll see, Python is an ideal language for writing scripts to
        implement and customize websites, because of both its ease of use and
        its library support. In the following chapter, we will use the basics
        we learn in this chapter to implement a full-blown website. Here, our
        goal is to understand the fundamentals of server-side scripting,
        before exploring systems that deploy or build upon that basic
        model.</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="a_house_upon_the_sand"></a>
<p class="epub__title">A House upon the Sand</p>
<p>As you read the next two chapters of this book, please keep in
          mind that they focus on the fundamentals of server-side scripting
          and are intended only as an introduction to programming in this
          domain with Python. The web domain is large and complex, changes
          rapidly and constantly, and often prescribes many ways to accomplish
          a given goal—some of which can vary from browser to browser and
          server to server.</p>
<p>For instance, the password encryption scheme of the next
          chapter may be unnecessary under certain scenarios (with a suitable
          server, we could use secure HTTP instead). Moreover, some of the
          HTML we’ll use here may not leverage all of that language’s power,
          and may even not conform to current HTML standards. In fact, much of
          the material added in later editions of this book reflects recent
          technology shifts in this domain.</p>
<p>Given such a large and dynamic field, this part of the book
          does not even pretend to be a complete look at the server-side
          scripting domain. That is, you should not take this text to be a
          final word on the subject. To become truly proficient in this area,
          you should also expect to spend some time studying other texts for
          additional <span>webmaster-y</span> details
          and techniques—for example, <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e63711"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e63714"></a>Chuck Musciano and Bill <span>Kennedy’s</span> <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>HTML &amp; XHTML:
          The Definitive Guide</em></span> (O’Reilly).</p>
<p>The good news is that here you will explore the core ideas
          behind server-side programming, meet Python’s CGI tool set, and
          learn enough to start writing substantial websites of your own in
          Python. This knowledge should apply to wherever the Web or you head
          next.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
