<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>What’s a Server-Side CGI Script?</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="What’s a Server-Side CGI Script?"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="what_apostrophy_s_a_server-side_cgi_scri"></a>What’s a Server-Side CGI Script?</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Simply put, CGI scripts <a id="cgi15.2"></a>implement much of the interaction you typically
        experience on the Web. They are a standard and widely used mechanism
        for programming web-based systems and website interaction, and they
        underlie most of the larger web <span>development</span> models.</p>
<p>There are other ways to add interactive behavior to websites
        with Python, both on the client and the server. We briefly met some
        such alternatives near the start of Chapter 12. For instance, client-side solutions
        include Jython applets, RIAs such as Silverlight and pyjamas, Active
        Scripting on Windows, and the emerging HTML 5 standard. On the server
        side, there are a variety of additional technologies that build on the
        basic CGI model, such as Python Server Pages, and web frameworks such
        as Django, App Engine, CherryPy, and Zope, many of which utilize the
        MVC programming model.</p>
<p>By and large, though, CGI server-side scripts are used to
        program much of the activity on the Web, whether it’s programmed
        directly or partly automated by frameworks and tools. CGI scripting is
        perhaps the most primitive approach to implementing websites, and it
        does not by itself offer the tools that are often built into larger
        frameworks such as state retention, database interfaces, and reply
        templating. CGI scripts, however, are in many ways the simplest
        technique for server-side scripting. As a result, they are an ideal
        way to get started with programming on the server side of the Web.
        Especially for simpler sites that do not require enterprise-level
        tools, CGI is sufficient, and it can be augmented with additional
        libraries as needed.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The Script Behind the Curtain"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_script_behind_the_curtain"></a>The Script Behind the Curtain</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Formally speaking, CGI scripts <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e63752"></a>are programs that run on a server machine and adhere
          to the Common Gateway Interface—a model for browser/server
          communications, from which CGI scripts take their name. CGI is an
          application protocol that web servers use to transfer input data and
          results between web browsers and other clients and server-side
          scripts. Perhaps a more useful way to understand CGI, though, is in
          terms of the interaction it implies.</p>
<p>Most people take this interaction for granted when browsing
          the Web and pressing buttons in web pages, but a lot is going on
          behind the scenes of every transaction on the Web. From the
          perspective of a user, it’s a fairly familiar and simple
          process:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Submission</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>When you visit a website to search, purchase a product,
                or submit information online, you generally fill in a form in
                your web browser, press a button to submit your information,
                and begin waiting for a reply.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Response</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Assuming all is well with both your Internet connection
                and the computer you are contacting, you eventually get a
                reply in the form of a new web page. It may be a simple
                acknowledgment (e.g., “Thanks for your order”) or a new form
                that must be filled out and submitted again.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>And, believe it or not, that simple model is what makes most
          of the Web hum. But internally, it’s a bit more complex. In fact, a
          subtle client/server socket-based architecture is at work—your web
          browser running on your computer is the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>client</em></span>,
          and the computer you contact over the Web is the
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>server</em></span>. Let’s examine the interaction scenario
          again, with all the gory details that users usually never
          see:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Submission</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>When you fill out a form page in a web browser and press
                a submission button, behind the scenes your web browser sends
                your information across the Internet to the server machine
                specified as its receiver. The server machine is usually a
                remote computer that lives somewhere else in both cyberspace
                and reality. It is named in the URL accessed—the Internet
                address string that appears at the top of your browser. The
                target server and file can be named in a URL you type
                explicitly, but more typically they are specified in the HTML
                that defines the submission page itself—either in a hyperlink
                or in the “action” tag of the input form’s HTML.</p>
<p>However the server is specified, the browser running on
                your computer ultimately sends your information to the server
                as bytes over a socket, using techniques we saw in the last
                three chapters. On the server machine, a program called an
                <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>HTTP server</em></span> runs perpetually, listening
                on a socket for incoming connection requests and data from
                browsers and other clients, usually on port number 80.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Processing</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>When your information shows up at the server machine,
                the HTTP server program notices it first and decides how to
                handle the request. If the requested URL names a simple
                <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>web page</em></span> (e.g., a URL ending in <em class="epub__filename">.html</em>), the HTTP server opens the
                named HTML file on the server machine and sends its text back
                to the browser over a socket. On the client, the browser reads
                the HTML and uses it to construct the next page you
                see.</p>
<p>But if the URL requested by the browser names an
                <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>executable program</em></span> instead (e.g., a URL
                ending in <em class="epub__filename">.cgi</em> or
                <em class="epub__filename">.py</em>), the HTTP server
                starts the named program on the server machine to process the
                request and redirects the incoming browser data to the spawned
                program’s <code class="epub__literal">stdin</code> input
                stream, environment variables, and command-line arguments.
                That program started by the server is usually a CGI script—a
                program run on the remote server machine somewhere in
                cyberspace, usually not on your computer. The CGI script is
                responsible for handling the request from this point on; it
                may store your information in a database, perform a search,
                charge your credit card, and so on.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Response</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Ultimately, the CGI script prints HTML, along with a few
                header lines, to generate a new response page in your browser.
                When a CGI script is started, the HTTP server takes care to
                connect the script’s <code class="epub__literal">stdout</code>
                standard output stream to a socket that the browser is
                listening to. As a result, HTML code printed by the CGI script
                is sent over the Internet, back to your browser, to produce a
                new page. The HTML printed back by the CGI script works just
                as if it had been stored and read from an HTML file; it can
                define a simple response page or a brand-new form coded to
                collect additional information. Because it is generated by a
                script, it may include information dynamically determined per
                request.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>In other words, CGI scripts are something like
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>callback handlers</em></span> for requests generated by web
          browsers that require a program to be run dynamically. They are
          automatically run on the server machine in response to actions in a
          browser. Although CGI scripts ultimately receive and send standard
          structured messages over sockets, CGI is more like a higher-level
          procedural convention for sending and receiving information between
          a browser and a <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e63838"></a>server.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Writing CGI Scripts in Python"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="writing_cgi_scripts_in_python"></a>Writing CGI Scripts in Python</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>If all of this <a id="cgi15.2.2"></a><a id="wr15.2.2"></a>sounds complicated, relax—Python, as well as the
          resident HTTP server, automates most of the tricky bits. CGI scripts
          are written as fairly autonomous programs, and they assume that
          startup tasks have already been accomplished. The HTTP web server
          program, not the CGI script, implements the server side of the HTTP
          protocol itself. Moreover, Python’s library modules automatically
          dissect information sent up from the browser and give it to the CGI
          script in an easily digested form. The upshot is that CGI scripts
          may focus on application details like processing input data and
          producing a result page.</p>
<p>As mentioned earlier, in the context of CGI scripts,
          the<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e63859"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e63864"></a> <code class="epub__literal">stdin</code> and <code class="epub__literal">stdout</code> <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e63876"></a>streams are automatically tied to sockets connected to
          the browser. In addition, the HTTP server passes some browser
          information to the CGI script in the form of shell environment
          variables, and possibly command-line arguments. To CGI programmers,
          that means:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Input</em></span> data sent from the browser to
              the server shows up as a stream of bytes in the <code class="epub__literal">stdin</code> input stream, along with shell
              environment variables.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Output</em></span> is sent back from the server
              to the client by simply printing properly formatted HTML to the
              <code class="epub__literal">stdout</code> output stream.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>The most complex parts of this scheme include parsing all the
          input information sent up from the browser and formatting
          information in the reply sent back. Happily, Python’s standard
          library largely automates both tasks:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Input</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>With the Python<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e63909"></a> <code class="epub__literal">cgi</code> module,
                input typed into a web browser form or appended to a URL
                string shows up as values in a dictionary-like object in
                Python CGI scripts. Python parses the data itself and gives us
                an object with one <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>key</code></em> <code class="epub__literal">:</code> <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>value</code></em>
                pair per input sent by the browser that is fully independent
                of transmission style (roughly, by fill-in form or by direct
                URL).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Output</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">cgi</code> module also
                has tools for automatically escaping strings so that they are
                legal to use in HTML (e.g., replacing embedded <code class="epub__literal">&lt;</code>, <code class="epub__literal">&gt;</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">&amp;</code> characters with HTML escape
                codes). Module<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e63946"></a> <code class="epub__literal">urllib.parse</code>
                provides additional tools for formatting text inserted into
                generated URL strings (e.g., adding <code class="epub__literal">%XX</code> and <code class="epub__literal">+</code> escapes).</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>We’ll study both of these interfaces in detail later in this
          chapter. For now, keep in mind that although any language can be
          used to write CGI scripts, Python’s standard modules and language
          attributes make it a snap.</p>
<p>Perhaps less happily, CGI scripts are also intimately tied to
          the syntax of HTML, since they must generate it to create a reply
          page. In fact, it can be said that Python CGI scripts <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e63966"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e63971"></a>embed HTML, which is an entirely distinct language in
          its own right.<sup>[57]</sup> As we’ll also see, the fact that CGI scripts create a
          user interface by printing HTML syntax means that we have to take
          special care with the text we insert into a web page’s code (e.g.,
          escaping HTML operators). Worse, CGI scripts require at least a
          cursory knowledge of HTML forms, since that is where the inputs and
          target script’s address are typically specified.</p>
<p>This book won’t teach HTML in depth; if you find yourself
          puzzled by some of the arcane syntax of the HTML generated by
          scripts here, you should glance at an HTML introduction, such as
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>HTML &amp; XHTML:
          The Definitive Guide</em></span>. Also keep in mind that
          higher-level tools and frameworks can sometimes hide the details of
          HTML generation from Python programmers, albeit at the cost of any
          new complexity inherent in the framework itself. With HTMLgen and
          similar packages, for instance, it’s possible to deal in Python
          objects, not HTML syntax, though you must learn this system’s API as
          <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e63992"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e63994"></a>well.</p>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[57] </sup>Interestingly, in Chapter 12 we
              briefly introduced other systems that take the opposite
              route—embedding Python code or calls in HTML. The server-side
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>templating</em></span> languages in Zope, PSP, and
              other web frameworks use this model, running the embedded Python
              code to produce part of a reply page. Because Python is
              embedded, these systems must run special servers to evaluate the
              embedded tags. Because Python CGI scripts embed HTML in Python
              instead, they can be run as standalone programs directly, though
              they must be launched by a CGI-capable web server.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
