<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Saving State Information in CGI Scripts</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Saving State Information in CGI Scripts"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="saving_state_information_in_cgi_scripts"></a>Saving State Information in CGI Scripts</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>One of the most <a id="state15.5"></a><a id="cgi15.5"></a>unusual aspects of the basic CGI model, and one of its
        starkest contrasts to the GUI programming techniques we studied in the
        prior part of this book, is that CGI scripts are
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>stateless</em></span>—each is a standalone program, normally
        run autonomously, with no knowledge of any other scripts that may run
        before or after. There is no notion of things such as global variables
        or objects that outlive a single step of interaction and retain
        context. Each script begins from scratch, with no memory of where the
        prior left off.</p>
<p>This makes web servers simple and robust—a buggy CGI script
        won’t interfere with the server process. In fact, a flaw in a CGI
        script generally affects only the single page it implements, not the
        entire web-based application. But this is a very different model from
        callback-handler functions in a single process GUI, and it requires
        extra work to remember things longer than a single script’s
        execution.</p>
<p>Lack of state retention hasn’t mattered in our simple examples
        so far, but larger systems are usually composed of multiple user
        interaction steps and many scripts, and they need a way to keep track
        of information gathered along the way. As suggested in the last two
        sections, generating query parameters on URL links and hidden form
        fields in input pages sent as replies are two simple ways for a CGI
        script to pass data to the next script in the application. When
        clicked or submitted, such parameters send pre<span>program</span>med selection or session
        information back to another server-side handler script. In a sense,
        the content of the generated reply page itself becomes the memory
        space of the application.</p>
<p>For example, a site that lets you read your email may present
        you with a list of viewable email messages, implemented in HTML as a
        list of hyperlinks generated by another script. Each hyperlink might
        include the name of the message viewer script, along with parameters
        identifying the selected message number, email server name, and so
        on—as much data as is needed to fetch the message associated with a
        particular link. A retail site may instead serve up a generated list
        of product links, each of which triggers a hardcoded hyperlink
        containing the product number, its price, and so on. Alternatively,
        the purchase page at a retail site may embed the product selected in a
        prior page as hidden form fields.</p>
<p>In fact, one of the main reasons for showing the techniques in
        the last two sections is that we’re going to use them extensively in
        the larger case study in the next chapter. For instance, we’ll use
        generated stateful URLs with query parameters to implement lists of
        dynamically generated selections that “know” what to do when clicked.
        Hidden form fields will also be deployed to pass user login data to
        the next page’s script. From a more general perspective, both
        techniques are ways to retain state information between pages—they can
        be used to direct the action of the next script to be run.</p>
<p>Generating URL parameters and hidden form fields works well for
        retaining state information across pages during a single session of
        interaction. Some scenarios require more, though. For instance, what
        if we want to remember a user’s login name from session to session? Or
        what if we need to keep track of pages at our site visited by a user
        in the past? Because such information must be longer lived than the
        pages of a single session of interaction, query parameters and hidden
        form fields won’t suffice. In some cases, the required state
        information might also be too large to embed in a reply page’s
        HTML.</p>
<p>In general, there are a variety of ways to pass or retain state
        information between CGI script executions and across sessions of
        interaction:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>URL query parameters</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Session state embedded in generated reply pages</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Hidden form fields</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Session state embedded in generated reply pages</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Cookies</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Smaller information stored on the client that may span
              sessions</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Server-side databases</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Larger information that might span sessions</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>CGI model extensions</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Persistent processes, session management, and so on</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>We’ll explore most of these in later examples, but since this is
        a core idea in server-side scripting, let’s take a brief look at each
        of these in turn.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="URL Query Parameters"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="url_query_parameters"></a>URL Query Parameters</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>We met these <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e66932"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e66937"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e66942"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e66947"></a>earlier in this chapter: hardcoded URL parameters in
          dynamically generated hyperlinks embedded in input pages produced as
          replies. By including both a processing script name and input to it,
          such links direct the operation of the next page when selected. The
          parameters are transmitted from client to server automatically, as
          part of a GET-style request.</p>
<p>Coding query parameters is straightforward—print the correctly
          formatted URL to standard output from your CGI script as part of the
          reply page (albeit following some escaping conventions we’ll meet
          later in this chapter). Here’s an example drawn from the next
          chapter’s webmail case study:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e66955"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">script = "onViewListLink.py"
user = 'bob'
mnum = 66
pswd = 'xxx'
site = ' pop.myisp.net'
print('&lt;a href="%s?user=%s&amp;pswd=%s&amp;mnum=%d&amp;site=%s"&gt;View %s&lt;/a&gt;'
              % (script, user, pswd, mnum, site, mnum))</pre>
<p>The resulting URL will have enough information to direct the
          next script when clicked:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e66959"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&lt;a href="onViewListLink.py?user=bob&amp;pswd=xxx&amp;mnum=66&amp;site=pop.myisp.net"&gt;View 66&lt;/a&gt;</pre>
<p>Query parameters serve as memory, and they pass information
          between pages. As such, they are useful for retaining state across
          the pages of a single session of interaction. Since each generated
          URL may have different attached parameters, this scheme can provide
          context per user-selectable action. Each link in a list of
          selectable alternatives, for example, may have a different implied
          action coded as a different parameter value. Moreover, users can
          bookmark a link with parameters, in order to return to a specific
          state in an interaction.</p>
<p>Because their state retention is lost when the page is
          abandoned, though, they are not useful for remembering state from
          session to session. Moreover, the data appended as URL query
          parameters is generally visible to users and may appear in server
          logfiles; in some applications, it may have to be manually encrypted
          to avoid display or forgery.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Hidden Form Input Fields"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="hidden_form_input_fields"></a>Hidden Form Input Fields</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>We met these in the prior section <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e66971"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e66976"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e66981"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e66986"></a>as well: hidden form input fields that are attached to
          form data and are embedded in reply web pages, but are not displayed
          in web pages or their URL addresses. When the form is submitted, all
          the hidden fields are transmitted to the next script along with any
          real inputs, to serve as context. The net effect provides context
          for an entire input form, not a particular hyperlink. An already
          entered username, password, or selection, for instance, can be
          implied by the values of hidden fields in subsequently generated
          pages.</p>
<p>In terms of code, hidden fields are generated by server-side
          scripts as part of the reply page’s HTML and are later returned by
          the client with all of the form’s input data. Previewing the next
          chapter’s usage again:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e66994"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">print('&lt;form method=post action="%s/onViewSubmit.py"&gt;' % urlroot)
print('&lt;input type=hidden name=mnum value="%s"&gt;' % msgnum)
print('&lt;input type=hidden name=user value="%s"&gt;' % user)
print('&lt;input type=hidden name=site value="%s"&gt;' % site)
print('&lt;input type=hidden name=pswd value="%s"&gt;' % pswd)</pre>
<p>Like query parameters, hidden form fields can also serve as a
          sort of memory, retaining state information from page to page. Also
          like query parameters, because this kind of memory is embedded in
          the page itself, hidden fields are useful for state retention among
          the pages of a single session of interaction, but not for data that
          spans multiple sessions.</p>
<p>And like both query parameters and cookies (up next), hidden
          form fields may be visible to users—though hidden in rendered pages
          and URLs, their values still are displayed if the page’s raw HTML
          source code is displayed. As a result, hidden form fields are not
          secure; encryption of the embedded data may again be required in
          some contexts to avoid display on the client or forgery in form
          submissions.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="HTTP “Cookies”"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="http_quotation_mark_cookies_quotation_ma"></a>HTTP “Cookies”</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Cookies, an <a id="http15.5.3"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e67010"></a>o<a id="state15.5.3"></a>extension to the HTTP protocol underlying the web
          model, are a way for server-side applications to directly store
          information on the client computer. Because this information is not
          embedded in the HTML of web pages, it outlives the pages of a single
          session. As such, cookies are ideal for remembering things that must
          span sessions.</p>
<p>Things like usernames and preferences, for example, are prime
          cookie candidates—they will be available the next time the client
          visits our site. However, because cookies may have space
          limitations, are seen by some as intrusive, and can be disabled by
          users on the client, they are not always well suited to general data
          storage needs. They are often best used for small pieces of
          noncritical cross-session state information, and websites that aim
          for broad usage should generally still be able to operate if cookies
          are unavailable.</p>
<p>Operationally, HTTP cookies are strings of information stored
          on the client machine and transferred between client and server in
          HTTP message headers. Server-side scripts generate HTTP headers to
          request that a cookie be stored on the client as part of the
          script’s reply stream. Later, the client web browser generates HTTP
          headers that send back all the cookies matching the server and page
          being contacted. In effect, cookie data is embedded in the data
          streams much like query parameters and form fields, but it is
          contained in HTTP headers, not in a page’s HTML. Moreover, cookie
          data can be stored permanently on the client, and so it outlives
          both pages and interactive sessions.</p>
<p>For web application developers, Python’s standard library
          includes tools that simplify the task of sending and receiving:
          <code class="epub__literal">http.cookiejar</code> <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e67031"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e67034"></a>does cookie handling for HTTP clients that talk to web
          servers, and the module <code class="epub__literal">http.cookies</code> simplifies the task of
          creating and receiving cookies in server-side scripts. Moreover, the
          module <code class="epub__literal">urllib.request</code> <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e67044"></a>we’ve studied earlier has support for opening URLs
          with automatic cookie handling.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Creating a cookie"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="creating_a_cookie"></a>Creating a cookie</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Web browsers <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e67055"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e67060"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e67065"></a>such as Firefox and Internet Explorer generally
            handle the client side of this protocol, storing and sending
            cookie data. For the purpose of this chapter, we are mainly
            interested in cookie processing on the server. Cookies are created
            by sending special HTTP headers at the start of the reply
            stream:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e67071"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">Content-type: text/html
Set-Cookie: foo=bar;

&lt;HTML&gt;...</pre>
<p>The full format of a cookie’s header is as follows:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e67075"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">Set-Cookie: name=value; expires=date; path=pathname; domain=domainname; secure</pre>
<p>The domain defaults to the hostname of the server that set
            the cookie, and the path defaults to the path of the document or
            script that set the cookie—these are later matched by the client
            to know when to send a cookie’s value back to the server. In
            Python, cookie creation is simple; the following in a CGI script
            stores a last-visited time cookie:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e67079"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import http.cookies, time
cook = http.cookies.SimpleCookie()
cook['visited'] = str(time.time())     # a dictionary
print(cook.output())                   # prints "Set-Cookie: visited=1276623053.89"
print('Content-type: text/html\n')</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">SimpleCookie</code> call
            here creates a dictionary-like cookie object whose keys are
            strings (the names of the cookies), and whose values are “Morsel”
            objects (describing the cookie’s value). Morsels in turn are also
            dictionary-like objects with one key per cookie property: <code class="epub__literal">path</code> and <code class="epub__literal">domain</code>, <code class="epub__literal">expires</code> to give the cookie an expiration
            date (the default is the duration of the browser session), and so
            on. Morsels also have attributes—for instance, <code class="epub__literal">key</code> and <code class="epub__literal">value</code> give the name and value of the
            cookie, respectively. Assigning a string to a cookie key
            automatically creates a Morsel from the string, and the cookie
            object’s <code class="epub__literal">output</code> method returns
            a string suitable for use as an HTTP header; printing the object
            directly has the same effect, due to its <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> operator overloading. Here is a
            more comprehensive example of the interface in action:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e67108"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import http.cookies, time</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>cooks = http.cookies.SimpleCookie()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>cooks['visited']  = time.asctime()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>cooks['username'] = 'Bob'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>cooks['username']['path'] = '/myscript'</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>cooks['visited'].value</code></strong>
'Tue Jun 15 13:35:20 2010'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(cooks['visited'])</code></strong>
Set-Cookie: visited="Tue Jun 15 13:35:20 2010"
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(cooks)</code></strong>
Set-Cookie: username=Bob; Path=/myscript
Set-Cookie: visited="Tue Jun 15 13:35:20 2010"</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Receiving a cookie"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="receiving_a_cookie"></a>Receiving a cookie</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Now, when the <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e67140"></a>client visits the page again in the future, the
            cookie’s data is sent back from the browser to the server in HTTP
            headers again, in the form “Cookie: name1=value1; name2=value2
            ...”. For example:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e67146"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">Cookie: visited=1276623053.89</pre>
<p>Roughly, the browser client returns all cookies that match
            the requested server’s domain name and path. In the CGI script on
            the server, the environment variable<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e67150"></a> <code class="epub__literal">HTTP_COOKIE</code>
            contains the raw cookie data headers string uploaded from the
            client; it can be extracted in Python as follows:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e67157"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import os, http.cookies
cooks = http.cookies.SimpleCookie(os.environ.get("HTTP_COOKIE"))
vcook = cooks.get("visited")     # a Morsel dictionary
if vcook != None:
    time = vcook.value</pre>
<p>Here, the <code class="epub__literal">SimpleCookie</code>
            constructor call automatically parses the passed-in cookie data
            string into a dictionary of Morsel objects; as usual, the
            dictionary <code class="epub__literal">get</code> method returns a
            default <code class="epub__literal">None</code> if a key is
            absent, and we use the Morsel object’s <code class="epub__literal">value</code> attribute to extract the cookie’s
            value string if sent.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Using cookies in CGI scripts"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="using_cookies_in_cgi_scripts"></a>Using cookies in CGI scripts</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To help put these <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e67178"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e67183"></a>pieces together, Example 15-16 lists a CGI script
            that stores a client-side cookie when first visited and receives
            and displays it on subsequent visits.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id82"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 15-16. PP4E\Internet\Web\cgi-bin\cookies.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
create or use a client-side cookie storing username;
there is no input form data to parse in this example
"""

import http.cookies, os
cookstr  = os.environ.get("HTTP_COOKIE")
cookies  = http.cookies.SimpleCookie(cookstr)
usercook = cookies.get("user")                     # fetch if sent

if usercook == None:                               # create first time
    cookies = http.cookies.SimpleCookie()          # print Set-cookie hdr
    cookies['user']  = 'Brian'
    print(cookies)
    greeting = '&lt;p&gt;His name shall be... %s&lt;/p&gt;' % cookies['user']
else:
    greeting = '&lt;p&gt;Welcome back, %s&lt;/p&gt;' % usercook.value

print('Content-type: text/html\n')                 # plus blank line now
print(greeting)                                    # and the actual html</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Assuming you are running this chapter’s local web server
            from Example 15-1, you
            can invoke this script with a URL such as
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>http://localhost/cgi-bin/cookies.py</em></span> (type
            this in your browser’s address field, or submit it interactively
            with the module <code class="epub__literal">urllib.request</code>). The first time you
            visit the script, the script sets the cookie within its reply’s
            headers, and you’ll see a reply page with this message:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e67206"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">His name shall be... Set-Cookie: user=Brian</pre>
<p>Thereafter, revisiting the script’s URL in the same browser
            session (use your browser’s reload button) produces a reply page
            with this message:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e67210"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">Welcome back, Brian</pre>
<p>This occurs because the client is sending the previously
            stored cookie value back to the script, at least until you kill
            and restart your web browser—the default expiration of a cookie is
            the end of a browsing session. In a realistic program, this sort
            of structure might be used by the login page of a web application;
            a user would need to enter his name only once per browser
            session.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Handling cookies with the urllib.request module"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="handling_cookies_with_the_urllib.request"></a>Handling cookies with the urllib.request module</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As mentioned earlier, <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e67219"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e67224"></a>the <code class="epub__literal">urllib.request</code> module provides an
            interface for reading the reply from a URL, but it uses
            the<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e67233"></a> <code class="epub__literal">http.cookiejar</code>
            module to also support storing and sending cookies on the client.
            However, it does not support cookies “out of the box.” For
            example, here it is in action testing the last section’s
            cookie-savvy script—cookies are not echoed back to the server when
            a script is revisited:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e67240"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from urllib.request import urlopen</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>reply = urlopen('http://localhost/cgi-bin/cookies.py').read()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(reply)</code></strong>
b'&lt;p&gt;His name shall be... Set-Cookie: user=Brian&lt;/p&gt;\n'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>reply = urlopen('http://localhost/cgi-bin/cookies.py').read()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(reply)</code></strong>
b'&lt;p&gt;His name shall be... Set-Cookie: user=Brian&lt;/p&gt;\n'</pre>
<p>To support cookies with this module properly, we simply need
            to enable the cookie-handler class; the same is true for other
            optional extensions in this module. Again, contacting the prior
            section’s script:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e67259"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import urllib.request as urllib</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>opener = urllib.build_opener(urllib.HTTPCookieProcessor())</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>urllib.install_opener(opener)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>reply = urllib.urlopen('http://localhost/cgi-bin/cookies.py').read()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(reply)</code></strong>
b'&lt;p&gt;His name shall be... Set-Cookie: user=Brian&lt;/p&gt;\n'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>reply = urllib.urlopen('http://localhost/cgi-bin/cookies.py').read()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(reply)</code></strong>
b'&lt;p&gt;Welcome back, Brian&lt;/p&gt;\n'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>reply = urllib.urlopen('http://localhost/cgi-bin/cookies.py').read()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(reply)</code></strong>
b'&lt;p&gt;Welcome back, Brian&lt;/p&gt;\n'</pre>
<p>This works because <code class="epub__literal">urllib.request</code> mimics the cookie
            behavior of a web browser on the client—it stores the cookie when
            so requested in the headers of a script’s reply, and adds it to
            headers sent back to the same script on subsequent visits. Also
            just as in a browser, the cookie is deleted if you exit Python and
            start a new session to rerun this code. See the library manual for
            more on this module’s interfaces.</p>
<p>Although easy to use, cookies have potential downsides. For
            one, they may be subject to size limitations (4 KB per cookie, 300
            total, and 20 per domain are one common limit). For another, users
            can disable cookies in most browsers, making them less suited to
            critical data. Some even see them as intrusive, because they can
            be abused to track user behavior. (Many sites simply require
            cookies to be turned on, finessing the issue completely.) Finally,
            because cookies are transmitted over the network between client
            and server, they are still only as secure as the transmission
            stream itself; this may be an issue for sensitive data if the page
            is not using secure HTTP transmissions between client and server.
            We’ll explore secure cookies and server concepts in the next
            chapter.</p>
<p>For more details on the cookie modules and the cookie
            protocol in general, see Python’s library manual, and search the
            Web for resources. It’s not impossible that future mutations of
            HTML may provide similar storage <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e67298"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e67300"></a>solutions.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Server-Side Databases"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="server-side_databases"></a>Server-Side Databases</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>For more <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e67308"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e67313"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e67316"></a>industrial-strength state retention, Python scripts
          can employ full-blown database solutions in the server. We will
          study these options in depth in Chapter 17. Python scripts have access
          to a variety of server-side data stores, including flat files,
          persistent object pickles and shelves, object-oriented databases
          such as ZODB, and relational SQL-based databases such as MySQL,
          PostgreSQL, Oracle, and SQLite. Besides data storage, such systems
          may provide advanced tools such as transaction commits and
          rollbacks, concurrent update synchronization, and more.</p>
<p>Full-blown databases are the ultimate storage solution. They
          can be used to represent state both between the pages of a single
          session (by tagging the data with generated per-session keys) and
          across multiple sessions (by storing data under per-user
          keys).</p>
<p>Given a user’s login name, for example, CGI scripts can fetch
          all of the context we have gathered in the past about that user from
          the server-side database. Server-side databases are ideal for
          storing more complex cross-session information; a shopping cart
          application, for instance, can record items added in the past in a
          server-side database.</p>
<p>Databases outlive both pages and sessions. Because data is
          kept explicitly, there is no need to embed it within the query
          parameters or hidden form fields of reply pages. Because the data is
          kept on the server, there is no need to store it on the client in
          cookies. And because such schemes employ general-purpose databases,
          they are not subject to the size constraints or optional nature of
          cookies.</p>
<p>In exchange for their added utility, full-blown databases
          require more in terms of installation, administration, and coding.
          As we’ll see in Chapter 17,
          luckily the extra coding part of that trade-off is remarkably simple
          in Python. Moreover, Python’s database interfaces may be used in any
          application, web-based or otherwise.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Extensions to the CGI Model"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="extensions_to_the_cgi_model"></a>Extensions to the CGI Model</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Finally, there are more <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e67339"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e67344"></a>advanced protocols and frameworks for retaining state
          on the server, which we won’t cover in this book. For instance, the
          Zope web application framework, discussed briefly in Chapter 12, provides a product interface, which
          allows for the construction of web-based objects that are
          automatically persistent.</p>
<p>Other schemes, such as FastCGI, <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e67354"></a>as well as server-specific extensions such as <code class="epub__literal">mod_python</code> for Apache, may attempt to work
          around the autonomous, one-shot nature of CGI scripts, or otherwise
          extend the basic CGI model to support long-lived memory stores. For
          example:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>FastCGI</em></span> allows web applications to
              run as persistent processes, which receive input data from and
              send reply streams to the HTTP web server over <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e67367"></a>Inter-Process Communication (IPC) mechanisms such
              as sockets. This differs from normal CGI, which communicates
              inputs and outputs with environment variables, standard streams,
              and command-line arguments, and assumes scripts run to
              completion on each request. Because a FastCGI process may
              outlive a single page, it can retain state information from page
              to page, and avoids startup performance costs.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">mod_python</code> <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e67378"></a>extends the open source Apache web server by
              embedding the Python interpreter within Apache. Python code is
              executed directly within the Apache server, eliminating the need
              to spawn external processes. This package also supports the
              concept of sessions, which can be used to store data between
              pages. Session data is locked for concurrent access and can be
              stored in files or in memory, depending on whether Apache is
              running in multiprocess or multithreaded mode. <code class="epub__literal">mod_python</code> also includes web
              development tools, such as the Python Server Pages <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e67385"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e67388"></a>(PSP) server-side templating language for HTML
              generation mentioned in Chapter 12 and
              earlier in this chapter.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Such models are not universally supported, though, and may
          come with some added cost in complexity—for example, to synchronize
          access to persistent data with locks. Moreover, a failure in a
          FastCGI-style web application impacts the entire application, not
          just a single page, and things like memory leaks become much more
          costly. For more on persistent CGI models, and support in Python for
          things such as FastCGI, search the Web or consult web-specific
          resources.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Combining Techniques"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="combining_techniques"></a>Combining Techniques</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Naturally, these techniques <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e67401"></a>may be combined to achieve a variety of memory
          strategies, both for interaction sessions and for more permanent
          storage needs. For example:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>A web application may use cookies to store a per-user or
              per-session key on the client, and later use that key to index
              into a server-side database to retrieve the user’s or session’s
              full state information.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Even for short-lived session information, URL query
              parameters or hidden form fields may similarly be used to pass a
              key identifying the session from page to page, to be used by the
              next script to index a server-side database.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Moreover, URL query parameters and hidden fields may be
              generated for temporary state memory that spans pages, even
              though cookies and databases are used for retention that must
              span sessions.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>The choice of technique is driven by the application’s storage
          needs. Although not as straightforward as the in-memory variables
          and objects of single process GUI programs running on a client, with
          creativity, CGI script state retention is entirely <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e67419"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e67421"></a>possible.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
