<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>More on HTML and URL Escapes</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="More on HTML and URL Escapes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="more_on_html_and_url_escapes"></a>More on HTML and URL Escapes</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Perhaps the subtlest <a id="cgi15.8"></a><a id="url15.8"></a><a id="html15.8"></a>change in the last section’s rewrite is that, for
        robustness, this version’s reply script (Example 15-23) also calls <code class="epub__literal">cgi.escape</code> for the language
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>name</em></span>, not just for the language’s code snippet.
        This wasn’t required in <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>languages2.py</em></span> (Example 15-20) for the known
        language names in our selection list table. However, it is not
        impossible that someone could pass the script a language name with an
        embedded HTML character as a query parameter. For example, a URL such
        as:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e68248"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">http://localhost/cgi-bin/languages2reply.py?language=a&lt;b</pre>
<p>embeds a <code class="epub__literal">&lt;</code> in the language
        name parameter (the name is <code class="epub__literal">a&lt;b</code>). When submitted, this version
        uses<a id="cgim15.8"></a> <code class="epub__literal">cgi.escape</code> to
        properly translate the <code class="epub__literal">&lt;</code> for use
        in the reply HTML, according to the standard HTML escape conventions
        discussed earlier; here is the reply text <span>generated</span>:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e68274"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&lt;TITLE&gt;Languages&lt;/TITLE&gt;
&lt;H1&gt;Syntax&lt;/H1&gt;&lt;HR&gt;

&lt;H3&gt;a&lt;b&lt;/H3&gt;&lt;P&gt;&lt;PRE&gt;
Sorry--I don't know that language
&lt;/PRE&gt;&lt;/P&gt;&lt;BR&gt;
&lt;HR&gt;</pre>
<p>The original version in Example 15-18 doesn’t escape the
        language name, such that the embedded <code class="epub__literal">&lt;b</code> is interpreted as an HTML tag (which
        makes the rest of the page render in bold font!). As you can probably
        tell by now, text escapes are pervasive in CGI scripting—even text
        that you may think is safe must generally be escaped before being
        inserted into the HTML code in the reply stream.</p>
<p>In fact, because the Web is a text-based medium that combines
        multiple language syntaxes, multiple formatting rules may apply: one
        for URLs and another for HTML. We met HTML escapes earlier in this
        chapter; URLs, and combinations of HTML and URLs, merit a few
        additional words.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="URL Escape Code Conventions"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="url_escape_code_conventions"></a>URL Escape Code Conventions</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Notice that in the prior section, although it’s wrong to embed
          an unescaped <code class="epub__literal">&lt;</code> in the HTML
          code reply, it’s perfectly all right to include it literally in the
          URL string used to trigger the reply. In fact, HTML and URLs define
          completely different characters as special. For instance, although
          <code class="epub__literal">&amp;</code> must be escaped as <code class="epub__literal">&amp;</code> inside HTML code, we have to use
          other escaping schemes to code a literal <code class="epub__literal">&amp;</code> within a URL string (where it
          normally separates parameters). To pass a language name like
          <code class="epub__literal">a&amp;b</code> to our script, we have to
          type the following URL:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e68305"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">http://localhost/cgi-bin/languages2reply.py?language=a%26b</pre>
<p>Here, <code class="epub__literal">%26</code> represents
          <code class="epub__literal">&amp;</code>—the <code class="epub__literal">&amp;</code> is replaced with a <code class="epub__literal">%</code> followed by the hexadecimal value (0x26)
          of its ASCII code value (38). Similarly, as we suggested at the end
          of Chapter 13, to name C++ as a query
          parameter in an explicit URL, <code class="epub__literal">+</code>
          must be escaped as <code class="epub__literal">%2b</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e68330"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">http://localhost/cgi-bin/languages2reply.py?language=C%2b%2b</pre>
<p>Sending <code class="epub__literal">C++</code> unescaped will
          not work, because <code class="epub__literal">+</code> is special in
          URL syntax—it represents a space. By URL standards, most
          nonalphanumeric characters are supposed to be translated to such
          escape sequences, and spaces are replaced by <code class="epub__literal">+</code> signs. Technically, this convention is
          known as the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>application/x-www-form-urlencoded</em></span>
          query string format, and it’s part of the magic behind those bizarre
          URLs you often see at the top of your browser as you surf the
          Web.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Python HTML and URL Escape Tools"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="python_html_and_url_escape_tools"></a>Python HTML and URL Escape Tools</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>If you’re like me, you probably don’t have the hexadecimal
          value of the ASCII code for <code class="epub__literal">&amp;</code>
          committed to memory (though Python’s <code class="epub__literal">hex(ord(c))</code> can help). Luckily, Python
          provides tools that automatically implement URL escapes, just as
          <code class="epub__literal">cgi.escape</code> does for HTML escapes.
          The main thing to keep in mind is that HTML code and URL strings are
          written with entirely different syntax, and so employ distinct
          escaping conventions. Web users don’t generally care, unless they
          need to type complex URLs explicitly—browsers handle most escape
          code details internally. But if you write scripts that must generate
          HTML or URLs, you need to be careful to escape characters that are
          reserved in either syntax.</p>
<p>Because HTML and URLs have different syntaxes, Python provides
          two distinct sets of tools for escaping their text. In the standard
          Python library:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">cgi.escape</code> escapes text
              to be embedded in HTML.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">urllib.parse.quote</code> and
              <code class="epub__literal">quote_plus</code> escape text to be
              embedded in URLs.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">urllib.parse</code> module
          <a id="url15.8.2"></a>also has tools for undoing URL escapes (<code class="epub__literal">unquote</code>, <code class="epub__literal">unquote_plus</code>), but HTML escapes are undone
          during HTML parsing at large (e.g., by Python’s <code class="epub__literal">html.parser</code> module). To illustrate the two
          escape conventions and tools, let’s apply each tool set to a few
          simple examples.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note"><h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p>Somewhat inexplicably, Python 3.2 developers have opted to
            move and rename the <code class="epub__literal">cgi.escape</code>
            function used throughout this book to <code class="epub__literal">html.escape</code>, to make use of its
            longstanding original name deprecated, and to alter its quoting
            behavior slightly. This is despite the fact that this function has
            been around for ages and is used in almost every Python CGI-based
            web script: a glaring case of a small group’s notion of aesthetics
            trouncing widespread practice in 3.X and breaking working code in
            the process. You may need to use the new <code class="epub__literal">html.escape</code> name in a future Python
            version; that is, unless Python users complain loudly enough (yes,
            hint!).</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Escaping HTML Code"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="escaping_html_code"></a>Escaping HTML Code</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As we saw earlier, <code class="epub__literal">cgi.escape</code> translates code for inclusion
          within HTML. We normally call this utility from a CGI script, but
          it’s just as easy to explore its behavior interactively:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e68416"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import cgi</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>cgi.escape('a &lt; b &gt; c &amp; d "spam"', 1)</code></strong>
'a &lt; b &gt; c &amp; d &quot;spam&quot;'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>s = cgi.escape("1&lt;2 &lt;b&gt;hello&lt;/b&gt;")</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>s</code></strong>
'1&lt;2 &lt;b&gt;hello&lt;/b&gt;'</pre>
<p>Python’s <code class="epub__literal">cgi</code> module
          automatically converts characters that are special in HTML syntax
          according to the HTML convention. It translates <code class="epub__literal">&lt;</code>, <code class="epub__literal">&gt;</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">&amp;</code> with an extra true argument,
          <code class="epub__literal">"</code>, into escape sequences of the
          form <code class="epub__literal">&X;</code>, where the <code class="epub__literal">X</code> is a mnemonic that denotes the original
          character. For instance, <code class="epub__literal">&lt;</code>
          stands for the “less than” operator (<code class="epub__literal">&lt;</code>) and <code class="epub__literal">&amp;</code> denotes a literal ampersand
          (<code class="epub__literal">&amp;</code>).</p>
<p>There is no <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>un</em></span>escaping tool in the CGI
          module, because HTML escape code sequences are recognized within the
          context of an HTML parser, like the one used by your web browser
          when a page is downloaded. Python comes with a full HTML parser,
          too, in the form of the standard module <code class="epub__literal">html.parser</code>. We won’t go into details on
          the HTML parsing tools here (they’re covered in Chapter 19 in conjunction with text processing),
          but to illustrate how escape codes are eventually undone, here is
          the HTML parser module at work reading back the preceding
          output:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e68476"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import cgi, html.parser</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>s = cgi.escape("1&lt;2 &lt;b&gt;hello&lt;/b&gt;")</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>s</code></strong>
'1&lt;2 &lt;b&gt;hello&lt;/b&gt;'
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>html.parser.HTMLParser().unescape(s)</code></strong>
'1&lt;2 &lt;b&gt;hello&lt;/b&gt;'</pre>
<p>This uses a utility method on the HTML parser class to
          unquote. In Chapter 19, we’ll see that
          using this class for more substantial work involves subclassing to
          override methods run as callbacks during the parse upon detection of
          tags, data, entities, and more. For more on full-blown HTML parsing,
          watch for the rest of this story in <span>Chapter 19.</span></p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Escaping URLs"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="escaping_urls"></a>Escaping URLs</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>By contrast, URLs reserve other characters as special and must
          adhere to different escape conventions. As a result, we use
          different Python library tools to escape URLs for transmission.
          Python’s <code class="epub__literal">urllib.parse</code> module
          provides two tools that do the translation work for us: <code class="epub__literal">quote</code>, which implements the standard
          <code class="epub__literal">%XX</code> hexadecimal URL escape code
          sequences for most nonalphanumeric characters, and <code class="epub__literal">quote_plus</code>, which additionally translates
          spaces to <code class="epub__literal">+</code> signs. The <code class="epub__literal">urllib.parse</code> module also provides
          functions for unescaping quoted characters in a URL string: <code class="epub__literal">unquote</code> undoes <code class="epub__literal">%XX</code> escapes, and <code class="epub__literal">unquote_plus</code> also changes plus signs back
          to spaces. Here is the module at work, at the interactive
          prompt:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e68530"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import urllib.parse</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>urllib.parse.quote("a &amp; b #! c")</code></strong>
'a%20%26%20b%20%23%21%20c'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>urllib.parse.quote_plus("C:\stuff\spam.txt")</code></strong>
'C%3A%5Cstuff%5Cspam.txt'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = urllib.parse.quote_plus("a &amp; b #! c")</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x</code></strong>
'a+%26+b+%23%21+c'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>urllib.parse.unquote_plus(x)</code></strong>
'a &amp; b #! c'</pre>
<p>URL escape sequences embed the hexadecimal values of nonsafe
          characters following a <code class="epub__literal">%</code> sign
          (this is usually their ASCII codes). In <code class="epub__literal">urllib.parse</code>, nonsafe characters are
          usually taken to include everything except letters, digits, and a
          handful of safe special characters (any in <code class="epub__literal">'_.-'</code>), but the two tools differ on
          forward slashes, and you can extend the set of safe characters by
          passing an extra string argument to the quote calls to customize the
          translations:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e68562"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>urllib.parse.quote_plus("uploads/index.txt")</code></strong>
'uploads%2Findex.txt'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>urllib.parse.quote("uploads/index.txt")</code></strong>
'uploads/index.txt'
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>urllib.parse.quote_plus("uploads/index.txt", '/')</code></strong>
'uploads/index.txt'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>urllib.parse.quote("uploads/index.txt", '/')</code></strong>
'uploads/index.txt'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>urllib.parse.quote("uploads/index.txt", '')</code></strong>
'uploads%2Findex.txt'
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>urllib.parse.quote_plus("uploads\index.txt")</code></strong>
'uploads%5Cindex.txt'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>urllib.parse.quote("uploads\index.txt")</code></strong>
'uploads%5Cindex.txt'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>urllib.parse.quote_plus("uploads\index.txt", '\\')</code></strong>
'uploads\\index.txt'</pre>
<p>Note that Python’s <code class="epub__literal">cgi</code>
          module also translates URL escape sequences back to their original
          characters and changes <code class="epub__literal">+</code> signs to
          spaces during the process of extracting input information.
          Internally, <code class="epub__literal">cgi.FieldStorage</code>
          automatically calls <code class="epub__literal">urllib.parse</code>
          tools which unquote if needed to parse and unescape parameters
          passed at the end of URLs. The upshot is that CGI scripts get back
          the original, unescaped URL strings, and don’t need to unquote
          values on their own. As we’ve seen, CGI scripts don’t even need to
          know that inputs came from a URL at all.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Escaping URLs Embedded in HTML Code"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="escaping_urls_embedded_in_html_code"></a>Escaping URLs Embedded in HTML Code</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>We’ve seen how to escape text inserted into both HTML and
          URLs. But what do we do for URLs inside HTML? That is, how do we
          escape when we generate and embed text inside a URL, which is itself
          embedded inside generated HTML code? Some of our earlier examples
          used hardcoded URLs with appended input parameters inside <code class="epub__literal">&lt;A HREF&gt;</code>
          hyperlink tags; the file <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>languages2.py</em></span>, for
          instance, prints HTML that includes a URL:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e68615"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&lt;a href="getfile.py?filename=cgi-bin\languages2.py"&gt;</pre>
<p>Because the URL here is embedded in HTML, it must at least be
          escaped according to HTML conventions (e.g., any <code class="epub__literal">&lt;</code> characters must become <code class="epub__literal">&lt;</code>), and any spaces should be
          translated to <code class="epub__literal">+</code> signs per URL
          conventions. A <code class="epub__literal">cgi.escape(url)</code>
          call followed by the string <code class="epub__literal">url.replace("
          ", "+")</code> would take us this far, and would probably suffice
          for most cases.</p>
<p>That approach is not quite enough in general, though, because
          HTML escaping conventions are not the same as URL conventions. To
          robustly escape URLs embedded in HTML code, you should instead call
          <code class="epub__literal">urllib.parse.quote_plus</code> on the
          URL string, or at least most of its components, before adding it to
          the HTML text. The escaped result also satisfies HTML escape
          conventions, because <code class="epub__literal">urllib.parse</code>
          translates more characters than <code class="epub__literal">cgi.escape</code>, and the <code class="epub__literal">%</code> in URL escapes is not special to
          <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e68648"></a>HTML.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="HTML and URL conflicts: &amp;"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="html_and_url_conflicts_colon_a"></a>HTML and URL conflicts: &amp;</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>But there is one more <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e68656"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e68661"></a>astonishingly subtle (and thankfully rare) wrinkle:
            you may also have to be careful with <code class="epub__literal">&amp;</code> characters in URL strings that are
            embedded in HTML code (e.g., within <code class="epub__literal">&lt;A&gt;</code> hyperlink tags). The <code class="epub__literal">&amp;</code> symbol is both a query parameter
            separator in URLs (<code class="epub__literal">?a=1&amp;b=2</code>) and the start of escape
            codes in HTML (<code class="epub__literal">&lt;</code>).
            Consequently, there is a potential for collision if a query
            parameter name happens to be the same as an HTML escape sequence
            code. The query parameter name <code class="epub__literal">amp</code>, for instance, that shows up as
            <code class="epub__literal">&amp;amp=1</code> in parameters two
            and beyond on the URL may be treated as an HTML escape by some
            HTML parsers, and translated to <code class="epub__literal">&amp;=1</code>.</p>
<p>Even if parts of the URL string are URL-escaped, when more
            than one parameter is separated by a <code class="epub__literal">&amp;</code>, the <code class="epub__literal">&amp;</code> separator might also have to be
            escaped as <code class="epub__literal">&amp;</code> according
            to HTML conventions. To see why, consider the following HTML
            hyperlink tag with query parameter names <code class="epub__literal">name</code>, <code class="epub__literal">job</code>, <code class="epub__literal">amp</code>, <code class="epub__literal">sect</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">lt</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e68719"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&lt;A HREF="file.py?name=a&amp;job=b&amp;amp=c&amp;sect=d&amp;lt=e"&gt;hello&lt;/a&gt;</pre>
<p>When rendered in most browsers tested, including Internet
            Explorer on Windows 7, this URL link winds up looking incorrectly
            like this (the <code class="epub__literal">S</code> character in
            the first of these is really a non-ASCII section marker):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e68726"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">file.py?name=a&amp;job=b&amp;=cS=d&lt;=e             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">result in IE</span></em>
file.py?name=a&amp;job=b&amp;=c%A7=d%3C=e         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">result in Chrome (0x3C is &lt;)</span></em></pre>
<p>The first two parameters are retained as expected (<code class="epub__literal">name=a</code>, <code class="epub__literal">job=b</code>), because <code class="epub__literal">name</code> is not preceded with an <code class="epub__literal">&amp;</code> and <code class="epub__literal">&amp;job</code> is not recognized as a valid
            HTML character escape code. However, the <code class="epub__literal">&amp;amp</code>, <code class="epub__literal">&amp;sect</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">&amp;lt</code> parts are interpreted as special
            characters because they do name valid HTML escape codes, even
            without a trailing semicolon.</p>
<p>To see this for yourself, open the example package’s
            <em class="epub__filename">test-escapes.html</em> file in
            your browser, and highlight or select its link; the query names
            may be taken as HTML <span>escapes</span>. This text appears to parse
            correctly in Python’s own HTML parser module described earlier
            (unless the parts in question also end in a semicolon); that might
            help for replies fetched manually with <code class="epub__literal">urllib.request</code>, but not when rendered in
            browsers:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e68771"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from html.parser import HTMLParser</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>html = open('test-escapes.html').read()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>HTMLParser().unescape(html)</code></strong>
'&lt;HTML&gt;\n&lt;A HREF="file.py?name=a&amp;job=b&amp;amp=c&amp;sect=d&amp;lt=e"&gt;hello&lt;/a&gt;\n&lt;/HTML&gt;'</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Avoiding conflicts"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="avoiding_conflicts"></a>Avoiding conflicts</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>What to do then? To make this work as expected in all cases,
            the <code class="epub__literal">&amp;</code> separators should
            generally be escaped if your parameter names may clash with an
            HTML escape code:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e68790"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&lt;A HREF="file.py?name=a&amp;job=b&amp;amp=c&amp;sect=d&amp;lt=e"&gt;hello&lt;/a&gt;</pre>
<p>Browsers render this fully escaped link as expected (open
            <em class="epub__filename">test-escapes2.html</em> to test),
            and Python’s HTML parser does the right thing as well:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e68797"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">file.py?name=a&amp;job=b&amp;amp=c&amp;sect=d&amp;lt=e       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">result in both IE and Chrome</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>h = '&lt;A HREF="file.py?name=a&amp;job=b&amp;amp=c&amp;sect=d&amp;lt=e"&gt;hello&lt;/a&gt;'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>HTMLParser().unescape(h)</code></strong>
'&lt;A HREF="file.py?name=a&amp;job=b&amp;amp=c&amp;sect=d&amp;lt=e"&gt;hello&lt;/a&gt;'</pre>
<p>Because of this conflict between HTML and URL syntax, most
            server tools (including Python’s <code class="epub__literal">urlib.parse</code> query-parameter parsing
            tools employed by Python’s <code class="epub__literal">cgi</code>
            module) also allow a semicolon to be used as a separator instead
            of <code class="epub__literal">&amp;</code>. The following link,
            for example, works the same as the fully escaped URL, but does not
            require an extra HTML escaping step (at least not for the <code class="epub__literal">;</code>):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e68822"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">file.py?name=a;job=b;amp=c;sect=d;lt=e</pre>
<p>Python’s <code class="epub__literal">html.parser</code>
            unescape tool allows the semicolons to pass unchanged, too, simply
            because they are not significant in HTML code. To fully test all
            three of these link forms for yourself at once, place them in an
            HTML file, open the file in your browser using its
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>http://localhost/badlink.html</em></span> URL, and view
            the links when followed. The HTML file in Example 15-24 will
            suffice.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id90"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 15-24. PP4E\Internet\Web\badlink.html</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&lt;HTML&gt;&lt;BODY&gt;

&lt;p&gt;&lt;A HREF=
"cgi-bin/badlink.py?name=a&amp;job=b&amp;amp=c&amp;sect=d&amp;lt=e"&gt;unescaped&lt;/a&gt;

&lt;p&gt;&lt;A HREF=
"cgi-bin/badlink.py?name=a&amp;job=b&amp;amp=c&amp;sect=d&amp;lt=e"&gt;escaped&lt;/a&gt;

&lt;p&gt;&lt;A HREF=
"cgi-bin/badlink.py?name=a;job=b;amp=c;sect=d;lt=e"&gt;alternative&lt;/a&gt;

&lt;/BODY&gt;&lt;/HTML&gt;</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>When these links are clicked, they invoke the simple CGI
            script in Example 15-25.
            This script displays the inputs sent from the client on the
            standard error stream to avoid any additional translations (for
            our locally running web server in Example 15-1, this routes the
            printed text to the server’s console window).</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id91"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 15-25. PP4E\Internet\Web\cgi-bin\badlink.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import cgi, sys
form = cgi.FieldStorage()      # print all inputs to stderr; stodout=reply page
for name in form.keys():
    print('[%s:%s]' % (name, form[name].value), end=' ', file=sys.stderr)</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Following is the (edited for space) output we get in our
            local Python-coded web server’s console window for following each
            of the three links in the HTML page in turn using Internet
            Explorer. The second and third yield the correct parameters set on
            the server as a result of the HTML escaping or URL conventions
            employed, but the accidental HTML escapes cause serious issues for
            the first unescaped link—the client’s HTML parser translates these
            in unintended ways (results are similar under Chrome, but the
            first link displays the non-ASCII section mark character with a
            different escape <span>sequence</span>):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e68856"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">mark-VAIO - - [16/Jun/2010 10:43:24] b'[:c\xa7=d&lt;=e] [job:b] [name:a] '
mark-VAIO - - [16/Jun/2010 10:43:24] CGI script exited OK

mark-VAIO - - [16/Jun/2010 10:43:27] b'[amp:c] [job:b] [lt:e] [name:a] [sect:d]'
mark-VAIO - - [16/Jun/2010 10:43:27] CGI script exited OK

mark-VAIO - - [16/Jun/2010 10:43:30] b'[amp:c] [job:b] [lt:e] [name:a] [sect:d]'
mark-VAIO - - [16/Jun/2010 10:43:30] CGI script exited OK</pre>
<p>The moral of this story is that unless you can be sure that
            the names of all but the leftmost URL query parameters embedded in
            HTML are not the same as the name of any HTML character escape
            code like <code class="epub__literal">amp</code>, you should
            generally either use a semicolon as a separator, if supported by
            your tools, or run the entire URL through <code class="epub__literal">cgi.escape</code> after escaping its parameter
            names and values with <code class="epub__literal">urllib.parse.quote_plus</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e68869"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>link = 'file.py?name=a&amp;job=b&amp;amp=c&amp;sect=d&amp;lt=e'</code></strong>

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># escape for HTML</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import cgi</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>cgi.escape(link)</code></strong>
'file.py?name=a&amp;job=b&amp;amp=c&amp;sect=d&amp;lt=e'

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># escape for URL</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import urllib.parse</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>elink = urllib.parse.quote_plus(link)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>elink</code></strong>
'file.py%3Fname%3Da%26job%3Db%26amp%3Dc%26sect%3Dd%26lt%3De'

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># URL satisfies HTML too: same</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>cgi.escape(elink</code></strong>)
'file.py%3Fname%3Da%26job%3Db%26amp%3Dc%26sect%3Dd%26lt%3De'</pre>
<p>Having said that, I should add that some examples in this
            book do not escape <code class="epub__literal">&amp;</code> URL
            separators embedded within HTML simply because their URL parameter
            names are known not to conflict with HTML escapes. In fact, this
            concern is likely to be rare in practice, since your program
            usually controls the set of parameter names it expects. This is
            not, however, the most general solution, especially if parameter
            names may be driven by a dynamic database; when in doubt, escape
            much <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e68907"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e68909"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e68911"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e68913"></a>and often.</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="quotation_mark_how_i_learned_to_stop_wor"></a>
<p class="epub__title">“How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Web”</p>
<p>Lest the HTML and URL formatting rules sound too clumsy
              (and send you screaming into the night!), note that the HTML and
              URL escaping conventions are imposed by the Internet itself, not
              by Python. (As you’ve learned by now, Python has a different
              mechanism for escaping special characters in string constants
              with backslashes.) These rules stem from the fact that the Web
              is based on the notion of shipping formatted text strings around
              the planet, and are almost surely influenced by the tendency of
              different interest groups to develop very different
              notations.</p>
<p>You can take heart, though, in the fact that you often
              don’t need to think in such cryptic terms; when you do, Python
              automates the translation process with library tools. Just keep
              in mind that any script that generates HTML or URLs dynamically
              probably needs to call Python’s escaping tools to be robust.
              We’ll see both the HTML and the URL escape tool sets employed
              frequently in later examples in this chapter and the next.
              Moreover, web development frameworks and tools such as Zope and
              others aim to get rid of some of the low-level complexities that
              CGI scripters face. And as usual in programming, there is no
              substitute for brains; amazing technologies like the Internet
              come at an inevitable cost in complexity.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
