<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 16. The PyMailCGI Server</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 16. The PyMailCGI Server"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="the_pymailcgi_server"></a>Chapter 16. The PyMailCGI Server</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="“Things to Do When Visiting Chicago”"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="quotation_mark_things_to_do_when_visitin"></a>“Things to Do When Visiting Chicago”</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>This chapter is the fifth in our survey of Python Internet
        programming, and it continues Chapter 15’s discussion. There, we explored
        the fundamentals of server-side Common Gateway Interface (CGI)
        scripting in Python. Armed with that knowledge, this chapter moves on
        to a larger case study that underscores advanced CGI and server-side
        web scripting topics.</p>
<p>This chapter presents<a id="I_indexterm5_d1e69887"></a> PyMailCGI—a “webmail” website for reading and sending
        email that illustrates security concepts, hidden form fields, URL
        generation, and more. Because this system is similar in spirit to the
        PyMailGUI program we studied in Chapter 14, this example also serves as a
        comparison of the web and nonweb application models. This case study
        is founded on basic CGI scripting, but it implements a complete
        website that does something more useful than Chapter 15’s examples.</p>
<p>As usual in this book, this chapter splits its focus between
        application-level details and Python programming concepts. For
        instance, because this is a fairly large case study, it illustrates
        system design concepts that are important in actual projects. It also
        says more about CGI scripts in general: PyMailCGI expands on the
        notions of state retention and security concerns and
        encryption.</p>
<p>The system presented here is neither particularly flashy nor
        feature rich as websites go (in fact, the initial cut of PyMailCGI was
        thrown together during a layover at Chicago’s O’Hare airport). Alas,
        you will find neither dancing bears nor blinking lights at this site.
        On the other hand, it was written to serve a real purpose, speaks more
        to us about CGI scripting, and hints at just how far Python
        server-side programs can take us. As outlined at the start of this
        part of the book, there are higher-level frameworks, systems, and
        tools that build upon ideas we will apply here. For now, let’s have
        some fun with Python on the Web.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
