<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Utility Modules</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Utility Modules"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="utility_modules"></a>Utility Modules</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>This section <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e72200"></a>presents the source code of the utility modules imported
        and used by the page scripts shown earlier. As installed, all of these
        modules live in the same directory as the CGI scripts, to make imports
        simple—they are found in the current working directory. There aren’t
        any new screenshots to see here because these are utilities, not CGI
        scripts. Moreover, these modules aren’t all that useful to study in
        isolation and are included here primarily to be referenced as you go
        through the CGI scripts’ code listed previously. See earlier in this
        chapter for additional details not repeated here.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="External Components and Configuration"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="external_components_and_configuration"></a>External Components and Configuration</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>When running <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e72213"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e72220"></a>PyMailCGI out of its own directory in the book
          examples distribution tree, it relies on a number of external
          modules that are potentially located elsewhere. Because all of these
          are accessible from the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>PP4E</em></span> package root, they
          can be imported with dotted-path names as usual, relative to the
          root. In case this setup ever changes, though, the module in Example 16-10 encapsulates the
          location of all external dependencies; if they ever move, this is
          the only file that must be changed.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id106"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 16-10. PP4E\Internet\Web\PyMailCgi\cgi-bin\externs.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
isolate all imports of modules that live outside of the PyMailCgi
directory, so that their location must only be changed here if moved;
we reuse the mailconfig settings that were used for pymailgui2 in ch13;
PP4E/'s container must be on sys.path to use the last import here;
"""

import sys
#sys.path.insert(0, r'C:\Users\mark\Stuff\Books\4E\PP4E\dev\Examples')
sys.path.insert(0, r'..\..\..\..')                       # relative to script dir

import mailconfig                                        # local version
from PP4E.Internet.Email import mailtools                # mailtools package</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>This module simply preimports all external names needed by
          PyMailCGI into its own namespace. See Chapter 13 for more on the <code class="epub__literal">mailtools</code> package modules’ source code
          imported and reused here; as for PyMailGUI, much of the magic behind
          PyMailCGI is actually implemented in <code class="epub__literal">mailtools</code>.</p>
<p>This version of PyMailCGI has its own local copy of the
          <code class="epub__literal">mailconfig</code> module we coded in
          Chapter 13 and expanded in Chapter 14, but it simply loads all
          attributes from the version we wrote in Chapter 13 to avoid redundancy, and
          customizes as desired; the local version is listed in Example 16-11.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id107"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 16-11. PP4E\Internet\Email\PyMailCgi\cgi-bin\mailconfig.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
user configuration settings for various email programs (PyMailCGI version);
email scripts get their server names and other email config options from
this module: change me to reflect your machine names, sig, and preferences;
"""

from PP4E.Internet.Email.mailconfig import *     # reuse ch13 configs
fetchlimit = 50    # 4E: maximum number headers/emails to fetch on loads (dflt=25)</pre>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="POP Mail Interface"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="pop_mail_interface"></a>POP Mail Interface</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Our next utility module, <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e72271"></a><a id="pop16.7.2"></a>the <code class="epub__literal">loadmail</code> file
          in Example 16-12, depends
          on external files and encapsulates access to mail on the remote POP
          server machine. It currently exports one function, <code class="epub__literal">loadmailhdrs</code>, which returns a list of the
          header text (only) of all mail in the specified POP account; callers
          are unaware of whether this mail is fetched over the Net, lives in
          memory, or is loaded from a persistent storage medium on the CGI
          server machine. That is by design—because <code class="epub__literal">loadmail</code> changes won’t impact its clients,
          it is mostly a hook for future expansion.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id108"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 16-12. PP4E\Internet\Web\PyMailCgi\cgi-bin\loadmail.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
mail list loader; future--change me to save mail list between CGI script runs,
to avoid reloading all mail each time;  this won't impact clients that use the
interfaces here if done well;  for now, to keep this simple, reloads all mail
for each list page;  2.0+: we now only load message headers (via TOP), not full
msg, but still fetch all hdrs for each index list--in-memory caches don't work
in a stateless CGI script, and require a real (likely server-side) database;
"""

from commonhtml import runsilent         # suppress prints (no verbose flag)
from externs    import mailtools         # shared with PyMailGUI

# load all mail from number 1 up
# this may trigger an exception

import sys
def progress(*args):  # not used
    sys.stderr.write(str(args) + '\n')

def loadmailhdrs(mailserver, mailuser, mailpswd):
    fetcher = mailtools.SilentMailFetcher(mailserver, mailuser, mailpswd)
    hdrs, sizes, full = fetcher.downloadAllHeaders()     # get list of hdr text
    return hdrs</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>This module is not much to look at—just an interface and calls
          to other modules. The <code class="epub__literal">mailtools.SilentMailFetcher</code> class (reused
          here from Chapter 13) uses the
          Python<a id="I_indexterm5_d1e72307"></a> <code class="epub__literal">poplib</code> module to
          fetch mail over sockets. The silent class prevents <code class="epub__literal">mailtools</code> print call statements from going
          to the HTML reply stream (although any exceptions are allowed to
          propagate there normally).</p>
<p>In this version, <code class="epub__literal">loadmail</code>
          loads just the header text portions of all incoming email to
          generate the selection list page. However, it still reloads headers
          every time you refetch the selection list page. As mentioned
          earlier, this scheme is better than the prior version, but it can
          still be slow if you have lots of email sitting on your server.
          Server-side database techniques, combined with a scheme for
          invalidating message lists on deletions and new receipts, might
          alleviate some of this bottleneck. Because the interface exported by
          <code class="epub__literal">loadmail</code> would likely not need to
          change to introduce a caching mechanism, clients of this module
          would likely still work unchanged.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="POP Password Encryption"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="pop_password_encryption"></a>POP Password Encryption</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>We <a id="py16.7.3"></a><a id="pass16.7.3"></a><a id="en16.7.3"></a>discussed PyMailCGI’s <a id="se16.7.3"></a>security protocols in the abstract earlier in this
          chapter. Here, we look at their concrete implementation. PyMailCGI
          passes user and password state information from page to page using
          hidden form fields and URL query parameters embedded in HTML reply
          pages. We studied these techniques in the prior chapter. Such data
          is transmitted as simple text over network sockets—within the HTML
          reply stream from the server, and as parameters in the request from
          the client. As such, it is subject to security issues.</p>
<p>This isn’t a concern if you are running a local web server on
          your machine, as all our examples do. The data is being shipped back
          and forth between two programs running on your computer, and it is
          not accessible to the outside world. If you want to install
          PyMailCGI on a remote web server machine, though, this can be an
          issue. Because this data is sensitive, we’d ideally like some way to
          hide it in transit and prevent it from being viewed in server logs.
          The policies used to address this have varied across this book’s
          lifespan, as options have come and gone:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The second edition of this book developed a custom
              encryption module using the standard library’s <code class="epub__literal">rotor</code> encryption module. This module
              was used to encrypt data inserted into the server’s reply
              stream, and then to later decrypt it when it was returned as a
              parameter from the client. Unfortunately, in Python 2.4 and
              later, the <code class="epub__literal">rotor</code> module is no
              longer available in the standard library; it was withdrawn due
              to security concerns. This seems a somewhat extreme measure
              (<code class="epub__literal">rotor</code> was adequate for
              simpler applications), but <code class="epub__literal">rotor</code> is no longer a usable solution
              in recent releases.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The third edition of this book extended the model of the
              second, by adding support for encrypting passwords with the
              third-party and open source<a id="I_indexterm5_d1e72375"></a> PyCrypto system. Regrettably, this system is
              available for Python 2.X but still not for 3.X as I write these
              words for the fourth edition in mid-2010 (though some progress
              on a 3.X port has been made). Moreover, the Python web server
              classes used by the locally running server deployed for this
              book still does not support HTTPS in <span>Python 3.1—</span>the ultimate solution
              to web security, which I’ll say more about in a moment.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Because of all the foregoing, this fourth edition has
              legacy support for both <code class="epub__literal">rotor</code>
              and PyCrypto if they are installed, but falls back on a
              simplistic password obfuscator which may be different at each
              PyMailCGI installation. Since this release is something of a
              prototype in general, further refinement of this model,
              including support for HTTPS under more robust web servers, is
              left as exercise.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>In general, there are a variety of approaches to encrypting
          information transferred back and forth between client and server.
          Unfortunately again, none is easily implemented for this chapter’s
          example, none is universally applicable, and most involve tools or
          techniques that are well beyond the scope and size constraints of
          this text. To sample some of the available options, though, the
          sections that follow contain a brief rundown of some of the common
          techniques in this domain.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Manual data encryption: rotor (defunct)"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="manual_data_encryption_colon_rotor_open"></a>Manual data encryption: rotor (defunct)</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In principle, CGI scripts can manually encrypt any sensitive
            data they insert into reply streams, as PyMailCGI did in this
            book’s second edition. With the removal of the<a id="I_indexterm5_d1e72395"></a> <code class="epub__literal">rotor</code> module,
            though, Python 2.4’s standard library has no encryption tools for
            this task. Moreover, using the original <code class="epub__literal">rotor</code> module’s code is not advisable
            from a maintenance perspective and would not be straightforward,
            since it was coded in the C language (it’s not a simple matter of
            copying a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>.py</em></span> file from a prior release).
            Unless you are using an older version of Python, <code class="epub__literal">rotor</code> is not a real option.</p>
<p>Mostly for historical interest and comparison today, this
            module was used as follows. It was based on an Enigma-style
            encryption scheme: we make a new rotor object with a key (and
            optionally, a rotor count) and call methods to encrypt and
            decrypt:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e72413"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import rotor</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>r = rotor.newrotor('pymailcgi')</code></strong>        # (key, [,numrotors])
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>r.encrypt('abc123')</code></strong>                    # may return nonprintable chars
' \323an\021\224'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = r.encrypt('spam123')</code></strong>               # result is same len as input
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x</code></strong>
'* _\344\011pY'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>len(x)</code></strong>
7
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>r.decrypt(x)</code></strong>
'spam123'</pre>
<p>Notice that the same <code class="epub__literal">rotor</code> object can encrypt multiple
            strings, that the result may contain nonprintable characters
            (printed as <code class="epub__literal">\ascii</code> escape codes
            when displayed), and that the result is always the same length as
            the original string. Most important, a string encrypted with
            <code class="epub__literal">rotor</code> can be decrypted in a
            different process (e.g., in a later CGI script) if we re-create
            the <code class="epub__literal">rotor</code> object:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e72451"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import rotor</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>r = rotor.newrotor('pymailcgi')</code></strong>        # can be decrypted in new process
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>r.decrypt('* _\344\011pY')</code></strong>             # use "\ascii" escapes for two chars
'spam123'</pre>
<p>Our <code class="epub__literal">secret</code> module by
            default simply used <code class="epub__literal">rotor</code> to
            encrypt and did no additional encoding of its own. It relies on
            URL encoding when the password is embedded in a URL parameter and
            on HTML escaping when the password is embedded in hidden form
            fields. For URLs, the following sorts of calls occur:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e72470"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from secret import encode, decode</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = encode('abc$#&lt;&gt;&amp;+')</code></strong>                 # CGI scripts do this
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x</code></strong>
' \323a\016\317\326\023\0163'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import urllib.parse</code></strong>                     # urlencode does this
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y = urllib.parse.quote_plus(x)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y</code></strong>
'+%d3a%0e%cf%d6%13%0e3'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a = urllib.parse.unquote_plus(y)</code></strong>        # cgi.FieldStorage does this
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a</code></strong>
' \323a\016\317\326\023\0163'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>decode(a)</code></strong>                               # CGI scripts do this
'abc$#&lt;&gt;&amp;+'</pre>
<p>Although <code class="epub__literal">rotor</code> itself is
            not a widely viable option today, these same techniques can be
            used with other encryption schemes.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Manual data encryption: PyCrypto"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="manual_data_encryption_colon_pycrypto"></a>Manual data encryption: PyCrypto</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>A variety of encryption tools are available in the
            third-party public domain, including the popular Python
            Cryptography Toolkit, also known as<a id="I_indexterm5_d1e72510"></a> PyCrypto. This package adds built-in modules for
            private and public key algorithms such as AES, DES, IDEA, and RSA
            encryption, provides a Python module for reading and decrypting
            PGP files, and much more. Here is an example of using AES
            encryption, run after installing PyCrypto on my machine with a
            Windows self-installer:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e72514"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from Crypto.Cipher import AES&gt;&gt;&gt; AES.block_size16</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mykey   = 'pymailcgi'.ljust(16, '-')</code></strong>      # key must be 16, 24, or 32 bytes
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mykey</code></strong>
'pymailcgi-------'
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>password   = 'Already got one.'</code></strong>           # length must be multiple of 16
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>aesobj1    = AES.new(mykey, AES.MODE_ECB)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>cyphertext = aesobj1.encrypt(password)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>cyphertext</code></strong>
'\xfez\x95\xb7\x07_"\xd4\xb6\xe3r\x07g~X]'
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>aesobj2  = AES.new(mykey, AES.MODE_ECB)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>aesobj2.decrypt(cyphertext)</code></strong>
'Already got one.'</pre>
<p>This interface is similar to that of the original <code class="epub__literal">rotor</code> module, but it uses better
            encryption algorithms. AES is a popular private key encryption
            algorithm. It requires a fixed length key and a data string to
            have a length that is a multiple of 16 bytes.</p>
<p>Unfortunately, this is not part of standard Python, may be
            subject to U.S. (and other countries’) export controls in binary
            form at this writing, and is too large and complex a topic for us
            to address in this text. This makes it less than universally
            applicable; at the least, shipping its binary installer with this
            book’s examples package may require legal expertise. And since
            data encryption is a core requirement of PyMailCGI, this seems too
            strong an external dependency.</p>
<p>The real showstopper for this book’s fourth edition, though,
            is that PyCrypto is a 2.X-only system not yet available for Python
            3.X today; this makes it unusable with the examples in this book.
            Still, if you are able to install and learn PyCrypto, this can be
            a powerful solution. For more details, search for PyCrypto on the
            Web.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="HTTPS: Secure HTTP transmissions"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="https_colon_secure_http_transmissions"></a>HTTPS: Secure HTTP transmissions</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p><a name="secure HTTP"></a>Provided you are using a server that supports secure HTTP,
            you can simply write HTML and delegate the encryption to the web
            server and browser. As long as both ends of the transmission
            support this protocol, it is probably the ultimate encrypting
            solution for web security. In fact, it is used by most e-commerce
            sites on the Web today.</p>
<p>Secure HTTP (HTTPS) <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e72560"></a>is designated in URLs by using the protocol name
            <code class="epub__literal">https://</code> rather than <code class="epub__literal">http://</code>. Under HTTPS, data is still sent
            with the usual HTTP protocol, but it is encrypted with the SSL
            secure sockets layer. HTTPS is supported by most web browsers and
            can be configured in most web servers, including Apache and the
            <span class="epub__keep-together">webserver.py</span> script that
            we are running locally in this chapter. If SSL support is compiled
            into your Python, Python sockets support it with <code class="epub__literal">ssl</code> module socket wrappers, and the
            client-side module <code class="epub__literal">urllib.request</code> we met in Chapter 13 supports HTTPS.</p>
<p>Unfortunately, enabling secure HTTP in a web server requires
            more configuration and background knowledge than we can cover
            here, and it may require installing tools outside the standard
            Python release. If you want to explore this issue further, search
            the Web for resources on setting up a Python-coded HTTPS server
            that supports SSL secure communications. As one possible lead, see
            the third-party <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e72584"></a>M2Crypto package’s OpenSSL wrapper support for
            password encryption, HTTPS in urllib, and more; this could be a
            viable alternative to manual encryption, but it is not yet
            available for Python 3.X at this writing.</p>
<p>Also see the Web for more details on HTTPS in general. It is
            not impossible that some of the HTTPS extensions for Python’s
            standard web server classes may make their way into the Python
            standard library in the future, but they have not in recent years,
            perhaps reflecting the classes’ intended roles—they provide
            limited functionality for use in locally running servers oriented
            toward testing, not deployment.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Secure cookies"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="secure_cookies"></a>Secure cookies</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>It’s possible to <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e72595"></a>replace the form fields and query parameter
            PyMailCGI currently generates with client-side cookies marked as
            secure. Such cookies are automatically encrypted when sent.
            Unfortunately again, marking a cookie as secure simply means that
            it can be transmitted only if the communications channel with the
            host is secure. It does not provide any additional encryption.
            Because of this, this option really just begs the question; it
            still requires an HTTPS server.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="The secret.py module"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="the_secret.py_module"></a>The secret.py module</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As you can probably tell, web security is a larger topic
            than we have time to address here. Because of that, the <code class="epub__literal">secret.py</code> module in Example 16-13 finesses the
            issue, by trying a variety of approaches in turn:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>If you are able to fetch and install the third-party
                PyCrypto system described earlier, the module will use that
                package’s AES tools to manually encrypt password data when
                transmitted together with a username.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>If not, it will try <code class="epub__literal">rotor</code> next, if you’re able to find
                and install the original rotor module in the version of Python
                that you’re using.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>And finally, it falls back on a very simplistic default
                character code shuffling obfuscation scheme, which you can
                replace with one of your own if you install this program on
                the Internet at large.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>See Example 16-13
            for more details; it uses function definitions nested in <code class="epub__literal">if</code> statements to generate the selected
            encryption scheme’s functions at run time.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id109"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 16-13. PP4E\Internet\Web\PyMailCgi\cgi-bin\secret.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
###############################################################################
PyMailCGI encodes the POP password whenever it is sent to/from client over
the Net with a username, as hidden text fields or explicit URL params; uses
encode/decode functions in this module to encrypt the pswd--upload your own
version of this module to use a different encryption mechanism or key; pymail
doesn't save the password on the server, and doesn't echo pswd as typed,
but this isn't 100% safe--this module file itself might be vulnerable;
HTTPS may be better and simpler but Python web server classes don't support;
###############################################################################
"""

import sys, time
dayofweek = time.localtime(time.time())[6]    # for custom schemes
forceReadablePassword = False

###############################################################################
# string encoding schemes
###############################################################################

if not forceReadablePassword:
    ###########################################################
    # don't do anything by default: the urllib.parse.quote
    # or cgi.escape calls in commonhtml.py will escape the
    # password as needed to embed in URL or HTML; the
    # cgi module undoes escapes automatically for us;
    ###########################################################

    def stringify(old):   return old
    def unstringify(old): return old

else:
    ###########################################################
    # convert encoded string to/from a string of digit chars,
    # to avoid problems with some special/nonprintable chars,
    # but still leave the result semi-readable (but encrypted);
    # some browsers had problems with escaped ampersands, etc.;
    ###########################################################

    separator = '-'

    def stringify(old):
        new = ''
        for char in old:
            ascii = str(ord(char))
            new   = new + separator + ascii       # '-ascii-ascii-ascii'
        return new

    def unstringify(old):
        new = ''
        for ascii in old.split(separator)[1:]:
            new = new + chr(int(ascii))
        return new

###############################################################################
# encryption schemes: try PyCrypto, then rotor, then simple/custom scheme
###############################################################################

useCrypto = useRotor = True
try:
   import Crypto
except:
    useCrypto = False
    try:
        import rotor
    except:
        useRotor = False

if useCrypto:
    #######################################################
    # use third-party pycrypto package's AES algorithm
    # assumes pswd has no '\0' on the right: used to pad
    # change the private key here if you install this
    #######################################################

    sys.stderr.write('using PyCrypto\n')
    from Crypto.Cipher import AES
    mykey = 'pymailcgi3'.ljust(16, '-')       # key must be 16, 24, or 32 bytes

    def do_encode(pswd):
        over = len(pswd) % 16
        if over: pswd += '\0' * (16-over)     # pad: len must be multiple of 16
        aesobj = AES.new(mykey, AES.MODE_ECB)
        return aesobj.encrypt(pswd)

    def do_decode(pswd):
        aesobj = AES.new(mykey, AES.MODE_ECB)
        pswd   = aesobj.decrypt(pswd)
        return pswd.rstrip('\0')

elif useRotor:
    #######################################################
    # use the standard lib's rotor module to encode pswd
    # this does a better job of encryption than code above
    # unfortunately, it is no longer available in Py 2.4+
    #######################################################

    sys.stderr.write('using rotor\n')
    import rotor
    mykey = 'pymailcgi3'

    def do_encode(pswd):
        robj = rotor.newrotor(mykey)              # use enigma encryption
        return robj.encrypt(pswd)

    def do_decode(pswd):
        robj = rotor.newrotor(mykey)
        return robj.decrypt(pswd)

else:
    #######################################################
    # use our own custom scheme as a last resort
    # shuffle characters in some reversible fashion
    # caveat: very simple -- replace with one of your own
    #######################################################

    sys.stderr.write('using simple\n')
    adder = 1

    def do_encode(pswd):
        pswd = 'vs' + pswd + '48'
        res = ''
        for char in pswd:
            res += chr(ord(char) + adder)    # inc each ASCII code
        return str(res)

    def do_decode(pswd):
        pswd = pswd[2:-2]
        res = ''
        for char in pswd:
            res += chr(ord(char) - adder)
        return res

###############################################################################
# top-level entry points
###############################################################################

def encode(pswd):
    return stringify(do_encode(pswd))       # encrypt plus string encode

def decode(pswd):
    return do_decode(unstringify(pswd))</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>In addition to encryption, this module also implements an
            encoding method for already encrypted strings, which transforms
            them to and from printable characters. By default, the encoding
            functions do nothing, and the system relies on straight URL or
            HTML encoding of the encrypted string. An optional encoding scheme
            translates the encrypted string to a string of ASCII code digits
            separated by dashes. Either encoding method makes nonprintable
            characters in the encrypted string printable.</p>
<p>To illustrate, let’s test this module’s tools interactively.
            For this test, we set <code class="epub__literal">force</code><code class="epub__literal">Readable</code><code class="epub__literal">Password</code> to <code class="epub__literal">True</code>. The top-level entry points encode
            and decode into printable characters (for illustration purposes,
            this test reflects a Python 2.X installation where PyCrypto is
            installed):</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e72652"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from secret import *</code></strong>
using PyCrypto
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>data = encode('spam@123+')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>data</code></strong>
'-47-248-2-170-107-242-175-18-227-249-53-130-14-140-163-107'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>decode(data)</code></strong>
'spam@123+'</pre>
<p>But there are actually two steps to this—encryption and
            printable encoding:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e72668"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>raw = do_encode('spam@123+')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>raw</code></strong>
'/\xf8\x02\xaak\xf2\xaf\x12\xe3\xf95\x82\x0e\x8c\xa3k'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>text = stringify(raw)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>text</code></strong>
'-47-248-2-170-107-242-175-18-227-249-53-130-14-140-163-107'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>len(raw), len(text)</code></strong>
(16, 58)</pre>
<p>Here’s what the encoding looks like without the extra
            printable encoding:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e72688"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>raw = do_encode('spam@123+')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>raw</code></strong>
'/\xf8\x02\xaak\xf2\xaf\x12\xe3\xf95\x82\x0e\x8c\xa3k'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>do_decode(raw)</code></strong>
'spam@123+'</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Rolling your own encryptor"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="rolling_your_own_encryptor"></a>Rolling your own encryptor</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As is, PyMailCGI avoids ever passing the POP account
            username and password across the Net together in a single
            transaction, unless the password is encrypted or obfuscated
            according to the module <code class="epub__literal">secret.py</code> on the server. This module can
            be different everywhere PyMailCGI is installed, and it can be
            uploaded anew in the future—encrypted passwords aren’t persistent
            and live only for the duration of one mail-processing interaction
            session. Provided you don’t publish your encryption code or its
            private keys, your data will be as secure as the custom encryption
            module you provide on your own server.</p>
<p>If you wish to use this system on the general Internet,
            you’ll want to tailor this code. Ideally, you’ll install PyCrypto
            and change the private key string. Barring that, replace Example 16-13 with a custom
            encryption coding scheme of your own or deploy one of the general
            techniques mentioned earlier, such as an HTTPS-capable web server.
            In any event, this software makes no guarantees; the security of
            your password is ultimately up to you to ensure.</p>
<p>For additional information on security tools and techniques,
            search the Web and consult books geared exclusively toward web
            programming techniques. As this system is a prototype at large,
            security is just one of a handful of limitations which would have
            to be more fully addressed in a robust production-grade <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e72713"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e72715"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e72717"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e72719"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e72721"></a>version.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note"><h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p>Because the encryption schemes used by PyMailCGI are
              reversible, it is possible to reconstruct my email account’s
              password if you happen to see its encrypted form in a
              screenshot, unless the private key listed in <code class="epub__literal">secret.py</code> was different when the tests
              shown were run. To sidestep this issue, the email account used
              in all of this book’s examples is temporary and will be deleted
              by the time you read these words. Please use an email account of
              your own to test-drive the system.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Common Utilities Module"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="common_utilities_module"></a>Common Utilities Module</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Finally, the file<a id="py16.7.4"></a> <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>commonhtml.py</em></span> in Example 16-14 is the Grand
          Central Station of this application—its code is used and reused by
          just about every other file in the system. Most of it is
          self-explanatory, and we’ve already met most of its core idea
          earlier, in conjunction with the CGI scripts that use it.</p>
<p>I haven’t talked about its <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>debugging</em></span>
          support, though. Notice that this module assigns <code class="epub__literal">sys.stderr</code> to <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code>, in an attempt to force the
          text of Python error messages to show up in the client’s browser
          (remember, uncaught exceptions print details to <code class="epub__literal">sys.stderr</code>). <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e72762"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e72767"></a>That works sometimes in PyMailCGI, but not always—the
          error text shows up in a web page only if a <code class="epub__literal">page_header</code> call has already printed a
          response preamble. If you want to see all error messages, make sure
          you call <code class="epub__literal">page_header</code> (or print
          <code class="epub__literal">Content-type:</code> lines manually)
          before any other processing.</p>
<p>This module also defines functions that dump raw CGI
          environment information to the browser (<code class="epub__literal">dumpstatepage</code>), and that wrap calls to
          functions that print status messages so that their output isn’t
          added to the HTML stream (<code class="epub__literal">runsilent</code>). A version 3.0 addition also
          attempts to work around the fact that built-in print calls can fail
          in Python 3.1 for some types of Unicode text (e.g., non-ASCII
          character sets in Internationalized headers), by forcing binary mode
          and bytes for the output stream (<code class="epub__literal">print</code>).</p>
<p>I’ll leave the discovery of any remaining magic in the code in
          Example 16-14 up to you,
          the reader. You are hereby admonished to go forth and read, refer,
          and reuse.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_internet-id110"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 16-14. PP4E\Internet\Web\PyMailCgi\cgi-bin\commonhtml.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">#!/usr/bin/python
"""
##################################################################################
generate standard page header, list, and footer HTML;  isolates HTML generation
related details in this file;  text printed here goes over a socket to the client,
to create parts of a new web page in the web browser;  uses one print per line,
instead of string blocks;  uses urllib to escape params in URL links auto from a
dict, but cgi.escape to put them in HTML hidden fields;  some tools here may be
useful outside pymailcgi;  could also return the HTML generated here instead of
printing it, so it could be included in other pages;  could also structure as a
single CGI script that gets and tests a next action name as a hidden form field;
caveat: this system works, but was largely written during a two-hour layover at
the Chicago O'Hare airport: there is much room for improvement and optimization;
##################################################################################
"""

import cgi, urllib.parse, sys, os

# 3.0: Python 3.1 has issues printing some decoded str as text to stdout
import builtins
bstdout = open(sys.stdout.fileno(), 'wb')
def print(*args, end='\n'):
    try:
        builtins.print(*args, end=end)
        sys.stdout.flush()
    except:
        for arg in args:
            bstdout.write(str(arg).encode('utf-8'))
        if end: bstdout.write(end.encode('utf-8'))
        bstdout.flush()

sys.stderr = sys.stdout           # show error messages in browser
from externs import mailconfig    # from a package somewhere on server
from externs import mailtools     # need parser for header decoding
parser = mailtools.MailParser()   # one per process in this module

# my cgi address root
#urlroot = 'http://starship.python.net/~lutz/PyMailCgi/'
#urlroot = 'http://localhost:8000/cgi-bin/'

urlroot  = ''  # use minimal, relative paths

def pageheader(app='PyMailCGI', color='#FFFFFF', kind='main', info=''):
    print('Content-type: text/html\n')
    print('&lt;html&gt;&lt;head&gt;&lt;title&gt;%s: %s page (PP4E)&lt;/title&gt;&lt;/head&gt;' % (app, kind))
    print('&lt;body bgcolor="%s"&gt;&lt;h1&gt;%s %s&lt;/h1&gt;&lt;hr&gt;' % (color, app, (info or kind)))

def pagefooter(root='pymailcgi.html'):
    print('&lt;/p&gt;&lt;hr&gt;&lt;a href="http://www.python.org"&gt;')
    print('&lt;img src="../PythonPoweredSmall.gif" ')
    print('align=left alt="[Python Logo]" border=0 hspace=15&gt;&lt;/a&gt;')
    print('&lt;a href="../%s"&gt;Back to root page&lt;/a&gt;' % root)
    print('&lt;/body&gt;&lt;/html&gt;')

def formatlink(cgiurl, parmdict):
    """
    make "%url?key=val&amp;key=val" query link from a dictionary;
    escapes str() of all key and val with %xx, changes ' ' to +
    note that URL escapes are different from HTML (cgi.escape)
    """
    parmtext = urllib.parse.urlencode(parmdict)     # calls parse.quote_plus
    return '%s?%s' % (cgiurl, parmtext)             # urllib does all the work

def pagelistsimple(linklist):                       # show simple ordered list
    print('&lt;ol&gt;')
    for (text, cgiurl, parmdict) in linklist:
        link = formatlink(cgiurl, parmdict)
        text = cgi.escape(text)
        print('&lt;li&gt;&lt;a href="%s"&gt;\n    %s&lt;/a&gt;' % (link, text))
    print('&lt;/ol&gt;')

def pagelisttable(linklist):                        # show list in a table
    print('&lt;p&gt;&lt;table border&gt;')                      # escape text to be safe
    for (text, cgiurl, parmdict) in linklist:
        link = formatlink(cgiurl, parmdict)
        text = cgi.escape(text)
        print('&lt;tr&gt;&lt;th&gt;&lt;a href="%s"&gt;View&lt;/a&gt;&lt;td&gt;\n %s' % (link, text))
    print('&lt;/table&gt;')

def listpage(linkslist, kind='selection list'):
    pageheader(kind=kind)
    pagelisttable(linkslist)         # [('text', 'cgiurl', {'parm':'value'})]
    pagefooter()

def messagearea(headers, text, extra=''):               # extra for readonly
    addrhdrs = ('From', 'To', 'Cc', 'Bcc')              # decode names only
    print('&lt;table border cellpadding=3&gt;')
    for hdr in ('From', 'To', 'Cc', 'Subject'):
        rawhdr = headers.get(hdr, '?')
        if hdr not in addrhdrs:
            dechdr = parser.decodeHeader(rawhdr)        # 3.0: decode for display
        else:                                           # encoded on sends
            dechdr = parser.decodeAddrHeader(rawhdr)    # email names only
        val = cgi.escape(dechdr, quote=1)
        print('&lt;tr&gt;&lt;th align=right&gt;%s:' % hdr)
        print('    &lt;td&gt;&lt;input type=text ')
        print('    name=%s value="%s" %s size=60&gt;' % (hdr, val, extra))
    print('&lt;tr&gt;&lt;th align=right&gt;Text:')
    print('&lt;td&gt;&lt;textarea name=text cols=80 rows=10 %s&gt;' % extra)
    print('%s\n&lt;/textarea&gt;&lt;/table&gt;' % (cgi.escape(text) or '?'))  # if has &lt;/&gt;s

def viewattachmentlinks(partnames):
    """
    create hyperlinks to locally saved part/attachment files
    when clicked, user's web browser will handle opening
    assumes just one user, only valid while viewing 1 msg
    """
    print('&lt;hr&gt;&lt;table border cellpadding=3&gt;&lt;tr&gt;&lt;th&gt;Parts:')
    for filename in partnames:
        basename = os.path.basename(filename)
        filename  = filename.replace('\\', '/') # Windows hack
        print('&lt;td&gt;&lt;a href=../%s&gt;%s&lt;/a&gt;' % (filename, basename))
    print('&lt;/table&gt;&lt;hr&gt;')

def viewpage(msgnum, headers, text, form, parts=[]):
    """
    on View + select (generated link click)
    very subtle thing: at this point, pswd was URL encoded in the
    link, and then unencoded by CGI input parser; it's being embedded
    in HTML here, so we use cgi.escape; this usually sends nonprintable
    chars in the hidden field's HTML, but works on ie and ns anyhow:
    in url:  ?user=lutz&amp;mnum=3&amp;pswd=%8cg%c2P%1e%f0%5b%c5J%1c%f3&amp;...
    in html: &lt;input type=hidden name=pswd value="...nonprintables.."&gt;
    could urllib.parse.quote html field here too, but must urllib.parse.unquote
    in next script (which precludes passing the inputs in a URL instead
    of the form); can also fall back on numeric string fmt in secret.py
    """
    pageheader(kind='View')
    user, pswd, site = list(map(cgi.escape, getstandardpopfields(form)))
    print('&lt;form method=post action="%sonViewPageAction.py"&gt;' % urlroot)
    print('&lt;input type=hidden name=mnum value="%s"&gt;' % msgnum)
    print('&lt;input type=hidden name=user value="%s"&gt;' % user)    # from page|url
    print('&lt;input type=hidden name=site value="%s"&gt;' % site)    # for deletes
    print('&lt;input type=hidden name=pswd value="%s"&gt;' % pswd)    # pswd encoded
    messagearea(headers, text, 'readonly')
    if parts: viewattachmentlinks(parts)

    # onViewPageAction.quotetext needs date passed in page
    print('&lt;input type=hidden name=Date value="%s"&gt;' % headers.get('Date','?'))
    print('&lt;table&gt;&lt;tr&gt;&lt;th align=right&gt;Action:')
    print('&lt;td&gt;&lt;select name=action&gt;')
    print('    &lt;option&gt;Reply&lt;option&gt;Forward&lt;option&gt;Delete&lt;/select&gt;')
    print('&lt;input type=submit value="Next"&gt;')
    print('&lt;/table&gt;&lt;/form&gt;')                     # no 'reset' needed here
    pagefooter()

def sendattachmentwidgets(maxattach=3):
    print('&lt;p&gt;&lt;b&gt;Attach:&lt;/b&gt;&lt;br&gt;')
    for i in range(1, maxattach+1):
        print('&lt;input size=80 type=file name=attach%d&gt;&lt;br&gt;' % i)
    print('&lt;/p&gt;')

def editpage(kind, headers={}, text=''):
    # on Send, View+select+Reply, View+select+Fwd
    pageheader(kind=kind)
    print('&lt;p&gt;&lt;form enctype="multipart/form-data" method=post', end=' ')
    print('action="%sonEditPageSend.py"&gt;' % urlroot)
    if mailconfig.mysignature:
        text = '\n%s\n%s' % (mailconfig.mysignature, text)
    messagearea(headers, text)
    sendattachmentwidgets()
    print('&lt;input type=submit value="Send"&gt;')
    print('&lt;input type=reset  value="Reset"&gt;')
    print('&lt;/form&gt;')
    pagefooter()

def errorpage(message, stacktrace=True):
    pageheader(kind='Error')                        # was sys.exc_type/exc_value
    exc_type, exc_value, exc_tb = sys.exc_info()
    print('&lt;h2&gt;Error Description&lt;/h2&gt;&lt;p&gt;', message)
    print('&lt;h2&gt;Python Exception&lt;/h2&gt;&lt;p&gt;',  cgi.escape(str(exc_type)))
    print('&lt;h2&gt;Exception details&lt;/h2&gt;&lt;p&gt;', cgi.escape(str(exc_value)))
    if stacktrace:
        print('&lt;h2&gt;Exception traceback&lt;/h2&gt;&lt;p&gt;&lt;pre&gt;')
        import traceback
        traceback.print_tb(exc_tb, None, sys.stdout)
        print('&lt;/pre&gt;')
    pagefooter()

def confirmationpage(kind):
    pageheader(kind='Confirmation')
    print('&lt;h2&gt;%s operation was successful&lt;/h2&gt;' % kind)
    print('&lt;p&gt;Press the link below to return to the main page.&lt;/p&gt;')
    pagefooter()

def getfield(form, field, default=''):
    # emulate dictionary get method
    return (field in form and form[field].value) or default

def getstandardpopfields(form):
    """
    fields can arrive missing or '' or with a real value
    hardcoded in a URL; default to mailconfig settings
    """
    return (getfield(form, 'user', mailconfig.popusername),
            getfield(form, 'pswd', '?'),
            getfield(form, 'site', mailconfig.popservername))

def getstandardsmtpfields(form):
    return  getfield(form, 'site', mailconfig.smtpservername)

def runsilent(func, args):
    """
    run a function without writing stdout
    ex: suppress print's in imported tools
    else they go to the client/browser
    """
    class Silent:
        def write(self, line): pass
    save_stdout = sys.stdout
    sys.stdout  = Silent()                        # send print to dummy object
    try:                                          # which has a write method
        result = func(*args)                      # try to return func result
    finally:                                      # but always restore stdout
        sys.stdout = save_stdout
    return result

def dumpstatepage(exhaustive=0):
    """
    for debugging: call me at top of a CGI to
    generate a new page with CGI state details
    """
    if exhaustive:
        cgi.test()                       # show page with form, environ, etc.
    else:
        pageheader(kind='state dump')
        form = cgi.FieldStorage()        # show just form fields names/values
        cgi.print_form(form)
        pagefooter()
    sys.exit()

def selftest(showastable=False):                    # make phony web page
    links = [                                       # [(text, url, {parms})]
        ('text1', urlroot + 'page1.cgi', {'a':1}),
        ('text2', urlroot + 'page1.cgi', {'a':2, 'b':'3'}),
        ('text3', urlroot + 'page2.cgi', {'x':'a b', 'y':'a&lt;b&amp;c', 'z':'?'}),
        ('te&lt;&gt;4', urlroot + 'page2.cgi', {'&lt;x&gt;':'', 'y':'&lt;a&gt;', 'z':None})]
    pageheader(kind='View')
    if showastable:
        pagelisttable(links)
    else:
        pagelistsimple(links)
    pagefooter()

if __name__ == '__main__':                          # when run, not imported
    selftest(len(sys.argv) &gt; 1)                     # HTML goes to stdout</pre>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
