<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Web Scripting Trade-Offs</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Web Scripting Trade-Offs"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="web_scripting_trade-offs"></a>Web Scripting Trade-Offs</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As shown in <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e72808"></a><a id="sc16.8"></a>this chapter, PyMailCGI is still something of a system
        in the making, but it does work as advertised: when it is installed on
        a remote server machine, by pointing a browser at the main page’s URL,
        I can check and send email from anywhere I happen to be, as long as I
        can find a machine with a web browser (and can live with the
        limitations of a prototype). In fact, any machine and browser will do:
        Python doesn’t have to be installed anew, and I don’t need POP or SMTP
        access on the client machine itself. That’s not the case with the
        PyMailGUI client-side program we wrote in Chapter 14. This property is especially useful
        at sites that allow web access but restrict more direct protocols such
        as POP email.</p>
<p>But before we all jump on the collective Internet bandwagon and
        utterly abandon traditional desktop APIs such as tkinter, a few words
        of larger context may be in order in conclusion.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="PyMailCGI Versus PyMailGUI"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="pymailcgi_versus_pymailgui"></a>PyMailCGI Versus PyMailGUI</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Besides illustrating <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e72825"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e72832"></a>larger CGI applications in general, the PyMailGUI and
          PyMailCGI examples were chosen for this book on purpose to
          underscore some of the trade-offs you run into when building
          applications to run on the Web. PyMailGUI and PyMailCGI do roughly
          the same things but are radically different in
          implementation:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>PyMailGUI</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>This is a traditional “desktop” user-interface program:
                it runs entirely on the local machine, calls out to an
                in-process GUI API library to implement interfaces, and talks
                to the Internet through sockets only when it has to (e.g., to
                load or send email on demand). User requests are routed
                immediately to callback handler method functions running
                locally and in-process, with shared variables and memory that
                automatically retain state between requests. As mentioned,
                because its memory is retained between events, PyMailGUI can
                cache messages in memory—it loads email headers and selected
                mails only once, fetches only newly arrived message headers on
                future loads, and has enough information to perform general
                inbox synchronization checks. On deletions, PyMailGUI can
                simply refresh its memory cache of loaded headers without
                having to reload from the server. Moreover, because PyMailGUI
                runs as a single process on the local machine, it can leverage
                tools such as multithreading to allow mail transfers to
                overlap in time (you can send while a load is in progress),
                and it can more easily support extra functionality such as
                local mail file saves and opens.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>PyMailCGI</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Like all CGI systems, PyMailCGI consists of scripts that
                reside and run on a server machine and generate HTML to
                interact with a user’s web browser on the client machine. It
                runs only in the context of a web browser or other HTML-aware
                client, and it handles user requests by running CGI scripts on
                the web server. Without manually managed state retention
                techniques such as a server-side database system, there is no
                equivalent to the persistent memory of PyMailGUI—each request
                handler runs autonomously, with no memory except that which is
                explicitly passed along by prior states as hidden form fields,
                URL query parameters, and so on. Because of that, PyMailCGI
                currently must reload all email headers whenever it needs to
                display the selection list, naively reloads messages already
                fetched earlier in the session, and cannot perform general
                inbox synchronization tests. This can be improved by more
                advanced state-retention schemes such as cookies and
                server-side databases, but none is as straightforward as the
                persistent in-process memory of PyMailGUI.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The Web Versus the Desktop"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_web_versus_the_desktop"></a>The Web Versus the Desktop</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Of course, <a id="py16.8.2"></a>these systems’ specific functionality isn’t exactly
          the same—PyMailCGI is roughly a functional subset of PyMailGUI—but
          they are close enough to capture common trade-offs. On a basic
          level, both of these systems use the Python POP and SMTP modules to
          fetch and send email through sockets. The implementation
          alternatives they represent, though, have some critical
          ramifications that you should consider when evaluating the prospect
          of delivering systems on the Web:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Performance costs</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Networks are slower than CPUs</em></span>. As
                implemented, PyMailCGI <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e72876"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e72881"></a>isn’t nearly as fast or as complete as
                PyMailGUI. In PyMailCGI, every time the user clicks a Submit
                button, the request goes across the network (it’s routed to
                another program on the same machine for “localhost,” but this
                setup is for testing, not deployment). More specifically,
                every user request incurs a network transfer overhead, every
                callback handler may take the form of a newly spawned process
                or thread on most servers, parameters come in as text strings
                that must be parsed out, and the lack of state information on
                the server between pages means that either mail needs to be
                <span>reloaded</span> often or state
                retention options must be employed which are slower and more
                complex than shared process memory.</p>
<p>In contrast, user clicks in PyMailGUI trigger in-process
                function calls rather than network traffic and program
                executions, and state is easily saved as Python in-process
                variables. Even with an ultra-fast Internet connection, a
                server-side CGI system is slower than a client-side program.
                To be fair, some tkinter operations are sent to the underlying
                Tcl library as strings, too, which must be parsed. This may
                change in time, but the contrast here is with CGI scripts
                versus GUI libraries in general. Function calls will probably
                always beat network transfers.</p>
<p>Some of these bottlenecks may be designed away at the
                cost of extra program complexity. For instance, some web
                servers use threads and process pools to minimize process
                creation for CGI scripts. Moreover, as we’ve seen, some state
                information can be manually passed along from page to page in
                hidden form fields, generated URL parameters, and client-side
                cookies, and state can be saved between pages in a
                concurrently accessible database to minimize mail reloads. But
                there’s no getting past the fact that routing events and data
                over a network to scripts is slower than calling a Python
                function directly. Not every application must care, but some
                do.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Complexity costs</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>HTML isn’t pretty</em></span>. Because
                PyMailCGI must generate HTML to interact with the user in a
                web browser, it is also more complex (or at least, less
                readable) than PyMailGUI. In some sense, CGI scripts embed
                HTML code in Python; templating systems such as PSP often take
                the opposite approach. Either way, because the end result of
                this is a mixture of two very different languages, creating an
                interface with HTML in a CGI script can be much less
                straightforward than making calls to a GUI API such as
                tkinter.</p>
<p>Witness, for example, all the care we’ve taken to escape
                HTML and URLs in this chapter’s examples; such constraints are
                grounded in the nature of HTML. Furthermore, changing the
                system to retain loaded-mail list state in a database between
                pages would introduce further complexities to the CGI-based
                solution (and, most likely, yet another language such as SQL,
                even if it only appears near the bottom of the software
                stack). And secure HTTP would eliminate the manual encryption
                complexity but would introduce new server configuration
                complexity.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Functionality limitations</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>HTML can say only so much</em></span>. HTML is
                a portable way to specify simple pages and forms, but it is
                poor to useless when it comes to describing more complex user
                interfaces. Because CGI scripts create user interfaces by
                writing HTML back to a browser, they are highly limited in
                terms of user-interface constructs. For example, consider
                implementing an image-processing and animation program as CGI
                scripts: HTML doesn’t easily apply once we leave the domain of
                fill-out forms and simple interactions.</p>
<p>It is possible to generate graphics in CGI scripts. They
                may be created and stored in temporary files on the server,
                with per-session filenames referenced in image tags in the
                generated HTML reply. For browsers that support the notion,
                graphic images may also be in-lined in HTML image tags,
                encoded in Base64 format or similar. Either technique is
                substantially more complex than using an image in the tkinter
                GUI library, though. Moreover, responsive animation and
                drawing applications are beyond the scope of a protocol such
                as CGI, which requires a network transaction per interaction.
                The interactive drawing and animation scripts we wrote at the
                end of Chapter 9, for
                example, could not be implemented as normal server-side
                scripts.</p>
<p>This is precisely the limitation that Java applets were
                designed to <span>address—</span><span>programs</span> that are stored on a
                server but are pulled down to run on a client on demand and
                are given access to a full-featured GUI API for creating
                richer user interfaces. Nevertheless, strictly server-side
                programs are inherently limited by the constraints of
                HTML.</p>
<p>Beyond HTML’s limitations, client-side programs such as
                PyMailGUI also have access to tools such as multithreading
                which are difficult to emulate in a CGI-based application
                (threads spawned by a CGI script cannot outlive the CGI script
                itself, or augment its reply once sent). Persistent process
                models for web applications such as FastCGI may provide
                options here, but the picture is not as clear-cut as on the
                client.</p>
<p>Although web developers make noble efforts at emulating
                client-side <span>capabilities—</span>see the discussion
                of RIAs and HTML 5 ahead—such efforts add additional
                complexity, can stretch the server-side programming model
                nearly to its breaking point, and account for much of the
                plethora of divergent web techniques.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Portability benefits</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>All you need is a browser on
                clients</em></span>. On the upside, because PyMailCGI runs over
                the Web, it can be run on any machine with a web browser,
                whether that machine has Python and tkinter installed or not.
                That is, Python needs to be installed on only one computer—the
                web server machine where the scripts actually live and run. In
                fact, this is probably the most compelling benefit to the web
                application model. As long as you know that the users of your
                system have an Internet browser, installation is simple. You
                still need Python on the server, but that’s easier to <span>guarantee</span>.</p>
<p>Python and tkinter, you will recall, are very portable,
                too—they run on all major window systems (X11, Windows,
                Mac)—but to run a client-side Python/tkinter program such as
                PyMailGUI, you need Python and tkinter on the client machine
                itself. Not so with an application built as CGI scripts: it
                will work on Macintosh, Linux, Windows, and any other machine
                that can somehow render HTML web pages. In this sense, HTML
                becomes a sort of portable GUI API language in web scripts,
                interpreted by your web browser, which is itself a kind of
                generalized GUI for rendering GUIs. You don’t even need the
                source code or bytecode for the CGI scripts themselves—they
                run on a remote server that exists somewhere else on the Net,
                not on the machine running the browser.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Execution requirements</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>But you do need a browser</em></span>. That is,
                the very nature of web-enabled systems can render them useless
                in some environments. Despite the pervasiveness of the
                Internet, many applications still run in settings that don’t
                have web browsers or Internet access. Consider, for instance,
                embedded systems, real-time systems, and secure government
                applications. While an <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>intranet</em></span> (a local
                network without external connections) can sometimes make web
                applications feasible in some such environments, I have worked
                at more than one company whose client sites had no web
                browsers to speak of. On the other hand, such clients may be
                more open to installing systems like Python on local machines,
                as opposed to supporting an internal or external
                network.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Administration requirements</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>You really need a server, too</em></span>. You
                can’t write CGI-based systems at all without access to a web
                server. Further, keeping programs on a centralized server
                creates some fairly critical administrative overheads. Simply
                put, in a pure client/server architecture, clients are
                simpler, but the server becomes a critical path resource and a
                potential performance bottleneck. If the centralized server
                goes down, you, your employees, and your customers may be
                knocked out of commission. Moreover, if enough clients use a
                shared server at the same time, the speed costs of web-based
                systems become even more pronounced. In production systems,
                advanced techniques such as load balancing and fail-over
                servers help, but they add new <span>requirements</span>.</p>
<p>In fact, one could make the argument that moving toward
                a web server architecture is akin to stepping backward in
                time—to the time of centralized mainframes and dumb terminals.
                Some would include the emerging <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>cloud
                computing</em></span> model in this analysis, arguably in part
                a throwback to older computing models. Whichever way we step,
                offloading and distributing processing to client machines at
                least partially avoids this processing <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e72975"></a>bottleneck.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Other Approaches"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="other_approaches"></a>Other Approaches</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>So what’s <a id="py16.8.3"></a>the best way to build applications for the Internet—as
          client-side programs that talk to the Net or as server-side programs
          that live and breathe on the Net? Naturally, there is no one answer
          to that question, since it depends upon each application’s unique
          constraints. Moreover, there are more possible answers to it than
          have been disclosed so far. Although the client and server
          programming models do imply trade-offs, many of the common web and
          CGI drawbacks already have common proposed solutions. For
          example:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Client-side solutions</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Client- and server-side <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e72999"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e73004"></a>programs can be mixed in many ways. For
                instance, applet programs live on a server but are downloaded
                to and run as client-side programs with access to rich GUI
                libraries.</p>
<p>Other technologies, such as embedding JavaScript or
                Python directly in HTML code, also support client-side
                execution and richer GUI possibilities. Such scripts live in
                HTML on the server but run on the client when downloaded and
                access browser components through an exposed object model to
                customize pages.</p>
<p>The Dynamic HTML (DHTML) extensions provide yet another
                client-side scripting option for changing web pages after they
                have been constructed. And the newly emerging AJAX model
                offers additional ways to add interactivity and responsiveness
                to web pages, and is at the heart of the RIA model noted
                ahead. All of these client-side technologies add extra
                complexities all their own, but they ease some of the
                limitations imposed by straight HTML.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>State retention solutions</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>We discussed general <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e73021"></a>state retention options in detail in the prior
                chapter, and we will study full-scale database systems for
                Python in Chapter 17. Some
                web application servers (e.g., Zope) naturally support state
                retention between pages by providing concurrently accessible
                object databases. Some of these systems have an explicit
                underlying database component (e.g., Oracle and MySQL); others
                may use flat files or Python persistent shelves with
                appropriate locking. In addition, object relational mappers
                (ORMs) such as SQLObject allow relational databases to be
                processed as Python classes.</p>
<p>Scripts can also pass state information around in hidden
                form fields and generated URL parameters, as done in
                PyMailCGI, or they can store it on the client machine itself
                using the standard cookie protocol. As we learned in Chapter 15, cookies are strings of
                information that are stored on the client upon request from
                the server, and that are transferred back to the server when a
                page is revisited (data is sent back and forth in HTTP header
                lines). Cookies are more complex than program variables and
                are somewhat controversial and optional, but they can offload
                some simple state retention tasks.</p>
<p>Alternative models such as FastCGI and <code class="epub__literal">mod_python</code> offer additional
                persistence options—where supported, FastCGI applications may
                retain context in long-lived processes, and <code class="epub__literal">mod_python</code> provides session data
                within Apache.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>HTML generation solutions</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Third-party extensions <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e73048"></a>can also take some of the complexity out of
                embedding HTML in Python CGI scripts, albeit at some cost to
                execution speed. For instance, the HTMLgen system and its
                relatives let programs build pages as trees of Python objects
                that “know” how to produce HTML. Other frameworks prove an
                object-based interface to reply-stream generation (e.g., a
                reply object with methods). When a system like this is
                employed, Python scripts deal only with objects, not with the
                syntax of HTML itself.</p>
<p>For instance, systems such as PHP, Python Server Pages
                (PSP), Zope’s DTML and ZPT, and Active Server Pages provide
                server-side <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e73056"></a>templating languages, which allow scripting
                language code to be embedded in HTML and executed on the
                server, to dynamically generate or determine part of the HTML
                that is sent back to a client in response to requests. The net
                result can cleanly insulate Python code from the complexity of
                HTML code and promote the separation of display format and
                business logic, but may add complexities of its own due to the
                mixture of different <span>languages</span>.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Generalized user interface
              development</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>To cover both bases, some systems attempt to separate
                logic from display so much as to make the choice almost
                irrelevant—by completely encapsulating display details, a
                single program can, in principle, render its user interface as
                either a traditional GUI or an HTML-based web page. Due to the
                vastly different architectures, though, this ideal is
                difficult to achieve well and does not address larger
                disparities between the client and server platforms. Issues
                such as state retention and network interfaces are much more
                significant than generation of windows and controls, and may
                impact code more.</p>
<p>Other systems may try to achieve similar goals by
                abstracting the display representation—a common XML
                representation, for instance, might lend itself to both a GUI
                and an HTML rendering. Again, though, this addresses only the
                rendering of the display, not the fundamental architectural
                differences of client- and server-side approaches.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Emerging technologies: RIAs and HTML
              5</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Finally, higher-level approaches such as the <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e73081"></a>RIA (Rich Internet Application) toolkits
                introduced in Chapters 7 and 12
                can offer additional functionality that HTML lacks and can
                approach the utility on GUI toolkits. On the other hand, they
                can also complicate the web development story even further,
                and add yet additional languages to the mix. Though this can
                vary, the net result is often something of a Web-hosted Tower
                of Babel, whose development might require simultaneously
                programming in Python, HTML, SQL, JavaScript, a server-side
                templating language, an object-relational mapping API, and
                more, and even nested and embedded combinations of these. The
                resulting software stack can be more complex than Python and a
                GUI toolkit.</p>
<p>Moreover, RIAs today inherit the inherent speed
                degradation of network-based systems in general; although AJAX
                can add interactivity to web pages, it still implies network
                access instead of in-process function calls. Ironically, much
                like desktop applications, RIAs may also still require
                installation of a browser plug-in on the client to be used at
                all. The emerging HTML 5 standard may address the plug-in
                constraint and ease the complexity somewhat, but it brings
                along with it a grab bag of new complexities all its own which
                we won’t describe here.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Clearly, Internet technology does come with some compromises,
          and it is still evolving rapidly. It is nevertheless an appropriate
          delivery context for many, though not all, applications. As with
          every design choice, you must be the judge. While delivering systems
          on the Web may have some costs in terms of performance,
          functionality, and complexity, it is likely that the significance of
          those overheads will continue to diminish with time. See the start
          of Chapter 12 for more on some systems
          that promise such change, and watch the Web for the ever-changing
          Internet story to <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e73095"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e73097"></a>unfold.</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="suggested_reading_colon_the_pyerrata_sys"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Suggested Reading: The PyErrata System</p>
<p>Now that I’ve <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e73105"></a>told you all the reasons you might not want to
            design systems for the Web, I’m going to completely contradict
            myself and refer you to a system that almost requires a web-based
            implementation. The second edition of this book included a chapter
            that presented the PyErrata website—a Python program that lets
            arbitrary people on arbitrary machines submit book comments and
            bug reports (usually called errata) over the Web, using just a web
            browser. Such a system must store information on a server, so it
            can be read by arbitrary clients.</p>
<p>Because of space concerns, that chapter was cut in this
            book’s third edition. However, we’re making its original content
            available as optional, supplemental reading. You can find this
            example’s code, as well as the original chapter’s file in the
            directory <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>PP4E\Internet\Web\PyErrata</em></span> of the
            book examples distribution tree (see the Preface for more on the examples
            distribution).</p>
<p>PyErrata is in some ways simpler than the PyMailCGI case
            study presented in this chapter. From a user’s perspective,
            PyErrata is more hierarchical than linear: user interactions are
            shorter and spawn fewer pages. There is also little state
            retention in the web pages themselves in PyErrata—URL parameters
            pass state in only one isolated case, and no hidden form fields
            are generated.</p>
<p>On the other hand, PyErrata introduces an entirely new
            dimension: persistent data storage. State (error and comment
            reports) is stored permanently by this system on the server,
            either in flat pickle files or in a shelve-based database. Both
            raise the specter of concurrent updates, since any number of users
            out in cyberspace may be accessing the site at the same time, so
            PyErrata also introduces file-locking techniques along the
            way.</p>
<p>I no longer maintain the website described by this extra
            chapter, and the material itself is slightly out of date in some
            ways. For instance, the <code class="epub__literal">os.open</code>
            call is preferred for file locking now; I would probably use a
            different data storage system today, such as ZODB; the code and
            its chapter may still be in Python 2.X form in the examples
            package; and this site might be better implemented as a blog or
            wiki, concepts and labels that arose after the site was
            developed.</p>
<p>Still, PyErrata provides an additional Python website case
            study, and it more closely reflects websites that must store
            information on the server.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
