<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Part V. Tools and Techniques</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__part" title="Part V. Tools and Techniques"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="tools_and_techniques"></a>Part V. Tools and Techniques</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__partintro" id="id4614292" title="Tools and Techniques"><div>
</div>
<p>This part of the book presents a collection of additional Python
      application topics. Most of the tools presented along the way can be
      used in a wide variety of application domains. You’ll find the following
      chapters here:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Chapter 17</span></dt><dd>
<p>This chapter covers commonly used and advanced Python
            techniques for storing information between program executions—DBM
            files, object pickling, object shelves, and Python’s SQL database
            API—and briefly introduces full-blown OODBs such as ZODB, as well
            as ORMs such as SQLObject and SQLAlchemy. The Python standard
            library’s SQLite support is used for the SQL examples, but the API
            is portable to enterprise-level systems such as MySQL.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Chapter 18</span></dt><dd>
<p>This chapter explores techniques for implementing more
            advanced data structures in Python—stacks, sets, binary search
            trees, graphs, and the like. In Python, these take the form of
            object implementations.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Chapter 19</span></dt><dd>
<p>This chapter addresses Python tools and techniques for
            parsing text-based information—string splits and joins, regular
            expression matching, XML parsing, recursive descent parsing, and
            more advanced language-based topics.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Chapter 20</span></dt><dd>
<p>This chapter introduces integration techniques—both
            extending Python with compiled libraries and embedding Python code
            in other applications. While the main focus here is on linking
            Python with compiled C code, we’ll also investigate integration
            with Java, .NET, and more. This chapter assumes that you know how
            to read C programs, and it is intended mostly for developers
            responsible for implementing application integration
            layers.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>This is the last technical part of the book, and it makes heavy
      use of tools presented earlier in the text to help underscore the notion
      of code reuse. For instance, a calculator GUI (PyCalc) serves to
      demonstrate language processing and code reuse concepts.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
