<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 17. Databases and Persistence</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 17. Databases and Persistence"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="databases_and_persistence"></a>Chapter 17. Databases and Persistence</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="“Give Me an Order of Persistence, but Hold the Pickles”"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="quotation_mark_give_me_an_order_of_persi"></a>“Give Me an Order of Persistence, but Hold the Pickles”</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>So far in this book, we’ve used Python in the system
        programming, GUI development, and Internet scripting domains—three of
        Python’s most common applications, and representative of its use as an
        application programming language at large. In the next four chapters,
        we’re going to take a quick look at other major Python programming
        topics: persistent data, data structure techniques, text and language
        processing, and Python/C integration.</p>
<p>These four topics are not really application areas themselves,
        but they are techniques that span domains. The database topics in this
        chapter, for instance, can be applied on the Web, in desktop GUI
        applications, and so on. Text processing is a similarly general tool.
        Moreover, none of these final four topics is covered exhaustively
        (each could easily fill a book alone), but we’ll sample Python in
        action in these domains and highlight their core concepts and tools.
        If any of these chapters spark your interest, additional resources are
        readily available in the Python world.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
