<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Persistence Options in Python</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Persistence Options in Python"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="persistence_options_in_python"></a>Persistence Options in Python</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In this chapter, our focus is on <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>persistent</em></span>
        data—the kind that outlives a <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e73178"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e73183"></a>program that creates it. That’s not true by default for
        objects a script constructs, of course; things like lists,
        dictionaries, and even class instance <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e73189"></a>objects live in your computer’s memory and are lost as
        soon as the script ends. To make data live longer, we need to do
        something special. In Python programming, there are today at least six
        traditional ways to save information in between program
        executions:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Flat files</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Text and bytes stored directly on your computer</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>DBM keyed files</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Keyed access to <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e73210"></a>strings stored in dictionary-like files</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Pickled objects</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Serialized Python <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e73223"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e73228"></a>objects saved to files and streams</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Shelve files</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Pickled Python <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e73241"></a>objects saved in DBM keyed files</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Object-oriented databases
            (OODBs)</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Persistent <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e73254"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e73257"></a>Python objects stored in persistent dictionaries
              (ZODB, Durus)</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>SQL relational databases
            (RDBMSs)</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Table-based <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e73268"></a>storage that supports SQL queries (SQLite, MySQL,
              PostGreSQL, etc.)</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Object relational mappers (ORMs)</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Mediators <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e73281"></a>that map Python classes to relational <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e73287"></a>tables (SQLObject, SQLAlchemy)</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>In some sense, Python’s interfaces to network-based object
        transmission protocols such as <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e73295"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e73300"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e73305"></a>SOAP, XML-RPC, and CORBA also offer persistence options,
        but they are beyond the scope of this chapter. Here, our interest is
        in techniques that allow a program to store its data directly and,
        usually, on the local machine. Although some database servers may
        operate on a physically remote machine on a network, this is largely
        transparent to most of the techniques we’ll study here.</p>
<p>We studied Python’s simple (or “flat”) file <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e73313"></a>interfaces in earnest in Chapter 4, and we have been using them
        ever since. Python provides standard access to both the <code class="epub__literal">stdio</code> filesystem (through the built-in
        <code class="epub__literal">open</code> function), as well as
        lower-level descriptor-based files (with the built-in <code class="epub__literal">os</code> module). For simple data storage tasks,
        these are all that many scripts need. To save for use in a future
        program run, simply write data out to a newly opened file on your
        computer in text or binary mode, and read it back from that file
        later. As we’ve seen, for more advanced tasks, Python also supports
        other file-like <span>interfaces</span> such
        as pipes, fifos, and sockets.</p>
<p>Since we’ve already explored flat files, I won’t say more about
        them here. The rest of this chapter introduces the remaining topics on
        the preceding list. At the end, we’ll also meet a GUI program for
        browsing the contents of things such as shelves and DBM files. Before
        that, though, we need to learn what manner of beast <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e73336"></a>these are.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note"><h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Fourth edition coverage note</em></span>: The prior
          edition of this book used the <code class="epub__literal">mysql-python</code> interface to the MySQL
          relational database system, as well as the ZODB object database
          system. As I update this chapter in June 2010, neither of these is
          yet available for Python 3.X, the version of Python used in this
          edition. Because of that, most ZODB information has been trimmed,
          and the SQL database examples here were changed to use the SQLite
          in-process database system that ships with Python 3.X as part of its
          standard library. The prior edition’s ZODB and MySQL examples and
          overviews are still available in the examples package, as described
          later. Because Python’s SQL database API is portable, though, the
          SQLite code here should work largely unchanged on most other
          systems.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
