<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>DBM Files</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="DBM Files"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="dbm_files"></a>DBM Files</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Flat files are handy <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e73353"></a><a id="per17.3"></a>for simple persistence tasks, but they are generally
        geared toward a sequential processing mode. Although it is possible to
        jump around to arbitrary locations with <code class="epub__literal">seek</code> calls, flat files don’t provide much
        structure to data beyond the notion of bytes and text lines.</p>
<p>DBM files, a standard tool in the Python library for database
        management, improve on that by providing key-based access to stored
        text strings. They implement a random-access, single-key view on
        stored data. For instance, information related to objects can be
        stored in a DBM file using a unique key per object and later can be
        fetched back directly with the same key. DBM files are implemented by
        a variety of underlying modules (including one coded in Python), but
        if you have Python, you have a DBM.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Using DBM Files"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="using_dbm_files"></a>Using DBM Files</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Although <a id="dbm17.3.1"></a>DBM filesystems have to do a bit of work to map chunks
          of stored data to keys for fast retrieval (technically, they
          generally use a technique<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e73380"></a> called <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>hashing</em></span> to store data in
          files), your scripts don’t need to care about the action going on
          behind the scenes. In fact, DBM is one of the easiest ways to save
          information in Python—DBM files behave so much like in-memory
          dictionaries that you may forget you’re actually dealing with a file
          at all. For instance, given a DBM file object:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Indexing by key fetches data from the file.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Assigning to an index stores data in the file.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>DBM file objects also support common dictionary methods such
          as keys-list fetches and tests and key deletions. The DBM library
          itself is hidden behind this simple model. Since it is so simple,
          let’s jump right into an interactive example that creates a DBM file
          and shows how the interface works:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e73396"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Dbase&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import dbm</code></strong>                              # get interface: bsddb, gnu, ndbm, dumb
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file = dbm.open('movie', 'c')</code></strong>           # make a DBM file called 'movie'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file['Batman'] = 'Pow!'</code></strong>                 # store a string under key 'Batman'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.keys()</code></strong>                             # get the file's key directory
[b'Batman']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file['Batman']</code></strong>                          # fetch value for key 'Batman'
b'Pow!'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>who  = ['Robin', 'Cat-woman', 'Joker']</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>what = ['Bang!', 'Splat!', 'Wham!']</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for i in range(len(who)):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file[who[i]] = what[i]</code></strong>              # add 3 more "records"
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.keys()</code></strong>
[b'Cat-woman', b'Batman', b'Joker', b'Robin']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>len(file), 'Robin' in file, file['Joker']</code></strong>
(4, True, b'Wham!')
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.close()</code></strong>                            # close sometimes required</pre>
<p>Internally, importing the<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e73441"></a> <code class="epub__literal">dbm</code> standard
          library module automatically loads whatever DBM interface is
          available in your Python interpreter (attempting alternatives in a
          fixed order), and opening the new DBM file creates one or more
          external files with names that start with the string <code class="epub__literal">'movie'</code> (more on the details in a moment).
          But after the import and open, a DBM file is virtually
          indistinguishable from a dictionary.</p>
<p>In effect, the object called <code class="epub__literal">file</code> here can be thought of as a
          dictionary mapped to an external file called <code class="epub__literal">movie</code>; the only obvious differences are
          that keys must be strings (not arbitrary immutables), and we need to
          remember to open to access and close after changes.</p>
<p>Unlike normal dictionaries, though, the contents of <code class="epub__literal">file</code> are retained between Python program
          runs. If we come back later and restart Python, our dictionary is
          still available. Again, DBM files are like dictionaries that must be
          opened:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e73464"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Dbase&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import dbm</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file = dbm.open('movie', 'c')</code></strong>           # open existing DBM file
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file['Batman']</code></strong>
b'Pow!'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.keys()</code></strong>                             # keys gives an index list
[b'Cat-woman', b'Batman', b'Joker', b'Robin']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for key in file.keys(): print(key, file[key])</code></strong>
...
b'Cat-woman' b'Splat!'
b'Batman' b'Pow!'
b'Joker' b'Wham!'
b'Robin' b'Bang!'</pre>
<p>Notice how DBM files return a real list for the <code class="epub__literal">keys</code> call; not shown here, their <code class="epub__literal">values</code> method instead returns an iterable
          view like dictionaries. Further, DBM files always store both keys
          and values as <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> objects;
          interpretation as arbitrary types of Unicode text is left to the
          client application. We can use either <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> or <code class="epub__literal">str</code> strings in our code when accessing or
          storing keys and values—using <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> allows your keys and values to
          retain arbitrary Unicode encodings, but <code class="epub__literal">str</code> objects in our code will be encoded to
          <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> internally using the UTF-8
          Unicode encoding by Python’s DBM implementation.</p>
<p>Still, we can always decode to Unicode <code class="epub__literal">str</code> strings to display in a more friendly
          fashion if desired, and DBM files have a keys iterator just like
          dictionaries. Moreover, assigning and deleting keys updates the DBM
          file, and we should close after making changes (this ensure that
          changes are flushed to disk):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e73520"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for key in file: print(key.decode(), file[key].decode())</code></strong>
...
Cat-woman Splat!
Batman Pow!
Joker Wham!
Robin Bang!

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file['Batman'] = 'Ka-Boom!'</code></strong>               # change Batman slot
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>del file['Robin']</code></strong>                         # delete the Robin entry
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.close()</code></strong>                              # close it after changes</pre>
<p>Apart from having to import the interface and open and close
          the DBM file, Python programs don’t have to know anything about DBM
          itself. DBM modules achieve this integration by overloading the
          indexing operations and routing them to more primitive library
          tools. But you’d never know that from looking at this Python
          code—DBM files look like normal Python dictionaries, stored on
          external files. Changes made to them are retained
          indefinitely:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e73536"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Dbase&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import dbm</code></strong>                              # open DBM file again
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file = dbm.open('movie', 'c')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for key in file: print(key.decode(), file[key].decode())</code></strong>
...
Cat-woman Splat!
Batman Ka-Boom!
Joker Wham!</pre>
<p>As you can see, this is about as simple as it can be. Table 17-1 lists the most commonly used DBM
          file operations. Once such a file is opened, it is processed just as
          though it were an in-memory Python dictionary. Items are fetched by
          indexing the file object by key and are stored by assigning to a
          <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e73554"></a>key.</p><div class="epub__table"><a id="dbm_file_operations"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Table 17-1. DBM file operations</p><div class="epub__table-contents"><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; " summary="DBM file operations"><colgroup><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Python
                  code</p></th><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Action</p></th><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Description</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">import dbm</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Import</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Get DBM
                  implementation</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">file=dbm.open('filename',
                  'c')</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Open</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Create or open an
                  existing DBM file for I/O</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">file['key'] =
                  'value'</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Store</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Create or change the
                  entry for <code class="epub__literal">key</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">value = file['key']</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Fetch</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Load the value for
                  the entry <code class="epub__literal">key</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">count = len(file)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Size</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Return the number of
                  entries stored</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">index = file.keys()</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Index</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Fetch the stored keys
                  list (not a view)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">found = 'key' in
                  file</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Query</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>See if there’s an
                  entry for <code class="epub__literal">key</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">del file['key']</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Delete</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Remove the entry for
                  <code class="epub__literal">key</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">for key in file:</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Iterate</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Iterate over stored
                  keys</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">file.close()</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Close</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Manual close, not
                  always needed</p></td></tr></tbody></table>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="DBM Details: Files, Portability, and Close"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="dbm_details_colon_files_comma_portabilit"></a>DBM Details: Files, Portability, and Close</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Despite the dictionary-like interface, DBM files really do map
          to one or more external files. For instance, the underlying default
          <code class="epub__literal">dbm</code> interface used by Python 3.1
          on Windows writes two files—<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>movie.dir</em></span> and
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>movie.dat</em></span>—when a DBM file called <code class="epub__literal">movie</code> is made, and saves a <em class="epub__filename">movie.bak</em> on later opens. If your Python
          has access to a different underlying keyed-file interface, different
          external files might show up on your computer.</p>
<p>Technically, the module <code class="epub__literal">dbm</code>
          is <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e73723"></a>really an interface to whatever DBM-like filesystem
          you have available in your Python:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>When opening an already existing DBM file, <code class="epub__literal">dbm</code> tries to determine the system that
              created it with the <code class="epub__literal">dbm.whichdb</code> function instead. This
              determination is based upon the content of the database
              itself.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>When creating a new file, <code class="epub__literal">dbm</code> today tries a set of keyed-file
              interface modules in a fixed order. According to its
              documentation, it attempts to import the interfaces <code class="epub__literal">dbm.bsd</code>, <code class="epub__literal">dbm.gnu</code>, <code class="epub__literal">dbm.ndbm</code>, or <code class="epub__literal">dbm.dumb</code>, and uses the first that
              succeeds. Pythons without any of these automatically fall back
              on an all-Python and always-present implementation called
              <code class="epub__literal">dbm.dumb</code>, which is not really
              “dumb,” or course, but may not be as fast or robust as other
              options.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Future Pythons are free to change this selection order, and
          may even add additional alternatives to it. You normally don’t need
          to care about any of this, though, unless you delete any of the
          files your DBM creates, or transfer them between machines with
          different configurations—if you need to care about the
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>portability</em></span> of your DBM files (and as we’ll see
          later, by proxy, that of your shelve files), you should configure
          machines such that all have the same DBM interface installed or rely
          upon the <code class="epub__literal">dumb</code> fallback. For
          example, the Berkeley DB package (a.k.a. <code class="epub__literal">bsddb</code>) used by <code class="epub__literal">dbm.bsd</code> is widely available and
          portable.</p>
<p>Note that DBM files may or may not need to be explicitly
          closed, per the last entry in Table 17-1. Some DBM files don’t require a
          close call, but some depend on it to flush changes out to disk. On
          such systems, your file may be corrupted if you omit the close call.
          Unfortunately, the default DBM in some older Windows Pythons,
          <code class="epub__literal">dbhash</code> (a.k.a. <code class="epub__literal">bsddb</code>), is one of the DBM systems that
          requires a close call to avoid data loss. As a rule of thumb, always
          close your DBM files explicitly after making changes and before your
          program exits to avoid potential problems; it’s essential a “commit”
          operation for these files. This rule extends by proxy to shelves, a
          topic we’ll meet later in this <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e73783"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e73785"></a>chapter.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note"><h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Recent changes</em></span>: Be sure to also pass a
            string <code class="epub__literal">'c'</code> as a second argument
            when calling <code class="epub__literal">dbm.open</code>, to force
            Python to create the file if it does not yet exist and to simply
            open it for reads and writes otherwise. This used to be the
            default behavior but is no longer. You do not need the <code class="epub__literal">'c'</code> argument when opening
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>shelves</em></span> discussed ahead—they still use an
            “open or create” <code class="epub__literal">'c'</code> mode by
            default if passed no open mode argument. Other open mode strings
            can be passed to <code class="epub__literal">dbm</code>, including
            <code class="epub__literal">n</code> to always create the file,
            and <code class="epub__literal">r</code> for read-only of an
            existing file—the new default. See the Python library manual for
            more details.</p>
<p>In addition, Python 3.X stores both key and value strings as
            <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> instead of <code class="epub__literal">str</code> as we’ve seen (which turns out to be
            convenient for pickled data in shelves, discussed ahead) and no
            longer ships with <code class="epub__literal">bsddb</code> as a
            standard component—it’s available independently on the Web as a
            third-party extension, but in its absence Python falls back on its
            own DBM file implementation. Since the underlying DBM
            implementation rules are prone to change with time, you should
            always consult Python’s library manuals as well as the <code class="epub__literal">dbm</code> module’s standard library source
            code for more information.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
