<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Pickled Objects</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Pickled Objects"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="pickled_objects"></a>Pickled Objects</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Probably the <a id="per17.4"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e73842"></a><a id="obj17.4"></a>biggest limitation of DBM keyed files is in what they
        can store: data stored under a key must be a simple string. If you
        want to store Python objects in a DBM file, you can sometimes manually
        convert them to and from strings on writes and reads (e.g., with
        <code class="epub__literal">str</code> and <code class="epub__literal">eval</code> calls), but this takes you only so far.
        For arbitrarily complex Python objects such as class instances and
        nested data structures, you need something more. Class instance
        objects, for example, cannot usually be later re-created from their
        standard string representations. Moreover, custom to-string
        conversions and from-string parsers are error prone and not
        general.</p>
<p>The Python <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> module, a
        <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e73864"></a>standard part of the Python system, provides the
        conversion step needed. It’s a sort of super general data formatting
        and de-formatting <span>tool—</span><code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> converts nearly arbitrary Python
        in-memory objects to and from a single linear string format, suitable
        for storing in flat files, shipping across network sockets between
        trusted sources, and so on. This conversion from object<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e73875"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e73880"></a> to string is often called<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e73887"></a> <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>serialization</em></span>—arbitrary data
        structures in memory are mapped to a serial string form.</p>
<p>The string representation used for objects is also sometimes
        referred to as a byte stream, due to its linear format. It retains all
        the content and references structure of the original in-memory object.
        When the object is later re-created from its byte string, it will be a
        new in-memory object identical in structure and value to the original,
        though located at a different memory address.</p>
<p>The net effect is that the re-created object is effectively a
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>copy</em></span> of the original; in Python-speak, the two
        will be <code class="epub__literal">==</code> but not <code class="epub__literal">is</code>. Since the recreation typically happens
        in an entirely new process, this difference is often irrelevant
        (though as we saw in Chapter 5, this
        generally precludes using pickled objects directly as cross-process
        shared state).</p>
<p>Pickling works on almost any Python datatype—numbers, lists,
        dictionaries, class instances, nested structures, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e73911"></a>and more—and so is a general way to store data. Because
        pickles contain native Python objects, there is almost no database API
        to be found; the objects stored with pickling are processed with
        normal Python syntax when they are later retrieved.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Using Object Pickling"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="using_object_pickling"></a>Using Object Pickling</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Pickling may <a id="pick17.4.1"></a>sound complicated the first time you encounter it, but
          the good news is that Python hides all the complexity of
          object-to-string conversion. In fact, the pickle module ’s
          interfaces are incredibly simple to use. For example, to pickle an
          object into a serialized string, we can either make a pickler and
          call its methods or use convenience functions in the module to
          achieve the same effect:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">P =
              pickle.Pickler(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>file</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Make a new pickler for pickling to an open output file
                object <code class="epub__literal">file</code>.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">P.dump(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>object</code></em>
<code class="epub__literal">)</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Write an object onto the pickler’s file/stream.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">pickle.dump(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>object,
              file</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Same as the last two calls combined: pickle an object
                onto an open file.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">string =
              pickle.dumps(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>object</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Return the pickled representation of <code class="epub__literal">object</code> as a character string.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Unpickling from a serialized string back to the original
          object is similar—both object and convenience function interfaces
          are available:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">U =
              pickle.Unpickler(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>file</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Make an unpickler for unpickling from an open input file
                object <code class="epub__literal">file</code>.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">object =
              U.load()</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Read an object from the unpickler’s file/stream.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">object =
              pickle.load(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>file</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Same as the last two calls combined: unpickle an object
                from an open file.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">object =
              pickle.loads(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>string</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Read an object from a character string rather than a
                file.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p><code class="epub__literal">Pickler</code> and <code class="epub__literal">Unpickler</code> are exported classes. In all of
          the preceding cases, <code class="epub__literal">file</code> is
          either an open file object or any object that implements the same
          attributes as file objects:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">Pickler</code> calls
              <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e74042"></a>the file’s <code class="epub__literal">write</code> method with a string
              argument.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">Unpickler</code> calls the
              <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e74056"></a>file’s <code class="epub__literal">read</code>
              method with a byte count, and <code class="epub__literal">readline</code> without arguments.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Any object that provides these attributes can be passed in to
          the <code class="epub__literal">file</code> parameters. In
          particular, <code class="epub__literal">file</code> can be an
          instance of a Python class that provides the read/write methods
          (i.e., the expected file-like <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>interface</em></span>). This
          lets you map pickled streams to in-<span>memory</span> objects with classes, for
          arbitrary use. For instance, the <code class="epub__literal">io.BytesIO</code> class in the standard library
          discussed in Chapter 3 provides an
          interface that maps file calls to and from in-memory byte strings
          and is an alternative to the pickler’s <code class="epub__literal">dumps</code>/<code class="epub__literal">loads</code> string calls.</p>
<p>This hook also lets you ship Python objects across a network,
          by providing sockets wrapped to look like files in pickle calls at
          the sender, and unpickle calls at the receiver (see Making Sockets Look Like Files and Streams for more
          details). In fact, for some, pickling Python objects across a
          trusted network serves as a simpler alternative to network transport
          protocols such as<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e74098"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e74103"></a> SOAP and XML-RPC, provided that Python is on both
          ends of the communication (pickled objects are represented with a
          Python-specific format, not with XML text).</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note"><h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Recent changes</em></span>: In Python 3.X, pickled
            objects are always represented as <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>, not <code class="epub__literal">str</code>, regardless of the protocol level
            which you request (even the oldest ASCII protocol yields bytes).
            Because of this, files used to store pickled Python objects should
            always be opened in binary mode. Moreover, in 3.X an optimized
            <code class="epub__literal">_pickle</code> implementation module
            is also selected and used automatically if present. More on both
            topics later.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Pickling in Action"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="pickling_in_action"></a>Pickling in Action</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Although pickled objects can be shipped in exotic ways, in
          more typical use, to pickle an object to a flat file, we just open
          the file in write mode and call the <code class="epub__literal">dump</code> function:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e74131"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Dbase&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>table = {'a': [1, 2, 3],</code></strong>
             <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'b': ['spam', 'eggs'],</code></strong>
             <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'c': {'name':'bob'}}</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import pickle</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mydb  = open('dbase', 'wb')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pickle.dump(table, mydb)</code></strong></pre>
<p>Notice the <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e74156"></a>nesting in the object pickled here—the pickler handles
          arbitrary structures. Also note that we’re using binary mode files
          here; in Python 3.X, we really must, because the pickled
          representation of an object is always a <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> object in all cases. To unpickle
          later in another session or program run, simply reopen the file and
          call <code class="epub__literal">load</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e74168"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Dbase&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import pickle</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mydb  = open('dbase', 'rb')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>table = pickle.load(mydb)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>table</code></strong>
{'a': [1, 2, 3], 'c': {'name': 'bob'}, 'b': ['spam', 'eggs']}</pre>
<p>The object you get back from unpickling has the same value and
          reference structure as the original, but it is located at a
          different address in memory. This is true whether the object is
          unpickled in the same or a future process. Again, the unpickled
          object is <code class="epub__literal">==</code> but is not <code class="epub__literal">is</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e74193"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Dbase&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import pickle</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f = open('temp', 'wb')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = ['Hello', ('pickle', 'world')]</code></strong>          # list with nested tuple
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pickle.dump(x, f)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f.close()</code></strong>                                   # close to flush changes
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f = open('temp', 'rb')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y = pickle.load(f)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y</code></strong>
['Hello', ('pickle', 'world')]
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x == y, x is y</code></strong>                              # same value, diff objects
(True, False)</pre>
<p>To make this process simpler still, the module in Example 17-1 wraps pickling and
          unpickling calls in functions that also open the files where the
          serialized form of the object is stored.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_dbase_revers"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 17-1. PP4E\Dbase\filepickle.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"Pickle to/from flat file utilities"
import pickle

def saveDbase(filename, object):
    "save object to file"
    file = open(filename, 'wb')
    pickle.dump(object, file)        # pickle to binary file
    file.close()                     # any file-like object will do

def loadDbase(filename):
    "load object from file"
    file = open(filename, 'rb')
    object = pickle.load(file)       # unpickle from binary file
    file.close()                     # re-creates object in memory
    return object</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>To store and fetch now, simply call these module functions;
          here they are in action managing a fairly complex structure with
          multiple references to the same nested <span>object—</span>the nested list called <code class="epub__literal">L</code> at first is stored only once in the
          file:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e74243"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Dbase&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from filepickle import *</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = [0]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D = {'x':0, 'y':L}</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>table = {'A':L, 'B':D}</code></strong>              # L appears twice
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>saveDbase('myfile', table)</code></strong>          # serialize to file

C:\...\PP4E\Dbase&gt;<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from filepickle import *</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>table = loadDbase('myfile')</code></strong>         # reload/unpickle
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>table</code></strong>
{'A': [0], 'B': {'y': [0], 'x': 0}}
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>table['A'][0] = 1</code></strong>                   # change shared object
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>saveDbase('myfile', table)</code></strong>          # rewrite to the file

C:\...\PP4E\Dbase&gt;<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from filepickle import *</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(loadDbase('myfile'))</code></strong>          # both L's updated as expected
{'A': [1], 'B': {'y': [1], 'x': 0}}</pre>
<p>Besides built-in types like the lists, tuples, and
          dictionaries of the examples so far, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>class
          instances</em></span> <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e74300"></a>may also be pickled to file-like objects. This
          provides a natural way to associate behavior with stored data (class
          methods process instance attributes) and provides a simple migration
          path (class changes made in module files are automatically picked up
          by stored instances). Here’s a brief interactive
          demonstration:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e74306"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class Rec:</code></strong>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __init__(self, hours):</code></strong>
            <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>self.hours = hours</code></strong>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def pay(self, rate=50):</code></strong>
            <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return self.hours * rate</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bob = Rec(40)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import pickle</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pickle.dump(bob, open('bobrec', 'wb'))</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rec = pickle.load(open('bobrec', 'rb'))</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rec.hours</code></strong>
40
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rec.pay()</code></strong>
2000</pre>
<p>We’ll explore how this works in more detail in conjunction
          with shelves later in this chapter—as we’ll see, although the
          <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> module can be used
          directly this way, it is also the underlying translation engine in
          both shelves and<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e74347"></a> ZODB databases.</p>
<p>In general, Python can pickle just about anything, except
          for:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Compiled code objects: functions and classes record just
              their names and those of their modules in pickles, to allow for
              later reimport and automatic acquisition of changes made in
              module files.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Instances of classes that do not follow class
              importability rules: in short, the class must be importable on
              object loads (more on this at the end of the section Shelve Files).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Instances of some built-in and user-defined types that are
              coded in C or depend upon transient operating system states
              (e.g., open file objects cannot be pickled).</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>A <code class="epub__literal">PicklingError</code> is raised
          if an object cannot be pickled. Again, we’ll revisit the pickler’s
          constraints on pickleable objects and classes when we study
          shelves.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Pickle Details: Protocols, Binary Modes, and _pickle"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="pickle_details_colon_protocols_comma_bin"></a>Pickle Details: Protocols, Binary Modes, and _pickle</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In later Python releases, the pickler <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e74377"></a>introduced the notion of
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>protocols</em></span>—storage formats for pickled data.
          Specify the desired protocol by passing an extra parameter to the
          pickling calls (but not to unpickling calls: the protocol is
          automatically determined from the pickled data):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e74386"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">pickle.dump(object, file, <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>protocol</code></em>)       # or protocol=N keyword argument</pre>
<p>Pickled data may be created in either text or binary
          protocols; the binary protocols’ format is more efficient, but it
          cannot be readily understood if inspected. By default, the storage
          protocol in Python 3.X is a 3.X-only binary <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> format (also known as protocol 3).
          In text mode (protocol 0), the pickled data is printable ASCII text,
          which can be read by humans (it’s essentially instructions for a
          stack machine), but it is still a <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> object in Python 3.X. The
          alternative protocols (protocols 1 and 2) create the pickled data in
          binary format as well.</p>
<p>For all protocols, pickled data is a <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> object in 3.X, not a <code class="epub__literal">str</code>, and therefore implies binary-mode
          reads and writes when stored in flat files (see Chapter 4 if you’ve forgotten why).
          Similarly, we must use a <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>-oriented object when forging the
          file object’s interface:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e74412"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import io, pickle</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pickle.dumps([1, 2, 3])</code></strong>                      # default=binary protocol
b'\x80\x03]q\x00(K\x01K\x02K\x03e.'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pickle.dumps([1, 2, 3], protocol=0)</code></strong>          # ASCII format protocol
b'(lp0\nL1L\naL2L\naL3L\na.'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pickle.dump([1, 2, 3], open('temp','wb'))</code></strong>    # same if protocol=0, ASCII
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pickle.dump([1, 2, 3], open('temp','w'))</code></strong>     # must use 'rb' to read too
TypeError: must be str, not bytes
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pickle.dump([1, 2, 3], open('temp','w'), protocol=0)</code></strong>
TypeError: must be str, not bytes

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>B = io.BytesIO()</code></strong>                             # use bytes streams/buffers
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pickle.dump([1, 2, 3], B)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>B.getvalue()</code></strong>
b'\x80\x03]q\x00(K\x01K\x02K\x03e.'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>B = io.BytesIO()</code></strong>                             # also bytes for ASCII
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pickle.dump([1, 2, 3], B, protocol=0)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>B.getvalue()</code></strong>
b'(lp0\nL1L\naL2L\naL3L\na.'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S = io.StringIO()</code></strong>                            # it's not a str anymore
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pickle.dump([1, 2, 3], S)</code></strong>                    # same if protocol=0, ASCII
TypeError: string argument expected, got 'bytes'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pickle.dump([1, 2, 3], S, protocol=0)</code></strong>
TypeError: string argument expected, got 'bytes'</pre>
<p>Refer to Python’s library manual for
          more information on the pickler; it supports additional interfaces
          that classes may use to customize its behavior, which we’ll bypass
          here in the interest of space. Also check out <code class="epub__literal">marshal</code>, a module that serializes an
          object too, but can handle only simple object types. <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> is more general than <code class="epub__literal">marshal</code> and is normally preferred.</p>
<p>An additional related module, <code class="epub__literal">_pickle</code>, is a C-coded optimization of
          <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code>, and is automatically used
          by <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> internally if
          available; it need not be selected or used directly. The <code class="epub__literal">shelve</code> module inherits this optimization
          automatically by proxy. I haven’t explained <code class="epub__literal">shelve</code> yet, but I will <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e74491"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e74493"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e74495"></a>now.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
