<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Shelve Files</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Shelve Files"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="shelve_files"></a>Shelve Files</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Pickling allows you to <a id="per17.5"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e74508"></a>store arbitrary objects on files and file-like objects,
        but it’s still a fairly unstructured medium; it doesn’t directly
        support easy access to members of collections of pickled objects.
        Higher-level structures can be added to pickling, but they are not
        inherent:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>You can sometimes craft your own higher-level pickle file
            organizations with the underlying filesystem (e.g., you can store
            each pickled object in a file whose name uniquely identifies the
            object), but such an organization is not part of pickling itself
            and must be manually managed.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>You can also store arbitrarily large dictionaries in a
            pickled file and index them by key after they are loaded back into
            memory, but this will load and store the entire dictionary all at
            once when unpickled and pickled, not just the entry you are
            interested in.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Shelves provide structure for collections of pickled objects
        that removes some of these constraints. They are a type of file that
        stores arbitrary Python objects by key for later retrieval, and they
        are a standard part of the Python system. Really, they are not much of
        a new topic—shelves are simply a combination of the DBM files and
        object pickling we just met:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>To <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>store</em></span> an in-memory object by key,
            the <code class="epub__literal">shelve</code> module <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e74533"></a>first serializes the object to a string with the
            <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> module, and then it
            stores that string in a DBM file by key with the <code class="epub__literal">dbm</code> module.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>To <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>fetch</em></span> an object back by key, the
            <code class="epub__literal">shelve</code> module first loads the
            object’s serialized string by key from a DBM file with the
            <code class="epub__literal">dbm</code> module, and then converts
            it back to the original in-memory object with the <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> module.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Because <code class="epub__literal">shelve</code> uses <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> internally, it can store any object
        that <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> can: strings, numbers,
        lists, dictionaries, cyclic objects, class instances, and more.
        Because shelve uses<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e74571"></a> <code class="epub__literal">dbm</code> internally, it
        inherits all of that module’s capabilities, as well as its portability
        constraints.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Using Shelves"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="using_shelves-id1"></a>Using Shelves</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In other words, <code class="epub__literal">shelve</code> is
          <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e74586"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e74591"></a>just a go-between; it serializes and deserializes
          objects so that they can be placed in string-based DBM files. The
          net effect is that shelves let you store nearly arbitrary Python
          objects on a file by key and fetch them back later with the <span>same key</span>.</p>
<p>Your scripts never see all of this interfacing, though. Like
          DBM files, shelves provide an interface that looks like a dictionary
          that must be opened. In fact, a shelve is simply a persistent
          dictionary of persistent Python objects—the shelve dictionary’s
          content is automatically mapped to a file on your computer so that
          it is retained between program runs. This is quite a feat, but it’s
          simpler to your code than it may sound. To gain access to a shelve,
          import the module and open your file:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e74602"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import shelve
dbase = shelve.open("mydbase")</pre>
<p>Internally, Python opens a DBM file with the name
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>mydbase</em></span>, or creates it if it does not yet exist
          (it uses the DBM <code class="epub__literal">'c'</code> input/output
          open mode by default). Assigning to a shelve key stores an
          object:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e74612"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">dbase['key'] = object      # store object</pre>
<p>Internally, this assignment converts the object to a
          serialized byte stream with pickling and stores it by key on a DBM
          file. Indexing a shelve fetches a stored object:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e74616"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">value = dbase['key']       # fetch object</pre>
<p>Internally, this index operation loads a string by key from a
          DBM file and unpickles it into an in-memory object that is the same
          as the object originally stored. Most dictionary operations are
          supported here, too:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e74620"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">len(dbase)                 # number of items stored
dbase.keys()               # stored item key index iterable</pre>
<p>And except for a few fine points, that’s really all there is
          to using a shelve. Shelves are processed with normal Python
          dictionary syntax, so there is no new database API to learn.
          Moreover, objects stored and fetched from shelves are normal Python
          objects; they do not need to be instances of special classes or
          types to be stored away. That is, Python’s persistence system is
          external to the persistent objects themselves. <span>Table 17-2</span> summarizes these and
          other commonly used shelve <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e74627"></a>operations.</p><div class="epub__table"><a id="shelve_file_operations"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Table 17-2. Shelve file operations</p><div class="epub__table-contents"><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; " summary="Shelve file operations"><colgroup><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Python
                  code</p></th><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Action</p></th><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Description</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">import shelve</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Import</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Get <code class="epub__literal">bsddb</code>, <code class="epub__literal">gdbm</code>, and so on…whatever is
                  installed</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">file=shelve.open('filename')</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Open</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Create or open an
                  existing shelve’s DBM file</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">file['key'] =
                  anyvalue</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Store</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Create or change the
                  entry for <code class="epub__literal">key</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">value = file['key']</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Fetch</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Load the value for
                  the entry <code class="epub__literal">key</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">count = len(file)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Size</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Return the number of
                  entries stored</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">index = file.keys()</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Index</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Fetch the stored keys
                  list (an iterable view)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">found = 'key' in
                  file</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Query</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>See if there’s an
                  entry for <code class="epub__literal">key</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">del file['key']</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Delete</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Remove the entry for
                  <code class="epub__literal">key</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">for key in file:</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Iterate</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Iterate over stored
                  keys</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">file.close()</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Close</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Manual close, not
                  always needed</p></td></tr></tbody></table>
</div>
</div>
<p>Because shelves export a dictionary-like interface, too, this
          table is almost identical to the DBM operation table. Here, though,
          the module name <code class="epub__literal">dbm</code> is replaced
          by <code class="epub__literal">shelve</code>, <code class="epub__literal">open</code> calls do not require a second
          <code class="epub__literal">c</code> argument, and stored values can
          be nearly arbitrary kinds of objects, not just strings. Keys are
          still strings, though (technically, keys are always a <code class="epub__literal">str</code> which is encoded to and from <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> automatically per UTF-8), and you
          still should <code class="epub__literal">close</code> shelves
          explicitly after making changes to be safe: shelves use <code class="epub__literal">dbm</code> internally, and <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e74804"></a>some underlying DBMs require closes to avoid data loss
          or <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e74810"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e74815"></a>damage.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note"><h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Recent changes</em></span>: The <code class="epub__literal">shelve</code> module now has an optional
            <code class="epub__literal">writeback</code> argument; if passed
            <code class="epub__literal">True</code>, all entries fetched are
            cached in memory, and written back to disk automatically at close
            time. This obviates the need to manually reassign changed mutable
            entries to flush them to disk, but can perform poorly if many
            items are fetched—it may require a large amount of memory for the
            cache, and it can make the <code class="epub__literal">close</code> operation slow since all fetched
            entries must be written back to disk (Python cannot tell which of
            the objects may have been changed).</p>
<p>Besides allowing values to be arbitrary objects instead of
            just strings, in Python 3.X the shelve interface differs from the
            DBM interface in two subtler ways. First, the <code class="epub__literal">keys</code> method returns an iterable
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>view</em></span> object (not a physical list). Second,
            the values of <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>keys</em></span> are always <code class="epub__literal">str</code> in your code, not <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>—on fetches, stores, deletes, and
            other contexts, the <code class="epub__literal">str</code> keys
            you use are encoded to the <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> expected by DBM using the UTF-8
            Unicode encoding. This means that unlike <code class="epub__literal">dbm</code>, you cannot use <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> for <code class="epub__literal">shelve</code> keys in your code to employ
            arbitrary encodings.</p>
<p>Shelve keys are also decoded from <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> to <code class="epub__literal">str</code> per UTF-8 whenever they are returned
            from the shelve API (e.g., keys iteration). Stored
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>values</em></span> are always the <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> object produced by the pickler to
            represent a serialized object. We’ll see these behaviors in action
            in the examples of this <span>section</span>.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Storing Built-in Object Types in Shelves"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="storing_built-in_object_types_in_shelves"></a>Storing Built-in Object Types in Shelves</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Let’s run an interactive <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e74893"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e74898"></a>session to experiment with shelve interfaces. As
          mentioned, shelves are essentially just persistent dictionaries of
          objects, which you open and close:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e74902"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Dbase&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import shelve</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dbase = shelve.open("mydbase")</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>object1 = ['The', 'bright', ('side', 'of'), ['life']]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>object2 = {'name': 'Brian', 'age': 33, 'motto': object1}</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dbase['brian']  = object2</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dbase['knight'] = {'name': 'Knight', 'motto': 'Ni!'}</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dbase.close()</code></strong></pre>
<p>Here, we open a shelve and store two fairly complex dictionary
          and list data structures away permanently by simply assigning them
          to shelve keys. Because <code class="epub__literal">shelve</code>
          uses <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> internally, almost
          anything goes here—the trees of nested objects are automatically
          serialized into strings for storage. To fetch them back, just reopen
          the shelve and index:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e74936"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Dbase&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import shelve</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dbase = shelve.open("mydbase")</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>len(dbase)</code></strong>                             # entries
2

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dbase.keys()</code></strong>                           # index
KeysView(&lt;shelve.DbfilenameShelf object at 0x0181F630&gt;)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(dbase.keys())</code></strong>
['brian', 'knight']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dbase['knight']</code></strong>                        # fetch
{'motto': 'Ni!', 'name': 'Knight'}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for row in dbase.keys():</code></strong>               # .keys() is optional
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(row, '=&gt;')</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for field in dbase[row].keys():</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('  ', field, '=', dbase[row][field])</code></strong>
...
brian =&gt;
   motto = ['The', 'bright', ('side', 'of'), ['life']]
   age = 33
   name = Brian
knight =&gt;
   motto = Ni!
   name = Knight</pre>
<p>The nested loops at the end of this session step through
          nested dictionaries—the outer scans the shelve and the inner scans
          the objects stored in the shelve (both could use key iterators and
          omit their <code class="epub__literal">.keys()</code> calls). The
          crucial point to notice is that we’re using normal Python syntax,
          both to store and to fetch these persistent objects, as well as to
          process them after loading. It’s persistent Python data on
          disk.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Storing Class Instances in Shelves"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="storing_class_instances_in_shelves"></a>Storing Class Instances in Shelves</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>One of the more useful kinds of <a id="cl17.5.3"></a><a id="sh17.5.3"></a>objects to store in a shelve is a class instance.
          Because its attributes record state and its inherited methods define
          behavior, persistent class objects effectively serve the roles of
          both database <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>records</em></span> and database-processing
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>programs</em></span>. We can also use the underlying
          <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> module to serialize
          instances to flat files and other file-like objects (e.g., network
          sockets), but the higher-level <code class="epub__literal">shelve</code> module also gives us a convenient
          keyed-access storage medium. For instance, consider the simple class
          shown in Example 17-2,
          which is used to model people in a hypothetical work
          scenario.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_dbase_revers-id1"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 17-2. PP4E\Dbase\person.py (version 1)</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"a person object: fields + behavior"

class Person:
    def __init__(self, name, job, pay=0):
        self.name = name
        self.job  = job
        self.pay  = pay               # real instance data
    def tax(self):
        return self.pay * 0.25        # computed on call
    def info(self):
        return self.name, self.job, self.pay, self.tax()</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Nothing about this class suggests it will be used for database
          records—it can be imported and used independent of external storage.
          It’s easy to use it for a database’s records, though: we can make
          some persistent objects from this class by simply creating instances
          as usual, and then storing them by key on an opened shelve:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e75015"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Dbase&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from person import Person</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bob   = Person('bob', 'psychologist', 70000)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>emily = Person('emily', 'teacher', 40000)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import shelve</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dbase = shelve.open('cast')</code></strong>          # make new shelve
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for obj in (bob, emily):</code></strong>             # store objects
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dbase[obj.name] = obj</code></strong>            # use name for key
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dbase.close()</code></strong>                        # need for bsddb</pre>
<p>Here we used the instance objects’ <code class="epub__literal">name</code> attribute as their key in the shelve
          database. When we come back and fetch these objects in a later
          Python session or script, they are re-created in memory exactly as
          they were when they were stored:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e75050"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Dbase&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import shelve</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dbase = shelve.open('cast')</code></strong>          # reopen shelve
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(dbase.keys())</code></strong>                   # both objects are here
['bob', 'emily']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(dbase['emily'])</code></strong>
&lt;person.Person object at 0x0197EF70&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(dbase['bob'].tax())</code></strong>            # call: bob's tax
17500.0</pre>
<p>Notice that calling Bob’s <code class="epub__literal">tax</code> method works even though we didn’t
          import the <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> class in this
          last session. Python is smart enough to link this object back to its
          original class when unpickled, such that all the original methods
          are available through <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e75079"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e75081"></a>fetched objects.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Changing Classes of Objects Stored in Shelves"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="changing_classes_of_objects_stored_in_sh"></a>Changing Classes of Objects Stored in Shelves</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Technically, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e75089"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e75094"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e75099"></a>Python reimports a class to re-create its stored
          instances as they are fetched and unpickled. Here’s how this
          works:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Store</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>When Python pickles a class instance to store it in a
                shelve, it saves the instance’s attributes plus a reference to
                the instance’s class. In effect, pickled class instances in
                the prior example record the <code class="epub__literal">self</code> attributes assigned in the
                class. Really, Python serializes and stores the instance’s
                <code class="epub__literal">__dict__</code> attribute
                dictionary along with enough source file information to be
                able to locate the class’s module later—the names of the
                instance’s class as well as its class’s enclosing
                module.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Fetch</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>When Python unpickles a class instance fetched from a
                shelve, it re-creates the instance object in memory by
                reimporting the class using the save class and module name
                strings, assigning the saved attribute dictionary to a new
                empty instance, and linking the instance back to the class.
                This is be default, and it can be tailored by defining special
                methods that will be called by <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> to fetch and store instance
                state (see the Python library manual for details).</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>The key point in this is that the class and stored instance
          data are separate. The class itself is not stored with its
          instances, but is instead located in the Python source file and
          reimported later when instances are fetched.</p>
<p>The downside of this model is that the class must be
          importable to load instances off a shelve (more on this in a
          moment). The upside is that by modifying external classes in module
          files, we can change the way stored objects’ data is interpreted and
          used without actually having to change those stored objects. It’s as
          if the class is a program that processes stored records.</p>
<p>To illustrate, suppose the <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> class from the previous section was
          changed to the source code in Example 17-3.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_dbase_revers-id2"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 17-3. PP4E\Dbase\person.py (version 2)</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
a person object: fields + behavior
change: the tax method is now a computed attribute
"""

class Person:
    def __init__(self, name, job, pay=0):
        self.name = name
        self.job  = job
        self.pay  = pay                  # real instance data

    def __getattr__(self, attr):         # on person.attr
        if attr == 'tax':
            return self.pay * 0.30       # computed on access
        else:
            raise AttributeError()       # other unknown names

    def info(self):
        return self.name, self.job, self.pay, self.tax</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>This revision has a new tax rate (30 percent), introduces a
          <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> qualification
          overload method, and deletes the original <code class="epub__literal">tax</code> method. Because this new version of
          the class is re-imported when its existing instances are loaded from
          the shelve file, they acquire the new behavior automatically—their
          tax attribute references are now intercepted and computed when
          accessed:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e75153"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Dbase&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import shelve</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dbase = shelve.open('cast')</code></strong>      # reopen shelve
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(list(dbase.keys()))</code></strong>        # both objects are here
['bob', 'emily']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(dbase['emily'])</code></strong>
&lt;person.Person object at 0x019AEE90&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(dbase['bob'].tax)</code></strong>          # no need to call tax()
21000.0</pre>
<p>Because the class has changed, <code class="epub__literal">tax</code> is now simply qualified, not called.
          In addition, because the tax rate was changed in the class, Bob pays
          more this time around. Of course, this example is artificial, but
          when used well, this separation of classes and persistent instances
          can eliminate many traditional database update programs. In most
          cases, you can simply change the class, not each stored instance,
          for new behavior.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Shelve Constraints"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="shelve_constraints"></a>Shelve Constraints</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Although <a id="sh17.5.5"></a>shelves are generally straightforward to use, there
          are a few rough edges worth knowing about.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Keys must be strings (and str)"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="keys_must_be_strings_open_parenthesis_an"></a>Keys must be strings (and str)</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>First, although <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e75195"></a>they can store arbitrary objects, keys must still be
            strings. The following fails, unless you convert the integer 42 to
            the string <code class="epub__literal">42</code> manually
            first:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e75204"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">dbase[42] = value      # fails, but str(42) will work</pre>
<p>This is different from in-memory dictionaries, which allow
            any immutable object to be used as a key, and derives from the
            shelve’s use of DBM files internally. As we’ve seen, keys must
            further be <code class="epub__literal">str</code> strings in
            Python 3.X, not <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>, because
            the shelve will attempt to encode them in all cases.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Objects are unique only within a key"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="objects_are_unique_only_within_a_key"></a>Objects are unique only within a key</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Although the <code class="epub__literal">shelve</code>
            module <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e75222"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e75227"></a>is smart enough to detect multiple occurrences of a
            nested object and re-create only one copy when fetched, this holds
            true only within a given slot:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e75233"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">dbase[key] = [object, object]    # OK: only one copy stored and fetched

dbase[key1] = object
dbase[key2] = object             # bad?: two copies of object in the shelve</pre>
<p>When <code class="epub__literal">key1</code> and <code class="epub__literal">key2</code> are fetched, they reference
            independent copies of the original shared object; if that object
            is mutable, changes from one won’t be reflected in the other. This
            really stems from the fact the each key assignment runs an
            independent pickle operation—the pickler detects repeated objects
            but only within each pickle call. This may or may not be a concern
            in your practice, and it can be avoided with extra support logic,
            but an object can be duplicated if it spans keys.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Updates must treat shelves as fetch-modify-store mappings"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="updates_must_treat_shelves_as_fetch-modi"></a>Updates must treat shelves as fetch-modify-store
            mappings</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Because objects fetched from a shelve don’t know that they
            came from a shelve, operations that change components of a fetched
            object change only the in-memory copy, not the data on a
            shelve:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e75248"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">dbase[key].attr = value   # shelve unchanged</pre>
<p>To really change an object stored on a shelve, fetch it into
            memory, change its parts, and then write it back to the shelve as
            a whole by key assignment:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e75252"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">object = dbase[key]       # fetch it
object.attr = value       # modify it
dbase[key] = object       # store back-shelve changed (unless writeback)</pre>
<p>As noted earlier, the <code class="epub__literal">shelve.open</code> call’s optional<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e75259"></a> <code class="epub__literal">writeback</code>
            argument can be used to avoid the last step here, by automatically
            caching objects fetched and writing them to disk when the shelve
            is closed, but this can require substantial memory resources and
            make close operations slow.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Concurrent updates are not directly supported"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="concurrent_updates_are_not_directly_supp"></a>Concurrent updates are not directly supported</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">shelve</code> module does
            not currently support simultaneous updates. Simultaneous readers
            are OK, but writers must be given exclusive access to the shelve.
            You can trash a shelve if multiple processes write to it at the
            same time, which is a common potential in things such as
            server-side scripts on the Web. If your shelves may be updated by
            multiple processes, be sure to wrap updates in calls to the
            <code class="epub__literal">os.open</code> standard library
            function to lock files and provide exclusive access.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Underlying DBM format portability"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="underlying_dbm_format_portability"></a>Underlying DBM format portability</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>With shelves, the <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e75284"></a>files created by an underlying DBM system used to
            store your persistent objects are not necessarily compatible with
            all possible DBM implementations or Pythons. For instance, a file
            generated by <code class="epub__literal">gdbm</code> on Linux, or
            by the <code class="epub__literal">bsddb</code> library on
            Windows, may not be readable by a Python with other DBM modules
            installed.</p>
<p>This is really the same portability issue we discussed for
            DBM files earlier. As you’ll recall, when a DBM file (or by proxy,
            a shelve) is created, the <code class="epub__literal">dbm</code>
            module tries to import all possible DBM system modules in a
            predefined order and uses the first that it finds. When <code class="epub__literal">dmb</code> later opens an existing file, it
            attempts to determine which DBM system created it by inspecting
            the files(s). Because the <code class="epub__literal">bsddb</code>
            system is tried first at file creation time and is available on
            both Windows and many Unix-like systems, your DBM file is portable
            as long as your Pythons support BSD on both platforms. This is
            also true if all platforms you’ll use fall back on Python’s own
            <code class="epub__literal">dbm.dumb</code> implementation. If the
            system used to create a DBM file is not available on the
            underlying platform, though, the DBM file cannot be used.</p>
<p>If DBM file portability is a concern, make sure that all the
            Pythons that will read your data use compatible DBM modules. If
            that is not an option, use the <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> module directly and flat files
            for storage (thereby bypassing both <code class="epub__literal">shelve</code> and <code class="epub__literal">dbm</code>), or use the OODB systems we’ll meet
            later in this chapter. Such systems may also offer a more complete
            answer to <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>transaction processing</em></span>, with calls
            to commit changes, and automatic rollback to prior commit points
            <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e75324"></a>on errors.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Pickled Class Constraints"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="pickled_class_constraints"></a>Pickled Class Constraints</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In addition to these <a id="pick17.5.6"></a>shelve constraints, storing class instances in a
          shelve adds a set of additional rules you need to be aware of.
          Really, these are imposed by the <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> module, not by <code class="epub__literal">shelve</code>, so be sure to follow these if you
          store class instance objects with <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> directly too:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Classes must be importable</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>As we’ve seen, the Python pickler stores instance
                attributes only when pickling an instance object, and it
                reimports the class later to re-create the instance. Because
                of that, the classes of stored objects must be importable when
                objects are <span>unpickled—</span>they must be coded
                unnested at the top level of a module file that is accessible
                on the module import search path at load time (e.g., named
                in<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e75359"></a> <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code>
                or in a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>.pth</em></span> file, or the current working
                directory or that of the top-level script).</p>
<p>Further, the class usually must be associated with a
                real imported module when instances are pickled, not with a
                top-level script (with the module name <code class="epub__literal">__main__</code>), unless they will only
                ever be used in the top-level script. You also need to be
                careful about moving class modules after instances are stored.
                When an instance is unpickled, Python must find its class’s
                module on the module search using the original module name
                (including any package path prefixes) and fetch the class from
                that module using the original class name. If the module or
                class has been moved or renamed, it might not be found.</p>
<p>In applications where pickled objects are shipped over
                network sockets, it’s possible to satisfy this constraint by
                shipping the text of the class along with stored instances;
                recipients may simply store the class in a local module file
                on the import search path prior to unpickling received
                instances. Where this is inconvenient or impossible, simpler
                pickled objects such as lists and dictionaries with nesting
                may be transferred instead, as they require no source file to
                be reconstructed.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Class changes must be backward
              compatible</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Although Python lets you change a class while instances
                of it are stored on a shelve, those changes must be backward
                compatible with the objects already stored. For instance, you
                cannot change the class to expect an attribute not associated
                with already stored persistent instances unless you first
                manually update those stored instances or provide extra
                conversion protocols on the class.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Other pickle module
              constraints</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Shelves also inherit the pickling systems’ nonclass
                limitations. As discussed earlier, some types of objects
                (e.g., open files and sockets) cannot be pickled, and thus
                cannot be stored in a shelve.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>In an early Python release, persistent object classes also had
          to either use constructors with no arguments or provide defaults for
          all constructor arguments (much like the notion of a C++ copy
          constructor). This constraint was dropped as of Python 1.5.2—classes
          with nondefaulted constructor arguments now work as is in the
          pickling <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e75394"></a>system.<sup>[69]</sup></p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Other Shelve Limitations"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="other_shelve_limitations"></a>Other Shelve Limitations</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Finally, although shelves store objects persistently, they are
          not really object-oriented database systems. Such systems also
          implement features such as immediate automatic write-through on
          changes, transaction commits and rollbacks, safe concurrent updates,
          and object decomposition and delayed (“lazy”) component fetches
          based on generated object IDs. Parts of larger objects may be loaded
          into memory only as they are accessed. It’s possible to extend
          shelves to support such features manually, but you don’t need to—the
          ZODB system, among others, provides an implementation of a more
          complete object-oriented database system. It is constructed on top
          of Python’s built-in pickling persistence support, but it offers
          additional features for advanced data stores. For more on ZODB,
          let’s move on to the next <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e75424"></a>section.</p>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[69] </sup>Interestingly, Python avoids calling the class to
              re-create a pickled instance and instead simply makes a class
              object generically, inserts instance attributes, and sets the
              instance’s <code class="epub__literal">__class__</code> pointer
              to the original class directly. This avoids the need for
              defaults, but it also means that the class <code class="epub__literal">__init__</code> constructors that are no
              longer called as objects are unpickled, unless you provide extra
              methods to force the call. See the library manual for more
              details, and see the <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code>
              module’s source code (<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>pickle.py</em></span> in the
              source library) if you’re curious about how this works. Or see
              the PyForm example later in this chapter—it does something very
              similar with <code class="epub__literal">__class__</code> links
              to build an instance object from a class and dictionary of
              attributes, without calling the class’s <code class="epub__literal">__init__</code> constructor. This makes
              constructor argument defaults unnecessary in classes used for
              records browsed by PyForm, but it’s the same idea.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
