<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>The ZODB Object-Oriented Database</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="The ZODB Object-Oriented Database"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="the_zodb_object-oriented_database"></a>The ZODB Object-Oriented Database</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>ZODB, the<a id="zo17.6"></a><a id="per17.6"></a> Zope Object Database, is a full-featured and
        Python-specific object-oriented database (OODB) system. ZODB can be
        thought of as a more powerful alternative to Python’s shelves of the
        preceding section. It allows you to store nearly arbitrary Python
        objects persistently by key, like shelves, but it adds a set of
        additional features in exchange for a small amount of extra interface
        code.</p>
<p>ZODB is not the only OODB available for Python: the Durus system
        <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e75445"></a>is generally seen as a simpler OODB which was inspired
        by ZODB. While Durus offers some advantages, it does not provide all
        the features of ZODB today, and it has not been as widely deployed
        (though perhaps in part because it is newer). Because of that, this
        section focuses on ZODB to introduce OODB concepts in general.</p>
<p>ZODB is an open source, third-party add-on for Python. It was
        originally developed as the database mechanism for websites developed
        with the Zope web framework mentioned in Chapter 12, but it is now available as a
        standalone package. It’s useful outside the context of both Zope and
        the Web as a general database management system in any domain.</p>
<p>Although ZODB does not support SQL queries, objects stored in
        ZODB can leverage the full power of the Python language. Moreover, in
        some applications, stored data is more naturally represented as a
        structured Python object. Table-based relational systems often must
        represent such data as individual parts scattered across multiple
        tables and associate them with complex and potentially slow key-based
        joins, or otherwise map them to and from the Python class model.
        Because OODBs store native Python objects directly, they can often
        provide a simpler model in systems which do not require the full power
        of SQL.</p>
<p>Using a ZODB database is very similar to Python’s standard
        library shelves, described in the prior section. Just like shelves,
        ZODB uses the Python pickling system to implement a persistent
        dictionary of persistent Python objects. In fact, there is almost no
        database interface to be found—objects are made persistent simply by
        assigning them to keys of the root ZODB dictionary object, or
        embedding them in objects stored in the database root. And as in a
        shelve, “records” take the form of native Python objects, processed
        with normal Python syntax and tools.</p>
<p>Unlike shelves, though, ZODB adds features critical to some
        types of programs:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Concurrent updates</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>You don’t need to manually lock files to avoid data
              corruption if there are potentially many concurrent writers, the
              way you would for shelves.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Transaction commit and rollback</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>If your program crashes, your changes are not retained
              unless you explicitly commit them to the database.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Automatic updates for some types of in-memory
            object changes</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Objects in ZODB derived from a persistence superclass are
              smart enough to know the database must be updated when an
              attribute is assigned.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Automatic caching of objects</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Objects are cached in memory for efficiency and are
              automatically removed from the cache when they haven’t been
              used.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Platform-independent storage</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Because ZODB stores your database in a single flat file
              with large-file support, it is immune to the potential size
              constraints and DBM filesystem format differences of shelves. As
              we saw earlier in this chapter, a shelve created on Windows
              using <code class="epub__literal">bsddb</code> may not be
              accessible to a script running with <code class="epub__literal">gdbm</code> on Linux.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Because of such advantages, ZODB is probably worth your
        attention if you need to store Python objects in a database
        persistently in a production environment. The only significant price
        you’ll pay for using ZODB is a small amount of extra code:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Accessing the database requires a small amount of extra
            boilerplate code to interface with ZODB—it’s not a simple open
            call.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Classes are derived from a persistence superclass if you
            want them to take advantage of automatic updates on
            changes—persistent classes are generally not as <span>completely</span> independent of the
            database as in shelves, though they can be.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Considering the extra functionality ZODB provides beyond
        shelves, these trade-offs are usually more than justified for
        <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e75515"></a>many applications.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The Mostly Missing ZODB Tutorial"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_mostly_missing_zodb_tutorial"></a>The Mostly Missing ZODB Tutorial</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Unfortunately, as I write <a id="zo17.6.1"></a>this edition in June 2010, ZODB is not yet available
          for Python 3.X, the version used in this book. Because of that, the
          prior edition’s Python 2.X examples and material have been removed
          from this section. However, in deference to Python 2.X users, as
          well as 3.X readers of some bright future where a 3.X-base ZODB has
          materialized, I’ve made the prior edition’s ZODB materials and
          examples available in this edition’s examples package.</p>
<p>See the Preface for details on the examples
          package, and see these locations within it for more on ZODB:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e75534"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\Dbase\Zodb-2.x                   # ZODB examples code third edition
C:\...\Dbase\Zodb-2.x\Documentaion      # The 3rd Edition's ZODB tutorial</pre>
<p>Although I cannot predict the future, ZODB will likely become
          available for Python 3.X eventually. In the absence of this, other
          Python-based OODBs may offer additional 3.X options.</p>
<p>To give you a brief sample of ZODB’s flavor, though, here’s a
          quick spin through its operation in Python 2.X. Once we’ve installed
          a compatible ZODB, we begin by first creating a database:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e75540"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">...\PP4E\Dbase\Zodb-2.x&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from ZODB import FileStorage, DB</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>storage = FileStorage.FileStorage(r'C:\temp\mydb.fs')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>db = DB(storage)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>connection = db.open()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>root = connection.root()</code></strong></pre>
<p>This is mostly standard “boilerplate” code for connecting to a
          ZODB database: we import its tools, create a <code class="epub__literal">FileStorage</code> and a <code class="epub__literal">DB</code> from it, and then open the database and
          create the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>root object</em></span>. The root object is the
          persistent dictionary in which objects are stored. <code class="epub__literal">FileStorage</code> is an object that maps the
          database to a flat file. Other storage interface options, such as
          relational database-based storage, are also possible.</p>
<p>Adding objects to a ZODB database is as simple as in shelves.
          Almost any Python object will do, including tuples, lists,
          dictionaries, class instances, and nested combinations thereof. As
          for <code class="epub__literal">shelve</code>, simply assign your
          objects to a key in the database root object to make them
          persistent:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e75579"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>object1 = (1, 'spam', 4, 'YOU')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>object2 = [[1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6], [7, 8, 9]]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>object3 = {'name': ['Bob', 'Doe'],</code></strong>
               <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'age':  42,</code></strong>
               <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'job':  ('dev', 'mgr')}</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>root['mystr']   = 'spam' * 3</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>root['mytuple'] = object1</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>root['mylist']  = object2</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>root['mydict']  = object3</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>root['mylist']</code></strong>
[[1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6], [7, 8, 9]]</pre>
<p>Because ZODB supports transaction rollbacks, you must commit
          your changes to the database to make them permanent. Ultimately,
          this transfers the pickled representation of your objects to the
          underlying file storage medium—here, three files that include the
          name of the file we gave when opening:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e75615"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import transaction</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>transaction.commit()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>storage.close()</code></strong>

...\PP4E\Dbase\Zodb-2.x&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dir /B c:\temp\mydb*</code></strong>
mydb.fs
mydb.fs.index
mydb.fs.tmp</pre>
<p>Without the final commit in this session, none of the changes
          we made would be saved. This is what we want in general—if a program
          aborts in the middle of an update task, none of the partially
          complete work it has done is retained. In fact, ZODB supports
          general database undo operations.</p>
<p>Pulling persistent objects back from ZODB in another session
          or program is just as straightforward: reopen the database as before
          and index the root to fetch objects back into memory. Like shelves,
          the database root supports dictionary interfaces—it may be indexed,
          has dictionary methods and a length, and so on:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e75633"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">...\PP4E\Dbase\Zodb-2.x&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from ZODB import FileStorage, DB</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>storage = FileStorage.FileStorage(r'C:\temp\mydb.fs')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>db = DB(storage)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>connection = db.open()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>root = connection.root()</code></strong>                          # connect

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>len(root), root.keys()</code></strong>                            # size, index
(4 ['mylist', 'mystr', 'mytuple', 'mydict'])

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>root['mylist']</code></strong>                                    # fetch objects
[[1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6], [7, 8, 9]]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>root['mydict']</code></strong>
{'job': ('dev', 'mgr'), 'age': 42, 'name': ['Bob', 'Doe']}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>root['mydict']['name'][-1]</code></strong>                        # Bob's last name
'Doe'</pre>
<p>Because the database root looks just like a dictionary, we can
          process it with normal dictionary code—stepping through the keys
          list to scan record by record, for instance:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e75668"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for key in root.keys():</code></strong>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('%s =&gt; %s' % (key.ljust(10), root[key]))</code></strong>

mylist     =&gt; [[1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6], [7, 8, 9]]
mystr      =&gt; spamspamspam
mytuple    =&gt; (1, 'spam', 4, 'YOU')
mydict     =&gt; {'job': ('dev', 'mgr'), 'age': 42, 'name': ['Bob', 'Doe']}</pre>
<p>Also like pickling and shelves, ZODB supports storage and
          retrieval of class instance objects, though they must inherit from a
          superclass which provides required protocol and intercepts attribute
          changes in order to flush them to disk automatically:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e75678"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from persistent import Persistent
class Person(Persistent):
    def __init__(self, name, job=None, rate=0):
        self.name = name
        self.job  = job
        self.rate = rate
    def changeRate(self, newrate):
        self.rate = newrate                   # automatically updates database</pre>
<p>When changing ZODB persistent class instances, in-memory
          attribute changes are <span>automatically</span> written back to the
          database. Other types of changes, such as in-place <span>appends</span> and key assignments, still
          require reassignment to the original key as in shelves to force the
          change to be written to disk (built-in list and dictionary objects
          do not know that they are persistent).</p>
<p>Because ZODB does not yet work with Python 3.X, that’s as much
          as we can say about it in this book. For more details, search for
          ZODB and Zope resources on the Web, and see the examples package
          resources listed earlier. Here, let’s move on to see how Python
          programs can make use of a very different sort of database
          interface—relational databases and <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e75690"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e75692"></a>SQL.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
