<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>SQL Database Interfaces</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="SQL Database Interfaces"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="sql_database_interfaces"></a>SQL Database Interfaces</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">shelve</code> <a id="sql17.7"></a><a id="per17.7"></a>module and ZODB package of the prior sections are
        powerful tools. Both allow scripts to throw nearly arbitrary Python
        objects on a keyed-access file and load them back later—in a single
        step for shelves and with a small amount of administrative code for
        ZODB. Especially for applications that record highly structured data,
        object databases can be convenient and efficient—there is no need to
        split and later join together the parts of large objects, and stored
        data is processed with normal Python syntax because it is normal
        Python objects.</p>
<p>Shelves and ZODB aren’t relational database systems, though;
        objects (records) are accessed with a single key, and there is no
        notion of SQL queries. Shelves, for instance, are essentially
        databases with a single index and no other query-processing support.
        Although it’s possible to build a multiple-index interface to store
        data with multiple shelves, it’s not a trivial task and requires
        manually coded extensions.</p>
<p>ZODB supports some types of searching beyond shelve (e.g., its
        cataloging feature), and persistent objects may be traversed with all
        the power of the Python language. However, neither shelves nor ZODB
        object-oriented databases provide the full generality of SQL queries.
        Moreover, especially for data that has a naturally tabular structure,
        relational databases may sometimes be a better fit.</p>
<p>For programs that can benefit from the power of SQL, Python also
        broadly supports relational database management systems (RDBMSs).
        Relational databases are not necessarily mutually exclusive with the
        object persistence topics we studied earlier in this chapter—it is
        possible, for example, to store the serialized string representation
        of a Python object produced by pickling in a relational database. ZODB
        also supports the notion of mapping an object database to a relational
        storage medium.</p>
<p>The databases we’ll meet in this section, though, are structured
        and processed in very different ways:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>They store data in related tables of columns (rather than in
            persistent dictionaries of arbitrarily structured persistent
            Python objects).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>They support the SQL query language for accessing data and
            exploiting relationships among it (instead of Python object
            traversals).</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>For some applications, the end result can be a potent
        combination. Moreover, some SQL-based database systems provide
        industrial-strength persistence support for <span>enterprise</span>-level data.</p>
<p>Today, there are freely available interfaces that let Python
        scripts utilize all common relational database systems, both free and
        commercial<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e75736"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e75741"></a>: MySQL, Oracle, Sybase, Informix, InterBase, PostgreSQL
        (Postgres), SQLite, ODBC, and more. In addition, the Python community
        has defined a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>database API</em></span> specification that
        works portably with a variety of underlying database packages. Scripts
        written for this API can be migrated to different database vendor
        packages, with minimal or no source code changes.</p>
<p>As of Python 2.5, Python itself includes built-in support for
        the SQLite relational database system as part of its standard library.
        Because this system supports the portable database API, it serves as a
        tool for both program storage and prototyping—systems developed with
        SQLite work largely unchanged when a more feature-rich database such
        as MySQL or Oracle is deployed.</p>
<p>Moreover, the popular<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e75754"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e75757"></a> SQLObject and SQLAlchemy third-party systems both
        provide an Object Relational Mapper (ORM), which grafts an object
        interface onto your database, in which tables are modeled by as Python
        classes, rows by instances of those classes, and columns by instance
        attributes. Since ORMs largely just wrap SQL databases in Python
        classes, we’ll defer their coverage until later in this chapter; for
        now, let’s explore SQL basics in <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e75761"></a>Python.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="SQL Interface Overview"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="sql_interface_overview"></a>SQL Interface Overview</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Like ZODB, and <a id="sql17.7.1"></a>unlike the <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code>
          and <code class="epub__literal">shelve</code> persistence modules
          presented earlier, most SQL databases are optional extensions that
          are not part of Python itself. SQLite is the only relational
          database package that comes with Python. Moreover, you need to know
          SQL to fully understand their interfaces. Because we don’t have
          space to teach SQL in this text, this section gives a brief overview
          of the API; please consult other SQL references and the database API
          resources mentioned in the next section for more details that we’ll
          skip here.</p>
<p>The good news is that you can access SQL databases from
          Python, through a straightforward and portable model. The Python
          database API specification defines an interface for communicating
          with underlying database systems from Python scripts.
          Vendor-specific database interfaces for Python may or may not
          conform to this API completely, but all database extensions for
          Python in common use are minor variations on a theme. Under the
          database API, SQL databases in Python are grounded on three core
          <span>concepts</span>:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Connection objects</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Represent a connection to a database, are the interface
                to rollback and commit operations, provide package
                implementation details, and generate cursor objects.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Cursor objects</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Represent an SQL statement submitted as a string and can
                be used to access and step through SQL statement
                results.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Query results of SQL</em></span> <code class="epub__literal">select</code>
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>statements</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Are returned to scripts as Python sequences of sequences
                (e.g., a list of tuples), representing database tables of
                rows. Within these row sequences, column field values are
                normal Python objects such as strings, integers, and floats
                (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">[('bob',48),
                ('emily',47)]</code>). Column values may also be special
                types that encapsulate things such as date and time, and
                database NULL values are returned as the Python <code class="epub__literal">None</code> object.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Beyond this, the API defines a standard set of database
          exception types, special database type object constructors, and
          informational top-level calls including thread safety and
          replacement style checks.</p>
<p>For instance, to establish a database connection under the
          Python API-compliant Oracle interface, install the commonly used
          Python Oracle extension module as well as Oracle itself, and then
          run a statement of this form:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e75825"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">connobj = connect("user/password@system")</pre>
<p>This call’s arguments may vary per database and vendor (e.g.,
          some may require network details or a local file’s name), but they
          generally contain what you provide to log in to your database
          system. Once you have a connection object, there a variety of things
          you can do with it, including:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e75829"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">connobj.close()                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">close connection now (not at object __del__ time)</span></em>
connobj.commit()                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">commit any pending transactions to the database</span></em>
connobj.rollback()                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">roll database back to start of pending transactions</span></em></pre>
<p>But one of the most useful things to do with a connection
          object is to generate a cursor object:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e75841"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">cursobj = connobj.cursor()            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">return a new cursor object for running SQL</span></em></pre>
<p>Cursor objects have a set of methods, too (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">close</code> to close the cursor before its
          destructor runs, and <code class="epub__literal">callproc</code> to
          call a stored procedure), but the most important may be this
          one:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e75854"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">cursobj.execute(<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>sqlstring</code></em> [, <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>parameters</code></em>])   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">run SQL query or command string</span></em></pre>
<p>Parameters are passed in as a sequence or mapping of values,
          and are substituted into the SQL statement string according to the
          interface module’s replacement target conventions. The <code class="epub__literal">execute</code> method can be used to run a
          variety of SQL statement strings:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>DDL definition statements (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">CREATE TABLE</code>)</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>DML modification statements (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">UPDATE</code> or <code class="epub__literal">INSERT</code>)</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>DQL query statements (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">SELECT</code>)</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>After running an SQL statement, the cursor’s <code class="epub__literal">rowcount</code> attribute gives the number of
          rows changed (for DML changes) or fetched (for DQL queries), and the
          cursor’s <code class="epub__literal">description</code> attribute
          gives column names and types after a query; <code class="epub__literal">execute</code> also returns the number of rows
          affected or fetched in the most vendor interfaces. For DQL query
          statements, you must call one of the <code class="epub__literal">fetch</code> methods to complete the
          operation:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e75905"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">tuple       = cursobj.fetchone()          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">fetch next row of a query result</span></em>
listoftuple = cursobj.fetchmany([<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>size</code></em>])   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">fetch next set of rows of query result</span></em>
listoftuple = cursobj.fetchall()          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">fetch all remaining rows of the result</span></em></pre>
<p>And once you’ve received fetch method results, table
          information is processed using normal Python sequence operations;
          for example, you can step through the tuples in a <code class="epub__literal">fetchall</code> result list with a simple
          <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop or comprehension
          expression. Most Python database interfaces also allow you to
          provide values to be passed to SQL statement strings, by providing
          targets and a tuple of parameters. For instance:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e75926"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">query = 'SELECT name, shoesize FROM spam WHERE job = ? AND age = ?'
cursobj.execute(query, (value1, value2))
results = cursobj.fetchall()
for row in results: <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...</code></em></pre>
<p>In this event, the database interface utilizes prepared
          statements (an optimization and convenience) and correctly passes
          the parameters to the database regardless of their Python types. The
          notation used to code targets in the query string may vary in some
          database interfaces (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">:p1</code>
          and <code class="epub__literal">:p2</code> or two <code class="epub__literal">%s</code>, rather than the two <code class="epub__literal">?</code>s used by the Oracle interface); in any
          event, this is not the same as Python’s <code class="epub__literal">%</code> string formatting operator, as it
          sidesteps security issues along the way.</p>
<p>Finally, if your database supports stored procedures, you can
          call them with the <code class="epub__literal">callproc</code>
          method or by passing an SQL <code class="epub__literal">CALL</code>
          or <code class="epub__literal">EXEC</code> statement string to the
          <code class="epub__literal">execute</code> method. <code class="epub__literal">callproc</code> may generate a result table
          retrieved with a <code class="epub__literal">fetch</code> variant,
          and returns a modified copy of the input sequence—input parameters
          are left untouched, and output and input/output parameters are
          replaced with possibly new values. Additional API features,
          including support for database blobs (roughly, with sized results),
          is described in the API’s documentation. For now, let’s move on to
          do some real SQL processing in <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e75968"></a>Python.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="An SQL Database API Tutorial with SQLite"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="an_sql_database_api_tutorial_with_sqlite"></a>An SQL Database API Tutorial with SQLite</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>We don’t have <a id="sql17.7.2"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e75981"></a>space to provide an exhaustive reference for the
          database API in this book. To sample the flavor of the interface,
          though, let’s step through a few simple examples. We’ll use the
          SQLite database system for this tutorial. SQLite is a standard part
          of Python itself, which you can reasonably expect to be available in
          all Python installations. Although SQLite implements a complete
          relational database system, it takes the form of an in-process
          library instead of a server. This generally makes it better suited
          for program storage than for enterprise-level data needs.</p>
<p>Thanks to Python’s portable database API, though, other
          popular database packages such as PostgreSQL, MySQL, and Oracle are
          used almost identically; the initial call to log in to the database
          will be all that normally requires different argument values for
          scripts that use standard SQL code. Because of this, we can use the
          SQLite system both as a prototyping tool in applications development
          and as an easy way to get started with the Python SQL database API
          in this book.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note"><h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p>As mentioned earlier, the third edition’s coverage of MySQL
            had to be replaced here because the interface used is not yet
            ported to Python 3.X. However, the third edition’s MySQL-based
            examples and overview are available in the book examples package,
            in directory <em class="epub__filename">C:\...\PP4E\Dbase\Sql\MySql-2.X</em>, and
            its <em class="epub__filename">Documentation</em>
            subdirectory. The examples are in Python 2.X form, but their
            database-related code is largely version neutral. Since that code
            is also largely database neutral, it is probably of limited value
            to most readers; the scripts listed in this book should work on
            other database packages like MySQL with only trivial
            changes.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Getting started"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="getting_started-id1"></a>Getting started</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Regardless of which <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e76003"></a>database system your scripts talk to, the basic SQL
            interface in Python is very simple. In fact, it’s hardly
            object-oriented at all—queries and other database commands are
            sent as strings of SQL. If you know SQL, you already have most of
            what you need to use relational databases in Python. That’s good
            news if you fall into this category, but adds a prerequisite if
            you don’t.</p>
<p>This isn’t a book on the SQL language, so we’ll defer to
            other resources for details on the commands we’ll be running here
            (O’Reilly has a suite of books on the topic). In fact, the
            databases we’ll use are tiny, and the commands we’ll use are
            deliberately simple as SQL goes—you’ll want to extrapolate from
            what you see here to the more realistic tasks you face. This
            section is just a brief look at how to use the Python language in
            conjunction with an SQL database.</p>
<p>Whether large or small, though, the Python code needed to
            process your database turns out to be surprisingly
            straightforward. To get started, the first thing we need to do is
            open a connection to the database and create a table for storing
            records:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e76013"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Dbase\Sql&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import sqlite3</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>conn = sqlite3.connect('dbase1')</code></strong>     # use a full path for files elsewhere</pre>
<p>We start out by importing the Python SQLite interface
            here—it’s a standard library module called <code class="epub__literal">sqlite3</code> to our scripts. Next we create a
            connection object, passing in the items our database requires at
            start-up time—here, the name of the local file where our databases
            will be stored. This file is what you’ll want to back up to save
            your database. It will create the file if needed, or open its
            current content; SQLite also accepts that special string
            “:memory:” to create a temporary database in memory
            instead.</p>
<p>As long as a script sticks to using standard SQL code, the
            <code class="epub__literal">connect</code> call’s arguments are
            usually the only thing that can vary across different database
            systems. For example, in the MySQL interface this call accepts a
            network host’s domain name, user name, and password, passed as
            keyword arguments instead, and the Oracle example sketched earlier
            expects a more specific sting syntax. Once we’ve gotten past this
            platform-<span>specific</span> call,
            though, the rest of the API is largely database neutral.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Making databases and tables"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="making_databases_and_tables"></a>Making databases and tables</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Next, let’s make a <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e76042"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e76047"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e76052"></a>cursor for submitting SQL statements to the database
            server, and submit one to create a first table:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e76058"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs = conn.cursor()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>tblcmd = 'create table people (name char(30), job char(10), pay int(4))'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.execute(tblcmd)</code></strong></pre>
<p>The last command here creates the table called “people”
            within the database; the name, job, and pay information specifies
            the columns in this table, as well as their datatypes, using a
            “type(size)” syntax—two strings and an integer. Datatypes can be
            more sophisticated than ours, but we’ll ignore such details here
            (see SQL references). In SQLite, the file is the database, so
            there’s no notion of creating or using a specific database within
            it, as there is in some systems. At this point, there is a simple
            flat file in the current working directory named <em class="epub__filename">data1</em>, which contains binary data and
            contains our <code class="epub__literal">people</code> database
            table.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Adding records"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="adding_records"></a>Adding records</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>So far, we’ve <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e76081"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e76086"></a>logged in (which just means opening a local file in
            SQLite) and created a table. Next let’s start a new Python session
            and create some records. There are three basic statement-based
            approaches we can use here: inserting one row at a time or
            inserting multiple rows with a single call statement or a Python
            loop. Here is the simple case (I’m omitting some call return
            values here if they are irrelevant to the story):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e76092"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Dbase\Sql&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import sqlite3</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>conn = sqlite3.connect('dbase1')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs = conn.cursor()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.execute('insert into people values (?, ?, ?)', ('Bob', 'dev', 5000))</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.rowcount</code></strong>
1
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sqlite3.paramstyle</code></strong>
'qmark'</pre>
<p>Create a cursor object to submit SQL statements to the
            database server as before. The SQL <code class="epub__literal">insert</code> <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e76121"></a>command adds a single row to the table. After an
            execute call, the cursor’s <code class="epub__literal">rowcount</code> attribute gives the number of
            rows produced or affected by the last statement run. This is also
            available as the return value of an <code class="epub__literal">execute</code> call in some database interface
            modules, but this is not defined in the database API
            specification, and isn’t <span>provided</span> in SQLite; in other words,
            don’t depend on it if you want your database scripts to work on
            other database systems.</p>
<p>Parameters to substitute into the SQL statement string are
            generally passed in as a sequence (e.g., list or tuple). Notice
            the module’s <code class="epub__literal">paramstyle</code>—this
            tells us what style it uses for substitution targets in the
            statement string. Here, <code class="epub__literal">qmark</code>
            means this module accepts <code class="epub__literal">?</code> for
            replacement targets. Other database modules might use styles such
            as <code class="epub__literal">format</code> (meaning a <code class="epub__literal">%s</code> target), or numeric indexes or
            mapping keys; see the DB API for more details.</p>
<p>To insert multiple rows with a single statement, use the
            <code class="epub__literal">executemany</code> method and a
            sequence of row sequences (e.g., a list of lists). This call is
            like calling <code class="epub__literal">execute</code> once for
            each row sequence in the argument, and in fact may be implemented
            as such; database interfaces may also use database-specific
            techniques to make this run quicker, though:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e76159"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.executemany('insert into people values (?, ?, ?)',</code></strong>
...          <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[ ('Sue', 'mus', '70000'),</code></strong>
...            <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>('Ann', 'mus', '60000')])</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.rowcount</code></strong>
2</pre>
<p>We inserted two rows at once in the last statement. It’s
            hardly any more work to achieve the same result by inserting one
            row at a time with a Python loop:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e76175"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rows = [['Tom', 'mgr', 100000],</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>['Kim', 'adm', 30000],</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>['pat', 'dev', 90000]]</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for row in rows:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.execute('insert into people values (? , ?, ?)', row)</code></strong>
...

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>conn.commit()</code></strong></pre>
<p>Blending Python and SQL like this starts to open up all
            sorts of interesting possibilities. Notice the last command; we
            always need to call the connection’s <code class="epub__literal">commit</code> method to write our changes out
            to the database. Otherwise, when the connection is closed, our
            changes may be lost. In fact, until we call the <code class="epub__literal">commit</code> method, none of our inserts may
            be visible from other database connections.</p>
<p>Technically, the API suggests that a connection object
            should automatically call its <code class="epub__literal">rollback</code> method to back out changes that
            have not yet been committed, when it is closed (which happens
            manually when its <code class="epub__literal">close</code> method
            is called, or automatically when the connection object is about to
            be garbage collected). For database systems that don’t support
            transaction commit and rollback operations, these calls may do
            nothing. SQLite implements both the <code class="epub__literal">commit</code> and <code class="epub__literal">rollback</code> methods; the latter rolls back
            any changes made since the last <code class="epub__literal">commit</code>.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Running queries"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="running_queries"></a>Running queries</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>OK, we’ve now <a id="sql17.7.2.4"></a><a id="qu17.7.2.4"></a>added six records to our database table. Let’s run
            an SQL query to see how we did:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e76236"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.execute('select * from people')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.fetchall()</code></strong>
[('Bob', 'dev', 5000), ('Sue', 'mus', 70000), ('Ann', 'mus', 60000), ('Tom', 'mgr',
100000), ('Kim', 'adm', 30000), ('pat', 'dev', 90000)]</pre>
<p>Run an SQL <code class="epub__literal">select</code>
            statement with a cursor object to grab all rows and call the
            cursor’s <code class="epub__literal">fetchall</code> to retrieve
            them. They come back to our script as a sequence of sequences. In
            this module, it’s a list of tuples—the outer list represents the
            result table, the nested tuples are that table’s rows, and the
            nested tuple’s contents are the column data. Because it’s all
            Python data, once we get the query result, we process it with
            normal Python code. For example, to make the display a bit more
            coherent, loop through the query’s result as usual:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e76252"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.execute('select * from people')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for row in curs.fetchall():</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(row)</code></strong>
...
('Bob', 'dev', 5000)
('Sue', 'mus', 70000)
('Ann', 'mus', 60000)
('Tom', 'mgr', 100000)
('Kim', 'adm', 30000)
('pat', 'dev', 90000)</pre>
<p>Tuple unpacking comes in handy in loops here, too, to pick
            out column values as we go. Here’s a simple formatted display of
            two of the columns’ values:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e76265"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.execute('select * from people')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for (name, job, pay) in curs.fetchall():</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(name, ':', pay)</code></strong>
...
Bob : 5000
Sue : 70000
Ann : 60000
Tom : 100000
Kim : 30000
pat : 90000</pre>
<p>Because the query result is a sequence, we can use Python’s
            powerful sequence and iteration tools to process it. For instance,
            to select just the name column values, we can run a more specific
            SQL query and get a list of tuples:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e76278"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.execute('select name from people')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>names = curs.fetchall()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>names</code></strong>
[('Bob',), ('Sue',), ('Ann',), ('Tom',), ('Kim',), ('pat',)]</pre>
<p>Or we can use a Python list comprehension to pick out the
            fields we want—by using Python code, we have more control over the
            data’s content and format:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e76291"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.execute('select * from people')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>names = [rec[0] for rec in curs.fetchall()]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>names</code></strong>
['Bob', 'Sue', 'Ann', 'Tom', 'Kim', 'pat']</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">fetchall</code> call we’ve
            used so far fetches the entire query result table all at once, as
            a single sequence (an empty sequence comes back, if the result is
            empty). That’s convenient, but it may be slow enough to block the
            caller temporarily for large result tables or generate substantial
            network traffic if the server is running remotely (something could
            easily require a parallel thread in GUI). To avoid such a
            bottleneck, we can also grab just one row, or a bunch of rows, at
            a time with <code class="epub__literal">fetchone</code> and
            <code class="epub__literal">fetchmany</code>. The <code class="epub__literal">fetchone</code> call returns the next result
            row or a <code class="epub__literal">None</code> false value at
            the end of the table:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e76320"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.execute('select * from people')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>while True:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>row = curs.fetchone()</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if not row: break</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(row)</code></strong>
...
('Bob', 'dev', 5000)
('Sue', 'mus', 70000)
('Ann', 'mus', 60000)
('Tom', 'mgr', 100000)
('Kim', 'adm', 30000)
('pat', 'dev', 90000)</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">fetchmany</code> call
            returns a sequence of rows from the result, but not the entire
            table; you can specify how many rows to grab each time with a
            parameter or rely on the default as given by the cursor’s <code class="epub__literal">arraysize</code> attribute. Each call gets at
            most that many more rows from the result or an empty sequence at
            the end of the table:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e76345"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.execute('select * from people')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>while True:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rows = curs.fetchmany()</code></strong>           # size=N optional argument
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if not rows: break</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for row in rows:</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(row)</code></strong>
...
('Bob', 'dev', 5000)
('Sue', 'mus', 70000)
('Ann', 'mus', 60000)
('Tom', 'mgr', 100000)
('Kim', 'adm', 30000)
('pat', 'dev', 90000)</pre>
<p>For this module at least, the result table is exhausted
            after a <code class="epub__literal">fetchone</code> or <code class="epub__literal">fetchmany</code> returns a <code class="epub__literal">False</code> value. The DB API says that
            <code class="epub__literal">fetchall</code> returns “all
            (remaining) rows,” so you generally need to call <code class="epub__literal">execute</code> again to regenerate results
            before fetching <span>new
            data</span>:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e76387"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.fetchone()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.fetchmany()</code></strong>
[]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.fetchall()</code></strong>
[]</pre>
<p>Naturally, we can do more than fetch an entire table; the
            full power of the SQL language is at your disposal in
            Python:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e76400"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.execute('select name, job from people where pay &gt; 60000')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.fetchall()</code></strong>
[('Sue', 'mus'), ('Tom', 'mgr'), ('pat', 'dev')]</pre>
<p>The last query fetches name and job fields for people who
            earn more than $60,000. The next is similar, but passes in the
            selection value as a parameter and orders the <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e76410"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e76412"></a>result table:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e76415"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>query = 'select name, job from people where pay &gt;= ? order by name'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.execute(query, [60000])</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for row in curs.fetchall(): print(row)</code></strong>
...
('Ann', 'mus')
('Sue', 'mus')
('Tom', 'mgr')
('pat', 'dev')</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Running updates"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="running_updates"></a>Running updates</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Cursor objects <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e76431"></a>also are used to submit SQL update statements to the
            database <span>server—</span>updates,
            deletes, and inserts. We’ve already seen the <code class="epub__literal">insert</code> statement at work. Let’s start a
            new session to perform some other kinds of updates; we begin with
            the same data we had in the prior session:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e76443"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Dbase\Sql&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import sqlite3</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>conn = sqlite3.connect('dbase1')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs = conn.cursor()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.execute('select * from people')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.fetchall()</code></strong>
[('Bob', 'dev', 5000), ('Sue', 'mus', 70000), ('Ann', 'mus', 60000), ('Tom', 'mgr',
100000), ('Kim', 'adm', 30000), ('pat', 'dev', 90000)]</pre>
<p>The SQL <code class="epub__literal">update</code> statement
            changes records—the following changes three records’ pay column
            values to <code class="epub__literal">65000</code> (Bob, Ann, and
            Kim), because their pay was no more than $60,000. As usual, the
            cursor’s <code class="epub__literal">rowcount</code> gives the
            number of records changed:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e76475"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.execute('update people set pay=? where pay &lt;= ?', [65000, 60000])</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.rowcount</code></strong>
3
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.execute('select * from people')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.fetchall()</code></strong>
[('Bob', 'dev', 65000), ('Sue', 'mus', 70000), ('Ann', 'mus', 65000), ('Tom', 'mgr',
100000), ('Kim', 'adm', 65000), ('pat', 'dev', 90000)]</pre>
<p>The SQL <code class="epub__literal">delete</code> statement
            <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e76494"></a>removes records, optionally according to a condition
            (to delete all records, omit the condition). In the following, we
            delete Bob’s record, as well as any record with a pay that is at
            least $90,000:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e76498"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.execute('delete from people where name = ?', ['Bob'])</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.execute('delete from people where pay &gt;= ?',(90000,))</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.execute('select * from people')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.fetchall()</code></strong>
[('Sue', 'mus', 70000), ('Ann', 'mus', 65000), ('Kim', 'adm', 65000)]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>conn.commit()</code></strong></pre>
<p>Finally, remember to commit your changes to the database
            before exiting Python, assuming you wish to keep them. Without a
            commit, a connection rollback or close call, as well as the
            connection’s <code class="epub__literal">__del__</code> deletion
            method, will back out uncommitted changes. Connection objects are
            automatically closed if they are still open when they are garbage
            collected, which in turn triggers a <code class="epub__literal">__del__</code> and a rollback; garbage
            collection happens automatically on program exit, if not
            <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e76522"></a>sooner.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Building Record Dictionaries"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="building_record_dictionaries"></a>Building Record Dictionaries</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Now that we’ve seen the <a id="sql17.7.3"></a><a id="re17.7.3"></a><a id="dic17.7.3"></a>basics in action, let’s move on and apply them to a
          few larger tasks. The SQL API defines query results to be sequences
          of sequences. One of the more common features that people seem to
          miss from the API is the ability to get records back as something
          more structured—a dictionary or class instance, for example, with
          keys or attributes giving column names. The ORMs we’ll meet at the
          end of this chapter map to class instances, but because this is
          Python, it’s easy to code this kind of transformation in other ways.
          Moreover, the API already gives us the tools we need.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Using table descriptions"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="using_table_descriptions"></a>Using table descriptions</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>For example, after a <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e76551"></a>query <code class="epub__literal">execute</code>
            call, the DB API specifies that the cursor’s <code class="epub__literal">description</code>
            attribute gives the names and (for some databases) types of the
            columns in the result table. To see how, let’s continue with the
            database in the state in which we left it in the prior
            section:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e76563"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.execute('select * from people')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.description</code></strong>
(('name', None, None, None, None, None, None), ('job', None, None, None, None, None,
None), ('pay', None, None, None, None, None, None))

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.fetchall()</code></strong>
[('Sue', 'mus', 70000), ('Ann', 'mus', 65000), ('Kim', 'adm', 65000)]</pre>
<p>Formally, the description is a sequence of
            column-description sequences, each of the following form. See the
            DB API for more on the meaning of the type code slot—it maps to
            objects at the top level of the database interface module, but the
            <code class="epub__literal">sqlite3</code> module implements only
            the name component:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e76579"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">(name, type_code, display_size, internal_size, precision, scale, null_ok)</pre>
<p>Now, we can use this metadata anytime we want to label the
            columns—for instance, in a formatted records display (be sure to
            regenerate a query result first, since the prior result has been
            fetched):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e76583"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.execute('select * from people')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>colnames = [desc[0] for desc in curs.description]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>colnames</code></strong>
['name', 'job', 'pay']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for row in curs.fetchall():</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for name, value in zip(colnames, row):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(name, '\t=&gt;', value)</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print()</code></strong>
...
name    =&gt; Sue
job     =&gt; mus
pay     =&gt; 70000

name    =&gt; Ann
job     =&gt; mus
pay     =&gt; 65000

name    =&gt; Kim
job     =&gt; adm
pay     =&gt; 65000</pre>
<p>Notice how a tab character is used to try to make this
            output align; a better approach might be to determine the maximum
            field name length (we’ll see how in a later <span>example</span>).</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Record dictionaries construction"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="record_dictionaries_construction"></a>Record dictionaries construction</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>It’s a minor extension of our formatted display code to
            create a dictionary for each record, with field names for keys—we
            just need to fill in the dictionary as we go:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e76617"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.execute('select * from people')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>colnames = [desc[0] for desc in curs.description]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rowdicts = []</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for row in curs.fetchall():</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>newdict = {}</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for name, val in zip(colnames, row):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>newdict[name] = val</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rowdicts.append(newdict)</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for row in rowdicts: print(row)</code></strong>
...
{'pay': 70000, 'job': 'mus', 'name': 'Sue'}
{'pay': 65000, 'job': 'mus', 'name': 'Ann'}
{'pay': 65000, 'job': 'adm', 'name': 'Kim'}</pre>
<p>Because this is Python, though, there are more powerful ways
            to build up these record dictionaries. For instance, the
            dictionary constructor call accepts the zipped name/value pairs to
            fill out the dictionaries for us:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e76649"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.execute('select * from people')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>colnames = [desc[0] for desc in curs.description]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rowdicts = []</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for row in curs.fetchall():</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rowdicts.append( dict(zip(colnames, row)) )</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rowdicts[0]</code></strong>
{'pay': 70000, 'job': 'mus', 'name': 'Sue'}</pre>
<p>And finally, a list comprehension will do the job of
            collecting the dictionaries into a <span>list—</span>not only is this less to type,
            but it probably runs quicker than the original version:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e76675"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.execute('select * from people')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>colnames = [desc[0] for desc in curs.description]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rowdicts = [dict(zip(colnames, row)) for row in curs.fetchall()]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rowdicts[0]</code></strong>
{'pay': 70000, 'job': 'mus', 'name': 'Sue'}</pre>
<p>One of the things we lose when moving to dictionaries is
            record field order—if you look back at the raw result of <code class="epub__literal">fetchall</code>, you’ll notice that record
            fields are in the name, job, and pay order in which they were
            stored. Our dictionary’s fields come back in the pseudorandom
            order of Python mappings. As long as we fetch fields by key, this
            is irrelevant to our script. Tables still maintain their order,
            and dictionary construction works fine because the description
            result tuple is in the same order as the fields in row tuples
            returned by queries.</p>
<p>We’ll leave the task of translating record tuples into class
            instances as a suggested exercise, except for two hints: Python’s
            standard library <code class="epub__literal">collections</code>
            module implements more exotic data types, such as named tuples and
            ordered dictionaries; and we can access fields as attributes
            rather than as keys, by simply creating an empty class instance
            and assigning to attributes with the Python <code class="epub__literal">setattr</code> function. Classes would also
            provide a natural place to code inheritable tools such as standard
            display methods. In fact, this is part of the utility that the
            upcoming ORMs can provide for us.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Automating with scripts and modules"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="automating_with_scripts_and_modules"></a>Automating with scripts and modules</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Up to this point, we’ve <a id="sc17.7.3.3"></a><a id="qu17.7.3.3"></a>essentially used Python as a command-line SQL
            client—our queries have been typed and run interactively. All the
            kinds of code we’ve run, though, can be used as the basis of
            database access in script files. Working interactively requires
            retyping things such as multiline loops, which can become tedious.
            With scripts, we can automate our work.</p>
<p>To demonstrate, let’s make the last section’s prior example
            into a utility module—Example 17-4 is a reusable
            module that knows how to translate the result of a query from row
            tuples to row dictionaries.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_dbase_revers-id3"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 17-4. PP4E\Dbase\Sql\makedicts.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
convert list of row tuples to list of row dicts with field name keys
this is not a command-line utility: hardcoded self-test if run
"""

def makedicts(cursor, query, params=()):
    cursor.execute(query, params)
    colnames = [desc[0] for desc in cursor.description]
    rowdicts = [dict(zip(colnames, row)) for row in cursor.fetchall()]
    return rowdicts

if __name__ == '__main__':   # self test
    import sqlite3
    conn = sqlite3.connect('dbase1')
    cursor = conn.cursor()
    query  = 'select name, pay from people where pay &lt; ?'
    lowpay = makedicts(cursor, query, [70000])
    for rec in lowpay: print(rec)</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>As usual, we can run this file from the system command line
            as a script to invoke its self-test code:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e76729"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">...\PP4E\Dbase\Sql&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>makedicts.py</code></strong>
{'pay': 65000, 'name': 'Ann'}
{'pay': 65000, 'name': 'Kim'}</pre>
<p>Or we can import it as a module and call its function from
            another context, like the interactive prompt. Because it is a
            module, it has become a reusable database tool:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e76736"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">...\PP4E\Dbase\Sql&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from makedicts import makedicts</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from sqlite3 import connect</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>conn = connect('dbase1')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs = conn.cursor()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.execute('select * from people')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.fetchall()</code></strong>
[('Sue', 'mus', 70000), ('Ann', 'mus', 65000), ('Kim', 'adm', 65000)]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rows = makedicts(curs, "select name from people where job = 'mus'")</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rows</code></strong>
[{'name': 'Sue'}, {'name': 'Ann'}]</pre>
<p>Our utility handles arbitrarily complex queries—they are
            simply passed through the DB API to the database server or
            library. The <code class="epub__literal">order by</code> clause
            here sorts the result on the name <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e76771"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e76773"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e76775"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e76777"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e76779"></a>field:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e76782"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>query = 'select name, pay from people where job = ? order by name'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>musicians = makedicts(curs, query, ['mus'])</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for row in musicians: print(row)</code></strong>
...
{'pay': 65000, 'name': 'Ann'}
{'pay': 70000, 'name': 'Sue'}</pre>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Tying the Pieces Together"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="tying_the_pieces_together"></a>Tying the Pieces Together</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>So far, we’ve <a id="sql17.7.4"></a>learned how to make databases and tables, insert
          records into tables, query table contents, and extract column names.
          For reference, and to show how these techniques are combined, Example 17-5 collects them
          into a single script.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_dbase_revers-id4"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 17-5. PP4E\Dbase\Sql\testdb.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from sqlite3 import connect
conn = connect('dbase1')
curs = conn.cursor()
try:
    curs.execute('drop table people')
except:
    pass  # did not exist
curs.execute('create table people (name char(30), job char(10), pay int(4))')

curs.execute('insert into people values (?, ?, ?)', ('Bob', 'dev', 50000))
curs.execute('insert into people values (?, ?, ?)', ('Sue', 'dev', 60000))

curs.execute('select * from people')
for row in curs.fetchall():
    print(row)

curs.execute('select * from people')
colnames = [desc[0] for desc in curs.description]
while True:
    print('-' * 30)
    row = curs.fetchone()
    if not row: break
    for (name, value) in zip(colnames, row):
        print('%s =&gt; %s' % (name, value))

conn.commit()   # save inserted records</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Refer to prior sections in this tutorial if any of the code in
          this script is unclear. When run, it creates a two-record database
          and lists its content to the standard output stream:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e76813"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Dbase\Sql&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>testdb.py</code></strong>
('Bob', 'dev', 50000)
('Sue', 'dev', 60000)
------------------------------
name =&gt; Bob
job =&gt; dev
pay =&gt; 50000
------------------------------
name =&gt; Sue
job =&gt; dev
pay =&gt; 60000
------------------------------</pre>
<p>As is, this example is really just meant to demonstrate the
          database API. It hardcodes database names, and it re-creates the
          database from scratch each time. We could turn this code into
          generally useful tools by refactoring it into reusable parts, as
          we’ll see later in this section. First, though, let’s explore
          techniques for getting data into <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e76820"></a>our databases.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Loading Database Tables from Files"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="loading_database_tables_from_files"></a>Loading Database Tables from Files</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>One of the nice <a id="tab17.7.5"></a><a id="files17.7.5"></a><a id="sql17.7.5"></a>things about using Python in the database domain is
          that you can combine the power of the SQL query language with the
          power of the Python general-purpose programming language. They
          naturally complement each other.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Loading with SQL and Python"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="loading_with_sql_and_python"></a>Loading with SQL and Python</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Suppose, for example, that you want to load a database table
            from a flat file, where each line in the file represents a
            database row, with individual field values separated by commas.
            Examples 17-6 and 17-7 list two such datafiles we’re
            going to be using here.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_dbase_revers-id5"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 17-6. PP4E\Dbase\Sql\data.txt</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">bob,devel,50000
sue,music,60000
ann,devel,40000
tim,admin,30000
kim,devel,60000</pre>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_dbase_revers-id6"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 17-7. PP4E\Dbase\Sql\data2.txt</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">bob,developer,80000
sue,music,90000
ann,manager,80000</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Now, some database systems like MySQL have a handy SQL
            statement for loading such a table quickly. Its <code class="epub__literal">load data</code> statement parses and loads
            data from a text file, located on either the client or the server
            machine. In the following, the first command deletes all records
            in the table, and we’re using the fact that Python automatically
            concatenates adjacent string literals to split the SQL statement
            over multiple lines:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e76868"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Using MySQL (currently available for Python 2.X only)</span></em>
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...log into MySQL first...</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.execute('delete from people')</code></strong>                # all records
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.execute(</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>"load data local infile 'data.txt' "</code></strong>
...           <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>"into table people fields terminated by ','")</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.execute('select * from people')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for row in curs.fetchall(): print(row)</code></strong>
...
('bob', 'devel', 50000L)
('sue', 'music', 60000L)       # 2.X long integers
('ann', 'devel', 40000L)
('tim', 'admin', 30000L)
('kim', 'devel', 60000L)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>conn.commit()</code></strong></pre>
<p>This works as expected. But what if you must use a system
            like the SQLite database used in this book, which lacks this
            specific SQL statement? Or, perhaps you just need to do something
            more custom than this MySQL statement allows. Not to worry—a small
            amount of simple Python code can easily accomplish the same result
            with SQLite and Python 3.X (again, some irrelevant output lines
            are omitted here):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e76898"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Dbase\Sql&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from sqlite3 import connect</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>conn = connect('dbase1')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs = conn.cursor()</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.execute('delete from people')</code></strong>         # empty the table
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.execute('select * from people')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.fetchall()</code></strong>
[]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file = open('data.txt')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rows = [line.rstrip().split(',') for line in file]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rows[0]</code></strong>
['bob', 'devel', '50000']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for rec in rows:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.execute('insert into people values (?, ?, ?)', rec)</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.execute('select * from people')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for rec in curs.fetchall(): print(rec)</code></strong>
...
('bob', 'devel', 50000)
('sue', 'music', 60000)
('ann', 'devel', 40000)
('tim', 'admin', 30000)
('kim', 'devel', 60000)</pre>
<p>This code makes use of a list comprehension to collect
            string split results for all lines in the file after removing any
            newline characters, and file iterators to step through the file
            line by line. Its Python loop does the same work as the MySQL
            <code class="epub__literal">load</code> statement, and it will
            work on more database types, including SQLite. We can get some
            similar result from an <code class="epub__literal">executemany</code> DB API call shown earlier as
            well, but the Python <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop
            here has the potential to be more general.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Python versus SQL"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="python_versus_sql"></a>Python versus SQL</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In fact, you have the entire Python language at your
            disposal for processing database results, and a little Python can
            often duplicate or go beyond SQL syntax. For instance, SQL has
            special aggregate function syntax for computing things such as
            sums and averages:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e76960"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.execute("select sum(pay), avg(pay) from people where job = 'devel'")</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.fetchall()</code></strong>
[(150000, 50000.0)]</pre>
<p>By shifting the processing to Python, we can sometimes
            simplify and do more than SQL’s syntax allows (albeit potentially
            sacrificing any query performance optimizations the database may
            perform). Computing pay sums and averages with Python can be
            accomplished with a simple loop:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e76970"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.execute("select name, pay from people where job = 'devel'")</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>result = curs.fetchall()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>result</code></strong>
(('bob', 50000L), ('ann', 40000L), ('kim', 60000L))

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>tot = 0</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for (name, pay) in result: tot += pay</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('total:', tot, 'average:', tot / len(result))</code></strong>         # use // to truncate
total: 150000 average: 50000.0</pre>
<p>Or we can use more advanced tools such as comprehensions and
            generator expressions to calculate sums, averages, maximums, and
            the like:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e76993"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(sum(rec[1] for rec in result))</code></strong>         # generator expr
150000
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(sum(rec[1] for rec in result) / len(result))</code></strong>
50000.0
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(max(rec[1] for rec in result))</code></strong>
60000</pre>
<p>The Python approach is more general, but it doesn’t buy us
            much until things become more complex. For example, here are a few
            more advanced comprehensions that collect the names of people
            whose pay is above and below the average in the query result
            set:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e77006"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>avg = sum(rec[1] for rec in result) / len(result)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print([rec[0] for rec in result if rec[1] &gt; avg])</code></strong>
['kim']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print([rec[0] for rec in result if rec[1] &lt; avg])</code></strong>
['ann']</pre>
<p>We may be able to do some of these kinds of tasks with more
            advanced SQL techniques such as nested queries, but we eventually
            reach a complexity threshold where Python’s general-purpose nature
            makes it attractive and potentially more portable. For comparison,
            here is the equivalent SQL:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e77019"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>query = ("select name from people where job = 'devel' and "</code></strong>
...                <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>"pay &gt; (select avg(pay) from people where job = 'devel')")</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.execute(query)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.fetchall()</code></strong>
[('kim',)]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>query = ("select name from people where job = 'devel' and "</code></strong>
...                <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>"pay &lt; (select avg(pay) from people where job = 'devel')")</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.execute(query)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>curs.fetchall()</code></strong>
[('ann',)]</pre>
<p>This isn’t the most complex SQL you’re likely to meet, but
            beyond this point, SQL can become more involved. Moreover, unlike
            Python, SQL is limited to database-specific tasks by design.
            Imagine a query that compares a column’s values to data fetched
            off the Web or from a user in a GUI—simple with Python’s Internet
            and GUI support, but well beyond the scope of a special-purpose
            language such as SQL. By combining Python and SQL, you get the
            best of both and can choose which is best suited to your
            goals.</p>
<p>With Python, you also have access to utilities you’ve
            already coded: your database tool set is arbitrarily extensible
            with functions, modules, and classes. To illustrate, here are some
            of the same operations coded in a more mnemonic fashion with the
            dictionary-record module we wrote earlier:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e77051"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from makedicts import makedicts</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>recs = makedicts(curs, "select * from people where job = 'devel'")</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(len(recs), recs[0])</code></strong>
3 {'pay': 50000, 'job': 'devel', 'name': 'bob'}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print([rec['name'] for rec in recs])</code></strong>
['bob', 'ann', 'kim']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(sum(rec['pay'] for rec in recs))</code></strong>
150000

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>avg = sum(rec['pay'] for rec in recs) / len(recs)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print([rec['name'] for rec in recs if rec['pay'] &gt; avg])</code></strong>
['kim']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print([rec['name'] for rec in recs if rec['pay'] &gt;= avg])</code></strong>
['bob', 'kim']</pre>
<p>Similarly, Python’s <code class="epub__literal">set</code>
            object type provides operations such as intersection, union, and
            difference which can serve as alternatives to other SQL database
            operations (in the interest of space, we’ll leave their
            exploration as a suggested side trip). For more <span>advanced</span> database extensions, see
            the SQL-related tools available for Python in the <span>third</span>-<span>party</span> domain. For example, a variety
            of packages add an OOP flavor to the DB <span>API—</span>the ORMs we’ll explore near the
            end of this <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e77096"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e77098"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e77100"></a>chapter.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="SQL Utility Scripts"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="sql_utility_scripts"></a>SQL Utility Scripts</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>At this point in <a id="sql17.7.6"></a><a id="sc17.7.6"></a>our SQL DB API tour, we’ve started to stretch the
          interactive prompt to its breaking point—we wind up retyping the
          same boilerplate code again every time we start a session and every
          time we run a test. Moreover, the code we’re writing is substantial
          enough to be reused in other programs. Let’s wrap up by transforming
          our code into reusable scripts that automate tasks and support
          reuse.</p>
<p>To illustrate more of the power of the Python/SQL mix, this
          section presents a handful of utility scripts that perform common
          tasks—the sorts of things you’d otherwise have to recode often
          during development. As an added bonus, most of these files are both
          command-line utilities and modules of functions that can be imported
          and called from other programs. Most of the scripts in this section
          also allow a database file name to be passed in on the command line;
          this allows us to use different databases for different purposes
          during development—changes in one won’t impact others.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Table load scripts"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="table_load_scripts"></a>Table load scripts</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Let’s take a <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e77126"></a>quick look at code first, before seeing it in
            action; feel free to skip ahead to correlate the code here with
            its behavior. As a first (and less than ideal) step, Example 17-8 shows a simple
            way to script-ify the table-loading logic of the prior
            section.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_dbase_revers-id7"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 17-8. PP4E\Dbase\Sql\loaddb1.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
load table from comma-delimited text file; equivalent to this nonportable SQL:
load data local infile 'data.txt' into table people fields terminated by ','"
"""

import sqlite3
conn = sqlite3.connect('dbase1')
curs = conn.cursor()

file = open('data.txt')
rows = [line.rstrip().split(',') for line in file]
for rec in rows:
    curs.execute('insert into people values (?, ?, ?)', rec)

conn.commit()       # commit changes now, if db supports transactions
conn.close()        # close, __del__ call rollback if changes not committed yet</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>As is, Example 17-8 is a top-level
            script geared toward one particular case. It’s hardly any extra
            work to generalize this into a function that can be imported and
            used in a variety of scenarios, as in Example 17-9—a much more
            widely useful module and command-line script.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_dbase_revers-id8"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 17-9. PP4E\Dbase\Sql\loaddb.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
load table from comma-delimited text file: reusable/generalized version
Importable functions; command-line usage: loaddb.py dbfile? datafile? table?
"""

def login(dbfile):
    import sqlite3
    conn = sqlite3.connect(dbfile)         # create or open db file
    curs = conn.cursor()
    return conn, curs

def loaddb(curs, table, datafile, conn=None, verbose=True):
    file = open(datafile)                                  # x,x,x\nx,x,x\n
    rows = [line.rstrip().split(',') for line in file]     # [[x,x,x], [x,x,x]]
    rows = [str(tuple(rec)) for rec in rows]               # ["(x,x,x)", "(x,x,x)"]
    for recstr in rows:
        curs.execute('insert into ' + table + ' values ' + recstr)
    if conn: conn.commit()
    if verbose: print(len(rows), 'rows loaded')

if __name__ == '__main__':
    import sys
    dbfile, datafile, table = 'dbase1', 'data.txt', 'people'
    if len(sys.argv) &gt; 1: dbfile   = sys.argv[1]
    if len(sys.argv) &gt; 2: datafile = sys.argv[2]
    if len(sys.argv) &gt; 3: table    = sys.argv[3]
    conn, curs = login(dbfile)
    loaddb(curs, table, datafile, conn)</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Notice the way this code uses two list comprehensions to
            build a string of record values for the <code class="epub__literal">insert</code> statement (see its comments for
            the transforms applied). We could also use an <code class="epub__literal">executemany</code> call as we did earlier, but
            we want to be general and avoid hardcoding the fields insertion
            template—this function might be used for tables with any number of
            columns.</p>
<p>This file also defines a <code class="epub__literal">login</code> function to automate the initial
            connection calls—after retyping this four-command sequence enough
            times, it seemed a prime candidate for a function. In addition,
            this reduces code redundancy; in the future, such logic need only
            be changed in a single location if we change database systems, as
            long as the <code class="epub__literal">login</code> function is
            used everywhere.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Table display script"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="table_display_script"></a>Table display script</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Once we load <a id="tab17.7.6.2"></a>data, we probably will want to display it. Example 17-10 allows us to
            display results as we go—it prints an entire table with either a
            simple display (which could be parsed by other tools) or a
            formatted display (generated with the dictionary-record utility we
            wrote earlier). Notice how it computes the maximum field-name size
            for alignment with a generator expression; the size is passed in
            to a string formatting expression by specifying an asterisk (*)
            for the field size in the format string.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_dbase_revers-id9"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 17-10. PP4E\Dbase\Sql\dumpdb.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
display table contents as raw tuples, or formatted with field names
command-line usage: dumpdb.py dbname? table? [-] (dash=formatted display)
"""

def showformat(recs, sept=('-' * 40)):
    print(len(recs), 'records')
    print(sept)
    for rec in recs:
        maxkey = max(len(key) for key in rec)                # max key len
        for key in rec:                                      # or: \t align
            print('%-*s =&gt; %s' % (maxkey, key, rec[key]))    # -ljust, *len
        print(sept)

def dumpdb(cursor, table, format=True):
    if not format:
        cursor.execute('select * from ' + table)
        while True:
            rec = cursor.fetchone()
            if not rec: break
            print(rec)
    else:
        from makedicts import makedicts
        recs = makedicts(cursor, 'select * from ' + table)
        showformat(recs)

if __name__ == '__main__':
    import sys
    dbname, format, table = 'dbase1', False, 'people'
    cmdargs = sys.argv[1:]
    if '-' in cmdargs:                     # format if '-' in cmdline args
        format = True                      # dbname if other cmdline arg
        cmdargs.remove('-')
    if cmdargs: dbname = cmdargs.pop(0)
    if cmdargs: table  = cmdargs[0]

    from loaddb import login
    conn, curs = login(dbname)
    dumpdb(curs, table, format)</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>While we’re at it, let’s code some utility scripts to
            initialize and erase the database, so we do not have to type these
            by hand at the interactive prompt again every time we want to
            start from scratch. Example 17-11 completely
            deletes and re-creates the database, to reset it to an initial
            state (we did this manually at the start of the tutorial).</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_dbase_revers-id10"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 17-11. PP4E\Dbase\Sql\makedb.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
physically delete and re-create database files
usage: makedb.py dbname? tablename?
"""

import sys
if input('Are you sure?').lower() not in ('y', 'yes'):
    sys.exit()

dbname = (len(sys.argv) &gt; 1 and sys.argv[1]) or 'dbase1'
table  = (len(sys.argv) &gt; 2 and sys.argv[2]) or 'people'

from loaddb import login
conn, curs = login(dbname)
try:
    curs.execute('drop table ' + table)
except:
    print('database table did not exist')

command = 'create table %s (name char(30), job char(10), pay int(4))' % table
curs.execute(command)
conn.commit()                 # commit may be optional here
print('made', dbname, table)</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Next, the clear script in Example 17-12 deletes all
            rows in the table, instead of dropping and re-creating them
            entirely. For testing purposes, either approach is sufficient.
            Minor caveat: the <code class="epub__literal">rowcount</code>
            attribute doesn’t always reflect the number of rows deleted in
            SQLite; see its library manual entry for details.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_dbase_revers-id11"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 17-12. PP4E\Dbase\Sql\cleardb.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
delete all rows in table, but don't drop the table or database it is in
usage: cleardb.py dbname? tablename?
"""

import sys
if input('Are you sure?').lower() not in ('y', 'yes'):
    sys.exit()

dbname = sys.argv[1] if len(sys.argv) &gt; 1 else 'dbase1'
table  = sys.argv[2] if len(sys.argv) &gt; 2 else 'people'

from loaddb import login
conn, curs = login(dbname)
curs.execute('delete from ' + table)
#print(curs.rowcount, 'records deleted')        # conn closed by its __del__
conn.commit()                                   # else rows not really deleted</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Finally, Example 17-13 provides a
            command-line tool that runs a query and prints its result table in
            formatted style. There’s not much to this script; because we’ve
            automated most of its tasks already, this is largely just a
            combination of existing tools. Such is the power of code reuse in
            <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e77209"></a>Python.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_dbase_revers-id12"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 17-13. PP4E\Dbase\Sql\querydb.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
run a query string, display formatted result table
example: querydb.py dbase1 "select name, job from people where pay &gt; 50000"
"""

import sys
database, querystr = 'dbase1', 'select * from people'
if len(sys.argv) &gt; 1: database = sys.argv[1]
if len(sys.argv) &gt; 2: querystr = sys.argv[2]

from makedicts import makedicts
from dumpdb    import showformat
from loaddb    import login

conn, curs = login(database)
rows = makedicts(curs, querystr)
showformat(rows)</pre>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Using the scripts"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="using_the_scripts"></a>Using the scripts</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Last but not least, here <a id="sc17.7.6.3"></a>is a log of a session that makes use of these
            scripts in command-line mode, to illustrate their operation. Most
            of the files also have functions that can be imported and called
            from a different program; the scripts simply map command-line
            arguments to the functions’ arguments when run standalone. The
            first thing we do is initialize a testing database and load its
            table from a text file:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e77228"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">...\PP4E\Dbase\Sql&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>makedb.py testdb</code></strong>
Are you sure?<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y</code></strong>
database table did not exist
made testdb people

...\PP4E\Dbase\Sql&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>loaddb.py testdb data2.txt</code></strong>
3 rows loaded</pre>
<p>Next, let’s check our work with the dump utility (use a
            <code class="epub__literal">-</code> argument to force a formatted
            display):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e77244"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">...\PP4E\Dbase\Sql&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dumpdb.py testdb</code></strong>
('bob', 'developer', 80000)
('sue', 'music', 90000)
('ann', 'manager', 80000)

...\PP4E\Dbase\Sql&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dumpdb.py testdb -</code></strong>
3 records
----------------------------------------
pay  =&gt; 80000
job  =&gt; developer
name =&gt; bob
----------------------------------------
pay  =&gt; 90000
job  =&gt; music
name =&gt; sue
----------------------------------------
pay  =&gt; 80000
job  =&gt; manager
name =&gt; ann
----------------------------------------</pre>
<p>The dump script is an exhaustive display; to be more
            specific about which records to view, use the query script and
            pass in a query string on the command line (the command lines are
            split here to fit in this book):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e77254"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">...\PP4E\Dbase\Sql&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>querydb.py testdb</code></strong>
                               <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>"select name, job from people where pay = 80000"</code></strong>
2 records
----------------------------------------
job  =&gt; developer
name =&gt; bob
----------------------------------------
job  =&gt; manager
name =&gt; ann
----------------------------------------

...\PP4E\Dbase\Sql&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>querydb.py testdb</code></strong>
                               <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>"select * from people where name = 'sue'"</code></strong>
1 records
----------------------------------------
pay  =&gt; 90000
job  =&gt; music
name =&gt; sue
----------------------------------------</pre>
<p>Now, let’s erase and start again with a new data set file.
            The clear script erases all records but doesn’t reinitialize the
            database completely:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e77270"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">...\PP4E\Dbase\Sql&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>cleardb.py testdb</code></strong>
Are you sure?<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y</code></strong>

...\PP4E\Dbase\Sql&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dumpdb.py testdb -</code></strong>
0 records
----------------------------------------

...\PP4E\Dbase\Sql&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>loaddb.py testdb data.txt</code></strong>
5 rows loaded

...\PP4E\Dbase\Sql&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dumpdb.py testdb</code></strong>
('bob', 'devel', 50000)
('sue', 'music', 60000)
('ann', 'devel', 40000)
('tim', 'admin', 30000)
('kim', 'devel', 60000)</pre>
<p>In closing, here are three queries in action on this new
            data set: they fetch names of developers, jobs that pay above an
            amount, and records with a given pay level sorted by job. We could
            run these at the Python interactive prompt, of course, but we’re
            getting a lot of setup and boilerplate code for free here:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e77289"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">...\PP4E\Dbase\Sql&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>querydb.py testdb</code></strong>
                               <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>"select name from people where job = 'devel'"</code></strong>
3 records
----------------------------------------
name =&gt; bob
----------------------------------------
name =&gt; ann
----------------------------------------
name =&gt; kim
----------------------------------------

...\PP4E\Dbase\Sql&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>querydb.py testdb</code></strong>
                               <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>"select job from people where pay &gt;= 60000"</code></strong>
2 records
----------------------------------------
job =&gt; music
----------------------------------------
job =&gt; devel
----------------------------------------

...\PP4E\Dbase\Sql&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>querydb.py testdb</code></strong>
                               <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>"select * from people where pay &gt;= 60000 order by job"</code></strong>
2 records
----------------------------------------
pay  =&gt; 60000
job  =&gt; devel
name =&gt; kim
----------------------------------------
pay  =&gt; 60000
job  =&gt; music
name =&gt; sue
----------------------------------------</pre>
<p>Before we move on, some context: the scripts in this section
            illustrate the benefits of code reuse, accomplish their purpose
            (which was partly demonstrating the SQL API), and serve as a model
            for canned database utilities. But they are still not as general
            as they could be; support for sorting options in the dump script,
            for example, may be a useful extension. Although we could
            generalize to support more options, at some point we may need to
            revert to typing SQL commands in a client—part of the reason SQL
            is a language is because it must support so much generality.
            Further extensions to these scripts are left as exercises. Change
            this code as you like; it’s Python, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e77313"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e77315"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e77317"></a>after all.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="SQL Resources"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="sql_resources"></a>SQL Resources</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Although the <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e77325"></a>examples we’ve seen in this section are simple, their
          techniques scale up to much more realistic databases and contexts.
          The websites we studied in the prior part of the book, for instance,
          can make use of SQL-based systems such as MySQL to store page state
          information as well as long-lived client information. Because MySQL
          (among others) supports both large databases and concurrent updates,
          it’s a natural for website implementation.</p>
<p>There is more to database interfaces than we’ve seen, but
          additional API documentation is readily available on the Web. To
          find the full database API specification, search the Web for “Python
          Database API.” You’ll find the formal API definition—really just a
          text file describing the PEP (the Python Enhancement Proposal) under
          which the API was hashed out.</p>
<p>Perhaps the best resource for additional information about
          database extensions today is the home page of the Python database
          SIG. Go to http://www.python.org, click on the
          Community and SIGs links there, and navigate to the database group’s
          page, or run a search. There, you’ll find API documentation (this is
          where it is officially maintained), links to database
          vendor–specific extension modules, and more. And as always, see the
          PyPI website and search the Web at large for related third-party
          tools and <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e77337"></a>extensions.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
