<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>ORMs: Object Relational Mappers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="ORMs: Object Relational Mappers"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="orms_colon_object_relational_mappers"></a>ORMs: Object Relational Mappers</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In this chapter, <a id="orm17.8"></a><a id="per17.8"></a>we’ve seen OODBs that store native Python objects
        persistently, as well as SQL databases that store information in
        tables. It turns out that there is another class of system that
        attempts to bridge the object and table worlds, which I’ve hinted at
        earlier in this chapter: ORMs graft the Python class model onto the
        tables of relational databases. They combine the power of relational
        database systems with the simplicity of Python class-based syntax—you
        don’t need to forgo SQL-based <span>databases</span>, but you can still store data
        that seems like Python objects to your scripts.</p>
<p>Today, there are two leading open source third-party systems
        that implement this mapping: SQLObject and SQLAlchemy. Both are fairly
        complex systems that we cannot do full justice to in this text, and
        you’re best off researching their documentation on the Web for the
        full story (there are also dedicated books covering SQLAlchemy today).
        Moreover, neither is completely Python 3.X ready as I write these
        words, so we can’t run live examples with them in this text.</p>
<p>To give you a slightly more concrete flavor of the ORM model,
        though, here is a very quick look at how you might use it to create
        and process database records in the <span>SQLObject<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e77365"></a></span> system. In brief, SQLObject maps:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Python classes to database tables</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Python class instances to rows in the table</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Python instance attributes to row columns</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>For example, to create a table, we define it with a class, with
        class attributes that define columns, and call its creation method
        (this code is derived from a more complete example at SQLObject’s
        website):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e77381"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from sqlobject import *
sqlhub.processConnection = connectionForURI('sqlite:/:memory:')

class Person(SQLObject):                  # class: describes table
    first = StringCol()                   # class attributes: row columns
    mid   = StringCol(length=1, default=None)
    last  = StringCol()

Person.createTable()                      # create a database table</pre>
<p>Once created, making an instance automatically inserts a row
        into the database, and attribute fetches and assignments are
        automatically mapped to fetches and updates of the corresponding table
        row’s column:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e77385"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">p = Person(first='Bob', last='Smith')     # new instance: makes and inserts row
p                                         # prints all attributes by name

p.first                                   # attribute: fetches row column
p.mid = 'M'                               # attribute: updates record</pre>
<p>Existing rows/instances may be fetched by methods calls, and we
        can assign multiple columns/attributes with a single update
        operation:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e77389"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">p2 = Person.get(1)                        # fetch existing record/instance: p2 is p
p.set(first='Tom', last='Jones')          # update two attributes/fields at once</pre>
<p>In addition, we can select by column values by creating a query
        object and executing it:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e77394"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">ts = Person.select(Person.q.first=='Tom') # query: select by column value
list(ts)                                  # run the query: list of instances

tjs = Person.selectBy(first='Tom', last='Jones')   # alternative query form (AND)</pre>
<p>Naturally, this barely scratches the surface of the available
        functionality. Even at this level of complexity, though, this is quite
        a trick—SQLObject automatically issues all the SQL required to fetch,
        store, and query the table and rows implied by the Python class syntax
        here. Again, the net effect allows systems to leverage the power of
        <span>enterprise</span>-<span>level</span> relational databases, but still
        use familiar Python class syntax to process stored data in Python
        scripts.</p>
<p>The code used with the SQLAlchemy ORM is of course very
        different, but the end result is functionally similar. For more
        details on ORMs for Python, consult your friendly neighborhood web
        search engine. You can also learn more about such systems by their
        roles in some larger web development frameworks; Django, for instance,
        has an ORM which is another variation on this <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e77406"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e77408"></a>theme.</p>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
