<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 18. Data Structures</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 18. Data Structures"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="data_structures"></a>Chapter 18. Data Structures</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="“Roses Are Red, Violets Are Blue; Lists Are Mutable, and So Is Set Foo”"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="quotation_mark_roses_are_red_comma_viole"></a>“Roses Are Red, Violets Are Blue; Lists Are Mutable, <span>and So Is Set Foo”</span></h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Data structures are a central theme in most programs, even if
        Python programmers often don’t need to care. Their apathy is
        warranted—Python comes “out of the box” with a rich set of built-in
        and already optimized types that make it easy to deal with structured
        data: lists, strings, tuples, dictionaries, sets, and the like. For
        simple systems, these types are usually enough. Dictionaries, for
        example, subsume many of the classical searching algorithms, and lists
        replace much of the work you’d do to support collections in
        lower-level languages. Even so, both are so easy to use that you
        generally never give them a second thought.</p>
<p>But for advanced applications, we may need to add more
        sophisticated types of our own to handle extra requirements or special
        cases. In this chapter, we’ll explore a handful of advanced data
        structure implementations in Python: sets, stacks, graphs, and so on.
        As we’ll see, data structures can take the form of new object types in
        Python, integrated into the language’s type model. That is, objects we
        code in Python become full-fledged <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>datatypes</em></span>—to
        the scripts that use them, they can look and feel just like built-in
        lists, numbers, and dictionaries.</p>
<p>Although the examples in this chapter illustrate advanced
        programming and computer science techniques, they also underscore
        Python’s support for writing <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>reusable</em></span> software.
        As object implementations are coded with classes and modules, they
        naturally become generally useful components that can be used in any
        program that imports them. In effect, we will be building
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>libraries</em></span> of data structure tools, whether we
        plan for it or not.</p>
<p>Moreover, though most examples in this chapter are pure Python
        code (and at least to linear readers, some may seem relatively simple
        compared to those of earlier chapters), they also provide a use case
        for discussing Python performance issues, and hint at what’s possible
        with the subject of Chapter 20—from the most general
        perspective, new <span>Python</span> objects
        can be implemented in either Python or an integrated language such as
        C. Types coded in C use patterns similar to those here.</p>
<p>In the end, though, we’ll also see that Python’s built-in
        support can often take the place of homegrown solutions in this
        domain. Although custom data structure implementations are sometimes
        necessary and still have much to offer in terms of code maintenance
        and evolution, they are not always as paramount in Python as they are
        in less programmer-friendly languages.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
