<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Implementing Stacks</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Implementing Stacks"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="implementing_stacks"></a>Implementing Stacks</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Stacks are a common and <a id="data18.2"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e77532"></a>straightforward data structure, used in a variety of
        applications: language processing, graph searches, and so on. For
        instance, expression evaluation in the next chapter’s calculator GUI
        is largely an exercise in juggling stacks, and programming languages
        in general typically implement function calls as stack operations in
        order to remember what to resume as calls return. Stacks can also help
        in XML parsing: they are a natural for tracking progress any time
        constructs might be arbitrarily nested.</p>
<p>In short, stacks are a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>last-in-first-out</em></span>
        collection of objects—the last item added to the collection is always
        the next one to be removed. Unlike the queues we used for thread
        communication, which add and delete at opposite ends, all the activity
        in stacks happens at the top. Clients use stacks by:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Pushing items onto the top</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Popping items off the top</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Depending on client requirements, there may also be tools for
        such tasks as testing whether the stack is empty, fetching the top
        item without popping it, iterating over a stack’s items, testing for
        item membership, and so on.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Built-in Options"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="built-in_options"></a>Built-in Options</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In Python, a <a id="st18.2.1"></a>simple list is often adequate for implementing a
          stack: because we can change lists in place arbitrarily, we can add
          and delete items from either the beginning (left) or the end
          (right). Table 18-1 summarizes various
          built-in operations available for implementing stack-like behavior
          with Python lists and in-place changes. They vary depending on
          whether the stack “top” is the first or the last node in the list;
          in this table, the string <code class="epub__literal">'b'</code> is
          the initial top item on the <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e77568"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e77573"></a>stack.</p><div class="epub__table"><a id="stacks_as_lists"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Table 18-1. Stacks as lists</p><div class="epub__table-contents"><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; " summary="Stacks as lists"><colgroup><col></col><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Operation</p></th><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Top is
                  end-of-list</p></th><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Top is
                  front-of-list</p></th><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Top is
                  front-of-list</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>New</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">stack=['a', 'b']</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">stack=['b', 'a']</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">stack=['b', 'a']</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Push</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">stack.append('c')</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">stack.insert(0,'c')</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">stack[0:0]=['c']</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Pop</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">top = stack[-1];</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">del
                  stack[-1]</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">top = stack[0];</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">del
                  stack[0]</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">top = stack[0];</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">stack[:1] =
                  []</code></p></td></tr></tbody></table>
</div>
</div>
<p>Even more conveniently, Python grew a list <code class="epub__literal">pop</code> method later in its life designed to
          be used in conjunction with <code class="epub__literal">append</code> to implement stacks and other
          common structures such as queues, yielding the even simpler coding
          options listed in Table 18-2.</p><div class="epub__table"><a id="stacks_as_lists_comma_coding_alternative"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Table 18-2. Stacks as lists, coding alternatives</p><div class="epub__table-contents"><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; " summary="Stacks as lists, coding alternatives"><colgroup><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Operation</p></th><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Top is
                  end-of-list</p></th><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Top is
                  front-of-list</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>New</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">stack=['a', 'b']</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">stack=['b', 'a']</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Push</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">stack.append('c')</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">stack.insert(0,'c')</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Pop</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">top = stack.pop()</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">top = stack.pop(0)</code></p></td></tr></tbody></table>
</div>
</div>
<p>By default, <code class="epub__literal">pop</code> is
          equivalent to fetching, and then deleting, the last item at offset
          −1. With an argument, <code class="epub__literal">pop</code> deletes
          and returns the item at that offset—<code class="epub__literal">list.pop(-1)</code> is the same as <code class="epub__literal">list.pop()</code>. For in-place change operations
          like <code class="epub__literal">append</code>, <code class="epub__literal">insert</code>, <code class="epub__literal">del</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">pop</code>, no new list is created in memory, so
          execution is quick (performance may further depend upon which end is
          the “top,” but this in turn depends on Python’s current list
          implementation, as well as measurement concepts we’ll explore
          later). Queues can be coded similarly, but they pop at the other end
          of the list.</p>
<p>Other built-in coding schemes are possible as well. For
          instance, <code class="epub__literal">del stack[:1]</code> is yet
          another way to delete the first item in a list-based stack in-place.
          Depending on which end is interpreted as the top of the stack, the
          following sequence assignment statement forms can be used to fetch
          and remove the top item as well, albeit at the cost of making a new
          list object each time:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e77759"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># top is front of list</span></em>
top, stack = stack[0], stack[1:]        # Python 1.X+
top, *stack = stack                     # Python 3.X

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># top is end of list</span></em>
stack, top = stack[:-1], stack[-1]      # Python 1.X+
*stack, top = stack                     # Python 3.X</pre>
<p>With so many built-in stack options, why bother implementing
          others? For one thing, they serve as a simple and familiar context
          for exploring data structure concepts in this book. More
          importantly, though, there is a practical programming motive here.
          List representations work and will be relatively fast, but they also
          bind stack-based programs to the stack representation chosen: all
          stack operations will be hardcoded throughout a program. If we later
          want to change how a stack is represented or extend its basic
          operation set, we’re stuck—every stack-based program will have to be
          updated, and in every place where it accesses the stack.</p>
<p>For instance, to add logic that monitors the number of stack
          operations a program performs, we’d have to add code around each
          hardcoded stack operation. In a large system, this update may be
          nontrivial work. As we’ll discuss in Chapter 20, we may also decide to
          move stacks to a C-based implementation, if they prove to be a
          performance bottleneck. As a general rule, hardcoded operations on
          built-in data structures don’t support future migrations as well as
          we’d sometimes like.</p>
<p>As we’ll see later, built-in types such as lists are actually
          class-like objects in Python that we can subclass to customize, too.
          This might be only a partial fix, though; unless we anticipate
          future changes and make instances of a subclass, we may still have a
          maintenance issue if we use built-in list operations directly and
          ever want to extend what they do in the <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e77774"></a>future.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="A Stack Module"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="a_stack_module"></a>A Stack Module</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Of course, the real solution to <a id="st18.2.2"></a>such code maintenance dilemmas is to
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>encapsulate</em></span>—that is, wrap up—stack
          implementations behind interfaces, using Python’s code reuse tools.
          As long as clients stick to using the interfaces, we’re free to
          change the interfaces’ implementations arbitrarily without having to
          change every place they are called. Let’s begin by implementing a
          stack as a module containing a Python list, plus functions to
          operate on it; Example 18-1
          shows one way to code this.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_dstruct_reve"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 18-1. PP4E\Dstruct\Basic\stack1.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"a shared stack module"

stack = []                                   # on first import
class error(Exception): pass                 # local excs, stack1.error

def push(obj):
    global stack                             # use 'global' to change
    stack = [obj] + stack                    # add item to the front

def pop():
    global stack
    if not stack:
        raise error('stack underflow')       # raise local error
    top, *stack = stack                      # remove item at front
    return top

def top():
    if not stack:                            # raise local error
        raise error('stack underflow')       # or let IndexError occur
    return stack[0]

def empty():      return not stack           # is the stack []?
def member(obj):  return obj in stack        # item in stack?
def item(offset): return stack[offset]       # index the stack
def length():     return len(stack)          # number entries
def dump():       print('&lt;Stack:%s&gt;' % stack)</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>This module creates a list object (<code class="epub__literal">stack</code>) and exports functions to manage
          access to it. The stack is declared global in functions that change
          it, but not in those that just reference it. The module also defines
          an error object (<code class="epub__literal">error</code>) that can
          be used to catch exceptions raised locally in this module. Some
          stack errors are built-in exceptions: the method <code class="epub__literal">item</code> triggers <code class="epub__literal">IndexError</code> for out-of-bounds
          indexes.</p>
<p>Most of the stack’s functions just delegate the operation to
          the embedded list used to represent the stack. In fact, the module
          is really just a simple wrapper around a Python list. Because this
          extra layer of interface logic makes clients independent of the
          actual implementation of the stack, though, we’re able to change the
          stack later without impacting its clients.</p>
<p>As usual, one of the best ways to understand such code is to
          see it in action. Here’s an interactive session that illustrates the
          module’s interfaces—it implements a stack of arbitrary Python
          objects:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e77816"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Dstruct\Basic&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import stack1</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>stack1.push('spam')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>stack1.push(123)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>stack1.top()</code></strong>
123
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>stack1.stack</code></strong>
[123, 'spam']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>stack1.pop()</code></strong>
123
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>stack1.dump()</code></strong>
&lt;Stack:['spam']&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>stack1.pop()</code></strong>
'spam'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>stack1.empty()</code></strong>
True
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for c in 'spam': stack1.push(c)</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>while not stack1.empty():</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(stack1.pop(), end=' ')</code></strong>
...
m a p s &gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>stack1.pop()</code></strong>
stack1.error: stack underflow</pre>
<p>Other operations are analogous, but the main thing to notice
          here is that all stack operations are module
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>functions</em></span>. For instance, it’s possible to
          iterate over the stack, but we need to use counter-loops and
          indexing function calls (<code class="epub__literal">item</code>).
          Nothing is preventing clients from accessing (and even changing)
          <code class="epub__literal">stack1.stack</code> directly, but doing
          so defeats the purpose of interfaces like this <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e77873"></a>one:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e77876"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for c in 'spam': stack1.push(c)</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>stack1.dump()</code></strong>
&lt;Stack:['m', 'a', 'p', 's']&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for i in range(stack1.length()):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(stack1.item(i), end=' ')</code></strong>
...
m a p s &gt;&gt;&gt;</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="A Stack Class"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="a_stack_class"></a>A Stack Class</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Perhaps the <a id="st18.2.3"></a><a id="cl18.2.3"></a>biggest drawback of the module-based stack is that it
          supports only a single stack object. All clients of the <code class="epub__literal">stack</code> module effectively share the same
          stack. Sometimes we want this feature: a stack can serve as a
          shared-memory object for multiple modules. But to implement a true
          stack datatype that can generate independent objects, we need to use
          classes.</p>
<p>To illustrate, let’s define a full-featured stack
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>class</em></span>. The <code class="epub__literal">Stack</code> class shown in Example 18-2 defines a new
          datatype with a variety of behaviors. Like the module, the class
          uses a Python list to hold stacked objects. But this time, each
          instance gets its own list. The class defines both “real” methods
          and specially named methods that implement common type operations.
          Comments in the code describe special methods.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_dstruct_reve-id1"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 18-2. PP4E\Dstruct\Basic\stack2.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"a multi-instance stack class"

class error(Exception): pass                 # when imported: local exception

class Stack:
    def __init__(self, start=[]):            # self is the instance object
        self.stack = []                      # start is any sequence: stack..
        for x in start: self.push(x)
        self.reverse()                       # undo push's order reversal

    def push(self, obj):                     # methods: like module + self
        self.stack = [obj] + self.stack      # top is front of list

    def pop(self):
        if not self.stack: raise error('underflow')
        top, *self.stack = self.stack
        return top

    def top(self):
        if not self.stack: raise error('underflow')
        return self.stack[0]

    def empty(self):
        return not self.stack                     # instance.empty()

    # overloads
    def __repr__(self):
        return '[Stack:%s]' % self.stack          # print, repr(),..

    def __eq__(self, other):
        return self.stack == other.stack          # '==', '!='?

    def __len__(self):
        return len(self.stack)                    # len(instance), not instance

    def __add__(self, other):
        return Stack(self.stack + other.stack)    # instance1 + instance2

    def __mul__(self, reps):
        return Stack(self.stack * reps)           # instance * reps

    def __getitem__(self, offset):                # see also __iter__
        return self.stack[offset]                 # instance[i], [i:j], in, for

    def __getattr__(self, name):
        return getattr(self.stack, name)          # instance.sort()/reverse()/..</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Now distinct instances are created by calling the <code class="epub__literal">Stack</code> class like a function. In most
          respects, the <code class="epub__literal">Stack</code> class
          implements operations exactly like the <code class="epub__literal">stack</code> module in Example 18-1. But here, access to
          the stack is qualified by <code class="epub__literal">self</code>,
          the subject instance object. Each instance has its own <code class="epub__literal">stack</code> attribute, which refers to the
          instance’s own list. Furthermore, instance stacks are created and
          initialized in the <code class="epub__literal">__init__</code>
          constructor method, not when the module is first imported. Let’s
          make a couple of stacks to see how all this works in
          practice:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e77947"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from stack2 import Stack</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = Stack()</code></strong>                   # make a stack object, push items
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.push('spam')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.push(123)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x</code></strong>                             # __repr__ prints a stack
[Stack:[123, 'spam']]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y = Stack()</code></strong>                   # two distinct stack objects
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y.push(3.1415)</code></strong>                # they do not share content
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y.push(x.pop())</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x, y</code></strong>
([Stack:['spam']], [Stack:[123, 3.1415]])

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>z = Stack()</code></strong>                   # third distinct stack object
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for c in 'spam': z.push(c)</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>while z:</code></strong>                      # __len__ tests stack truth
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(z.pop(), end=' ')</code></strong>
...
m a p s &gt;&gt;&gt;

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>z = x + y</code></strong>                     # __add__ handles stack +
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>z</code></strong>                             # holds three different types
[Stack:['spam', 123, 3.1415]]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for item in z:</code></strong>                # __getitem__ does for
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(item, end=' ')</code></strong>
...
spam 123 3.1415 &gt;&gt;&gt;

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>z.reverse()</code></strong>                   # __getattr__ delegates to list
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>z</code></strong>
[Stack:[3.1415, 123, 'spam']]</pre>
<p>Like lists and dictionaries, <code class="epub__literal">Stack</code> defines both methods and operators
          for manipulating instances by attribute references and expressions.
          Additionally, it defines the <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> special method to intercept
          references to attributes not defined in the class and to route them
          to the wrapped list object (to support list methods: <code class="epub__literal">sort</code>, <code class="epub__literal">append</code>, <code class="epub__literal">reverse</code>, and so on). Many of the module’s
          operations become operators in the class. Table 18-3 shows the
          equivalence of module and class operations (columns 1 and 2) and
          gives the class method that comes into play for each (column
          3).</p><div class="epub__table"><a id="module_solidus_class_operation_compariso"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Table 18-3. Module/class operation comparison</p><div class="epub__table-contents"><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; " summary="Module/class operation comparison"><colgroup><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Module
                  operations</p></th><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Class
                  operations</p></th><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Class
                  method</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">module.empty()</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">not instance</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>__len__</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">module.member(x)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">x in instance</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>__getitem__</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">module.item(i)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">instance[i]</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>__getitem__</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">module.length()</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">len(instance)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>__len__</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">module.dump()</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">print(instance)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>__repr__</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">range()</code> <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>counter
                  loops</code></em></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">for x in instance</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>__getitem__</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>manual
                  loop logic</code></em></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">instance + instance</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>__add__</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">module.stack.reverse()</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">instance.reverse()</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>__getattr__</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">module.push/pop/top</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">instance.push/pop/top</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>push/pop/top</p></td></tr></tbody></table>
</div>
</div>
<p>In effect, classes let us extend Python’s set of built-in
          types with reusable types implemented in Python modules. Class-based
          types may be used just like built-in types: depending on which
          operation methods they define, classes can implement numbers,
          mappings, and sequences, and may or may not be mutable. Class-based
          types may also fall somewhere in between these <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e78161"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e78163"></a>categories.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Customization: Performance Monitors"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="customization_colon_performance_monitors"></a>Customization: Performance Monitors</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>So far we’ve seen how <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e78171"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e78176"></a>classes support multiple instances and integrate
          better with Python’s object model by defining operator methods. One
          of the other main reasons for using classes is to allow for future
          extensions and customizations. By implementing stacks with a class,
          we can later add subclasses that specialize the implementation for
          new demands. In fact, this is often the main reason for using a
          custom class instead of a built-in alternative.</p>
<p>For instance, suppose we’ve started using the <code class="epub__literal">Stack</code> class in Example 18-2, but we start
          running into performance problems. One way to isolate bottlenecks is
          to instrument data structures with logic that keeps track of usage
          statistics, which we can analyze after running client applications.
          Because <code class="epub__literal">Stack</code> is a class, we can
          add such logic in a new subclass without affecting the original
          stack module (or its clients). The subclass in Example 18-3 extends <code class="epub__literal">Stack</code> to keep track of overall push/pop
          usage frequencies and to record the maximum size of each
          instance.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_dstruct_reve-id2"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 18-3. PP4E\Dstruct\Basic\stacklog.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"customize stack for usage data"

from stack2 import Stack                    # extends imported Stack

class StackLog(Stack):                      # count pushes/pops, max-size
    pushes = pops = 0                       # shared/static class members
    def __init__(self, start=[]):           # could also be module vars
        self.maxlen = 0
        Stack.__init__(self, start)

    def push(self, object):
        Stack.push(self, object)                    # do real push
        StackLog.pushes += 1                        # overall stats
        self.maxlen = max(self.maxlen, len(self))   # per-instance stats

    def pop(self):
        StackLog.pops += 1                          # overall counts
        return Stack.pop(self)                      # not 'self.pops': instance

    def stats(self):
        return self.maxlen, self.pushes, self.pops  # get counts from instance</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>This subclass works the same as the original <code class="epub__literal">Stack</code>; it just adds monitoring logic. The
          new <code class="epub__literal">stats</code> method is used to get a
          statistics tuple through an instance:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e78210"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from stacklog import StackLog</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = StackLog()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y = StackLog()</code></strong>                           # make two stack objects
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for i in range(3): x.push(i)</code></strong>             # and push object on them
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for c in 'spam':   y.push(c)</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x, y</code></strong>                                     # run inherited __repr__
([Stack:[2, 1, 0]], [Stack:['m', 'a', 'p', 's']])
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.stats(), y.stats()</code></strong>
((3, 7, 0), (4, 7, 0))
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y.pop(), x.pop()</code></strong>
('m', 2)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.stats(), y.stats()</code></strong>                     # my maxlen, all pushes, all pops
((3, 7, 2), (4, 7, 2))</pre>
<p>Notice the use of <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>class</em></span> attributes to
          record overall pushes and pops, and <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>instance</em></span>
          attributes for per-instance maximum length. By hanging attributes on
          different objects, we can expand or narrow their scopes.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Optimization: Tuple Tree Stacks"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="optimization_colon_tuple_tree_stacks"></a>Optimization: Tuple Tree Stacks</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>One of the nice things <a id="st18.2.5"></a><a id="tu18.2.5"></a><a id="op18.2.5"></a>about wrapping objects up in classes is that you are
          free to change the underlying implementation without breaking the
          rest of your program. Optimizations can be added in the future, for
          instance, with minimal impact; the interface is unchanged, even if
          the internals are. There are a variety of ways to implement stacks,
          some more efficient than others. So far, our stacks have used
          slicing and extended sequence assignment to implement pushing and
          popping. This method is relatively inefficient: both operations make
          copies of the wrapped list object. For large stacks, this practice
          can add a significant time penalty.</p>
<p>One way to speed up such code is to change the underlying data
          structure completely. For example, we can store the stacked objects
          in a binary tree of tuples: each item may be recorded as a pair,
          <code class="epub__literal">(object, tree)</code>, where <code class="epub__literal">object</code> is the stacked item and <code class="epub__literal">tree</code> is either another tuple pair giving
          the rest of the stack or <code class="epub__literal">None</code> to
          designate an empty stack. A stack of items <code class="epub__literal">[1,2,3,4]</code> would be internally stored as a
          tuple tree <code class="epub__literal">(1,(2,(3,(4,None))))</code>.</p>
<p>This tuple-based representation is similar to the notion of
          “cons-cells” in Lisp-family languages: the object on the left is the
          <code class="epub__literal">car</code>, and the rest of the tree on
          the right is the <code class="epub__literal">cdr</code>. Because we
          add or remove only a top tuple to push and pop items, this structure
          avoids copying the entire stack. For large stacks, the benefit might
          be significant. The next class, shown in Example 18-4, implements these
          ideas.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_dstruct_reve-id3"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 18-4. PP4E\Dstruct\Basic\stack3.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"optimize with tuple pair trees"

class Stack:
    def __init__(self, start=[]):              # init from any sequence
        self.stack = None                      # even other (fast)stacks
        for i in range(-len(start), 0):
            self.push(start[-i - 1])           # push in reverse order

    def push(self, node):                      # grow tree 'up/left'
        self.stack = node, self.stack          # new root tuple: (node, tree)

    def pop(self):
        node, self.stack = self.stack          # remove root tuple
        return node                            # TypeError if empty

    def empty(self):
        return not self.stack                  # is it 'None'?

    def __len__(self):                         # on: len, not
        len, tree = 0, self.stack
        while tree:
            len, tree = len+1, tree[1]         # visit right subtrees
        return len

    def __getitem__(self, index):              # on: x[i], in, for
        len, tree = 0, self.stack
        while len &lt; index and tree:            # visit/count nodes
            len, tree = len+1, tree[1]
        if tree:
            return tree[0]                     # IndexError if out-of-bounds
        else:
            raise IndexError()                 # so 'in' and 'for' stop

    def __repr__(self):
        return '[FastStack:' + repr(self.stack) + ']'</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>This class’s <code class="epub__literal">__getitem__</code>
          method handles indexing, <code class="epub__literal">in</code>
          tests, and <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop iteration as
          before (when no <code class="epub__literal">__iter__</code> is
          defined), but this version has to traverse a tree to find a node by
          index. Notice that this isn’t a subclass of the original <code class="epub__literal">Stack</code> class. Since nearly every operation
          is implemented differently here, inheritance won’t really help. But
          clients that restrict themselves to the operations that are common
          to both classes can still use them interchangeably—they just need to
          import a stack class from a different module to switch
          implementations. Here’s a session with this stack version; as long
          as we stick to pushing, popping, indexing, and iterating, this
          version is essentially indistinguishable from the <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e78321"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e78323"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e78325"></a>original:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e78328"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from stack3 import Stack</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = Stack()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y = Stack()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for c in 'spam': x.push(c)</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for i in range(3): y.push(i)</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x</code></strong>
[FastStack:('m', ('a', ('p', ('s', None))))]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y</code></strong>
[FastStack:(2, (1, (0, None)))]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>len(x), x[2], x[-1]</code></strong>
(4, 'p', 'm')
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.pop()</code></strong>
'm'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x</code></strong>
[FastStack:('a', ('p', ('s', None)))]
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>while y: print(y.pop(), end=' ')</code></strong>
...
2 1 0 &gt;&gt;&gt;</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Optimization: In-Place List Modifications"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="optimization_colon_in-place_list_modific"></a>Optimization: In-Place List Modifications</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The last section <a id="op18.2.6"></a><a id="li18.2.6"></a><a id="st18.2.6"></a>tried to speed up pushes and pops with a different
          data structure, but we might also be able to speed up our stack
          object by falling back on the mutability of Python’s list object.
          Because lists can be changed in place, they can be modified more
          quickly than any of the prior examples. In-place change operations
          such as <code class="epub__literal">append</code> are prone to
          complications when a list is referenced from more than one place.
          But because the list inside the stack object isn’t meant to be used
          directly, we’re probably safe.</p>
<p>The module in Example 18-5 shows one way to
          implement a stack with in-place changes; some operator overloading
          methods have been dropped to keep this simple. The Python <code class="epub__literal">pop</code> method it uses is equivalent to
          indexing and deleting the item at <span>offset −1</span> (top is end-of-list here).
          Compared to using built-in lists directly, this class incurs some
          performance degradation for the extra method calls, but it supports
          future changes better by encapsulating stack operations.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_dstruct_reve-id4"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 18-5. PP4E\Dstruct\Basic\stack4.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"optimize with in-place list operations"

class error(Exception): pass                 # when imported: local exception

class Stack:
    def __init__(self, start=[]):            # self is the instance object
        self.stack = []                      # start is any sequence: stack...
        for x in start: self.push(x)

    def push(self, obj):                     # methods: like module + self
        self.stack.append(obj)               # top is end of list

    def pop(self):
        if not self.stack: raise error('underflow')
        return self.stack.pop()              # like fetch and delete stack[-1]

    def top(self):
        if not self.stack: raise error('underflow')
        return self.stack[-1]

    def empty(self):
        return not self.stack                # instance.empty()

    def __len__(self):
        return len(self.stack)               # len(instance), not instance

    def __getitem__(self, offset):
        return self.stack[offset]            # instance[offset], in, for

    def __repr__(self):
        return '[Stack:%s]' % self.stack</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>This version works like the original in module <code class="epub__literal">stack2</code>, too; just replace <code class="epub__literal">stack2</code> with <code class="epub__literal">stack4</code> in the previous interaction to get
          a feel for its operation. The only obvious difference is that stack
          items are in reverse when printed (i.e., the top is <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e78414"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e78416"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e78418"></a>the end):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e78421"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from stack4 import Stack</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = Stack()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.push('spam')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.push(123)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x</code></strong>
[Stack:['spam', 123]]
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y = Stack()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y.push(3.1415)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y.push(x.pop())</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x, y</code></strong>
([Stack:['spam']], [Stack:[3.1415, 123]])
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y.top()</code></strong>
123</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Timing the Improvements"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="timing_the_improvements"></a>Timing the Improvements</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The prior <a id="st18.2.7"></a>section’s in-place changes stack object probably runs
          faster than both the original and the tuple-tree versions, but the
          only way to really be sure is to time the alternative
          implementations.<sup>[70]</sup> Since this could be something we’ll want to do more
          than once, let’s first define a general module for timing functions
          in Python. In Example 18-6, the built-in
          <code class="epub__literal">time</code> module provides a <code class="epub__literal">clock</code> function that we can use to get the
          current CPU time in floating-point seconds, and the function
          <code class="epub__literal">timer.test</code> simply calls a
          function <code class="epub__literal">reps</code><a name="seconds by"></a> times and returns
          the number of elapsed seconds by subtracting stop from start
          times.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_dstruct_reve-id5"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 18-6. PP4E\Dstruct\Basic\timer.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"generic code timer tool"
def test(reps, func, *args):        # or best of N? see Learning Python
    import time
    start = time.clock()            # current CPU time in float seconds
    for i in range(reps):           # call function reps times
        func(*args)                 # discard any return value
    return time.clock() - start     # stop time - start time</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>There are other ways to time code, including a best-of-N
          approach and Python’s own <code class="epub__literal">timeit</code>
          module, but this module suffices for our purpose here. If you’re
          interested in doing better, see <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Learning
          Python</em></span>, Fourth Edition, for a larger case study
          on this topic, or experiment on your own.</p>
<p>Next, we define a test driver script which deploys the timer,
          in Example 18-7. It
          expects three command-line arguments: the number of pushes, pops,
          and indexing operations to perform (we’ll vary these arguments to
          test different scenarios). When run at the top level, the script
          creates 200 instances of the original and optimized stack classes
          and performs the specified number of operations on each stack.
          Pushes and pops change the stack; indexing just accesses it.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_dstruct_reve-id6"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 18-7. PP4E\Dstruct\Basic\stacktime.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"compare performance of stack alternatives"

import stack2           # list-based stacks: [x]+y
import stack3           # tuple-tree stacks: (x,y)
import stack4           # in-place stacks:   y.append(x)
import timer            # general function timer utility

rept = 200
from sys import argv
pushes, pops, items = (int(arg) for arg in argv[1:])

def stackops(stackClass):
    x = stackClass('spam')                    # make a stack object
    for i in range(pushes): x.push(i)         # exercise its methods
    for i in range(items):  t = x[i]          # 3.X: range generator
    for i in range(pops):   x.pop()
                                              # or mod = __import__(n)
for mod in (stack2, stack3, stack4):          # rept*(push+pop+ix)
    print('%s:' % mod.__name__, end=' ')
    print(timer.test(rept, stackops, getattr(mod, 'Stack')))</pre>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Results under Python 3.1"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="results_under_python_3.1"></a>Results under Python 3.1</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The following are some of the timings reported by the test
            driver script. The three outputs represent the measured run times
            in seconds for the original, tuple, and in-place stacks. For each
            stack type, the first test creates 200 stack objects and performs
            roughly 120,000 stack operations (200 repetitions × (200 pushes +
            200 indexes + 200 pops)) in the test duration times listed. These
            results were obtained on a fairly slow Windows 7 netbook laptop
            under Python 3.1; as usual for benchmarks, your mileage will
            probably vary.</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e78515"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Dstruct\Basic&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python stacktime.py 200 200 200</code></strong>
stack2: 0.838853884098
stack3: 2.52424649244
stack4: 0.215801718938

C:\...\PP4E\Dstruct\Basic&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python stacktime.py 200 50 200</code></strong>
stack2: 0.775219065818
stack3: 2.539294115
stack4: 0.156989574341

C:\...\PP4E\Dstruct\Basic&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python stacktime.py 200 200 50</code></strong>
stack2: 0.743521212289
stack3: 0.286850521181
stack4: 0.156262000363

C:\...\PP4E\Dstruct\Basic&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python stacktime.py 200 200 0</code></strong>
stack2: 0.721035029026
stack3: 0.116366779208
stack4: 0.141471921584</pre>
<p>If you look closely enough, you’ll notice that the results
            show that the tuple-based stack (<code class="epub__literal">stack3</code>) performs better when we do more
            pushing and popping, but worse if we do much indexing. Indexing
            lists is extremely fast for built-in lists (<code class="epub__literal">stack2</code> and <code class="epub__literal">stack4</code>), but very slow for tuple
            trees—the Python class must traverse the tree manually.</p>
<p>The in-place change stacks (<code class="epub__literal">stack4</code>) are <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>almost</em></span>
            always fastest, unless no indexing is done at all—tuples (<code class="epub__literal">stack3</code>) win by a hair in the last test
            case. When there is no indexing, as in the last test, the tuple
            and in-place change stacks are roughly six and five times quicker
            than the simple list-based stack, respectively. Since pushes and
            pops are most of what clients would normally do to a stack, tuples
            are a contender here, despite their poor indexing
            performance.</p>
<p>Of course, we’re talking about fractions of a second after
            many tens of thousands of operations; in many applications, your
            users probably won’t care either way. If you access a stack
            millions of times in your program, though, this difference may
            accumulate to a significant amount of time.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="More on performance analysis"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="more_on_performance_analysis"></a>More on performance analysis</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Two last notes on <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e78558"></a>performance here. Although absolute times have
            changed over the years with new Pythons and test machines, these
            results have remained relatively the same. That is, tuple-based
            stacks win when no indexing is performed. All performance
            measurements in a dynamic language like Python are prone to change
            over time, though, so run such tests on your own for more accurate
            results.</p>
<p>Second, there’s often more to performance measurement than
            timing alternatives this way. For a more complete picture, read
            about Python’s standard library <code class="epub__literal">profile</code> module (and its optimized
            workalike, <code class="epub__literal">cProfile</code>). The
            profilers run Python code, collect performance data along the way,
            and provide it in a report on code exit. It’s the most complete
            way to isolate your code’s bottleneck, before you start working on
            optimizing with better coding, algorithms, and data structures or
            moving portions to the <span>C <span>language</span>.</span></p>
<p>For simple performance analysis, though, our timing module
            provides the data we need. In fact, we’ll reuse it to measure a
            more dramatic improvement in relative speed for set implementation
            alternatives—the topic of the next <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e78579"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e78581"></a>section.</p>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[70] </sup>Because Python is so dynamic, guesses about relative
              performance in Python are just as likely to be wrong as right.
              Moreover, their accuracy is prone to change over time. Trust me
              on this. I’ve made sweeping statements about performance in
              other books, only to be made wrong by a later Python release
              that optimized some operations more than others. Performance
              measurement in Python is both nontrivial and an ongoing task. In
              general, code for readability first, and worry about performance
              later, but always gather data to support your optimization
              efforts.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
