<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Implementing Sets</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Implementing Sets"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="implementing_sets"></a>Implementing Sets</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Another commonly used <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e78589"></a><a id="data18.3"></a>data structure is the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>set</em></span>, a
        collection of objects that support <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e78603"></a>operations such as:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Intersection</span></dt><dd>
<p>Make a new set with all items in common.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Union</span></dt><dd>
<p>Make a new set with all items in either operand.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Membership</span></dt><dd>
<p>Test whether an item exists in a set.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Other operations, such as difference and subset tests, can be
        useful as well, depending on the intended use. Sets come in handy for
        dealing with abstract group combinations. For instance, given a set of
        engineers and a set of writers, you can pick out individuals who do
        both activities by intersecting the two sets. A union of such sets
        would contain either type of individual, but would include any given
        individual only once. This latter property also makes sets ideal for
        removing duplicates from collections—simply convert to and from a set
        to filter out repeats.</p>
<p>In fact, we relied on such operations in earlier chapters;
        PyMailGUI in Chapter 14, for example,
        used intersection, union, and difference to manage the set of active
        mail downloads, and filtered out duplicate recipients in multiple
        contexts with set conversion. Sets are a widely relevant tool on
        practical programs.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Built-in Options"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="built-in_options-id1"></a>Built-in Options</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>If you’ve studied the core <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e78639"></a>Python language, you should already know that, as for
          stacks, Python comes with built-in support here as well. Here,
          though, the support is even more direct—Python’s set datatype
          provides standard and optimized set operations today. As a quick
          review, built-in set usage is straightforward: set objects are
          initially created by calling the type name with an iterable or
          sequence giving the components of the set or by running a set
          comprehension expression:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e78645"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = set('abcde')</code></strong>                # make set from an iterable/sequence
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y = {c for c in 'bdxyz'}</code></strong>        # same via set comprehension expression
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x</code></strong>
{'a', 'c', 'b', 'e', 'd'}
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y</code></strong>
{'y', 'x', 'b', 'd', 'z'}</pre>
<p>Once you have a set, all the usual operations are available;
          here are the most common:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e78661"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'e' in x</code></strong>                        # membership
True
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x – y</code></strong>                           # difference
{'a', 'c', 'e'}
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x &amp; y</code></strong>                           # intersection
{'b', 'd'}
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x | y</code></strong>                           # union
{'a', 'c', 'b', 'e', 'd', 'y', 'x', 'z'}</pre>
<p>Interestingly, just like the dictionaries, built-in sets are
          unordered, and require that all set components be hashable
          (immutable). Making a set with a dictionary of items works, but only
          because <code class="epub__literal">set</code> uses the dictionary
          iterator, which returns the next key on each iteration (it ignores
          key values):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e78680"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = set(['spam', 'ham', 'eggs'])</code></strong>       # sequence of immutables
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x</code></strong>
{'eggs', 'ham', 'spam'}
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = {'spam', 'ham', 'eggs'}</code></strong>            # same but set literal if items known
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x</code></strong>
{'eggs', 'ham', 'spam'}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = set([['spam', 'ham'], ['eggs']])</code></strong>   # immutables do not work as items
TypeError: unhashable type: 'list'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = set({'spam':[1, 1], 'ham': [2, 2], 'eggs':[3, 3]})</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; x
{'eggs', 'ham', 'spam'}</pre>
<p>Plus there are additional operations we won’t illuminate
          here—see a core language text such as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Learning
          Python</em></span> for more details. For instance, built-in
          sets also support operations such as superset testing, and they come
          in two flavors: mutable and frozen (frozen sets are hashable, and
          thus usable in sets of sets). Moreover, set comprehensions are more
          powerful than suggested, and sets are a natural at duplicate
          removal:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e78707"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y = {c.upper() * 4 for c in 'spamham'}</code></strong>   # set comprehension
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y</code></strong>
{'SSSS', 'AAAA', 'MMMM', 'HHHH', 'PPPP'}
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(set([1, 2, 3, 1, 2]))</code></strong>               # remove duplicates from a list
[1, 2, 3]</pre>
<p>As for stacks, though, the built-in set type might not by
          itself achieve all our goals. Moreover, homegrown set
          implementations turn out to be an ideal vehicle for studying custom
          data structure implementations in Python. Although the end result
          may not compete with the performance of built-in set objects today,
          the code can still be instructive to read, and fun to experiment
          with.</p>
<p>Also as for stacks, a custom set implementation will generally
          be based upon other built-in types. Python lists, tuples, and
          strings come close to the notion of a set: the <code class="epub__literal">in</code> operator tests membership, <code class="epub__literal">for</code> iterates, and so on. Here, we’ll add
          operations not directly supported by Python sequences. In effect,
          we’re <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>extending</em></span> built-in types for unique
          requirements.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Set Functions"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="set_functions"></a>Set Functions</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As before, let’s <a id="set18.3.2"></a><a id="fun18.3.2"></a>first start out with a function-based set manager. But
          this time, instead of managing a shared set object in a module,
          let’s define functions to implement set operations on passed-in
          Python sequences (see Example 18-8).</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_dstruct_reve-id7"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 18-8. PP4E\Dstruct\Basic\inter.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"set operations for two sequences"

def intersect(seq1, seq2):
    res = []                          # start with an empty list
    for x in seq1:                    # scan the first sequence
        if x in seq2:
            res.append(x)             # add common items to the end
    return res

def union(seq1, seq2):
    res = list(seq1)                  # make a copy of seq1
    for x in seq2:                    # add new items in seq2
        if not x in res:
            res.append(x)
    return res</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>These functions work on any type of sequence—lists strings,
          tuples, and other iterable objects that conform to the protocols
          expected by these functions (<code class="epub__literal">for</code>
          loops, <code class="epub__literal">in</code> membership tests). In
          fact, we can even use them on mixed object types: the last two
          commands in the following test compute the intersection and union of
          a list and a tuple. As usual in Python, the object
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>interface</em></span> is what matters, not the specific
          types:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e78765"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Dstruct\Basic&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from inter import *</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>s1 = "SPAM"</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>s2 = "SCAM"</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>intersect(s1, s2), union(s1, s2)</code></strong>
(['S', 'A', 'M'], ['S', 'P', 'A', 'M', 'C'])
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>intersect([1,2,3], (1,4))</code></strong>
[1]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>union([1,2,3], (1,4))</code></strong>
[1, 2, 3, 4]</pre>
<p>Notice that the result is always a list here, regardless of
          the type of sequences passed in. We could work around this by
          converting types or by using a class to sidestep this issue (and we
          will in a moment). But type conversions aren’t clear-cut if the
          operands are mixed-type sequences. Which type do we convert
          to?</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Supporting multiple operands"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="supporting_multiple_operands"></a>Supporting multiple operands</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>If we’re going to use the <code class="epub__literal">intersect</code> and <code class="epub__literal">union</code> functions as general tools, one
            useful extension is support for multiple arguments (i.e., more
            than two). The functions in Example 18-9 use Python’s
            variable-length argument lists feature to compute the intersection
            and union of arbitrarily many <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e78804"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e78806"></a>operands.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_dstruct_reve-id8"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 18-9. PP4E\Dstruct\Basic\inter2.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"set operations for multiple sequences"

def intersect(*args):
    res = []
    for x in args[0]:                  # scan the first list
        for other in args[1:]:         # for all other arguments
            if x not in other: break   # this item in each one?
        else:
            res.append(x)              # add common items to the end
    return res

def union(*args):
    res = []
    for seq in args:                   # for all sequence-arguments
        for x in seq:                  # for all nodes in argument
            if not x in res:
                res.append(x)          # add new items to result
    return res</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>These multi-operand functions work on sequences in the same
            way as the originals, but they also support three or more
            operands. Notice the use of an <code class="epub__literal">else</code> on the <span>intersection’s</span> <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop here to detect common items.
            Also note that the last two examples in the following session work
            on lists with embedded compound objects: the <code class="epub__literal">in</code> tests used by the <code class="epub__literal">intersect</code> and <code class="epub__literal">union</code> functions apply equality testing
            to sequence nodes recursively, as deep as necessary to determine
            collection comparison results:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e78835"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Dstruct\Basic&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from inter2 import *</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>s1, s2, s3 = 'SPAM', 'SLAM', 'SCAM'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>intersect(s1, s2)</code></strong>
['S', 'A', 'M']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>intersect(s1, s2, s3)</code></strong>
['S', 'A', 'M']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>intersect(s1, s2, s3, 'HAM')</code></strong>
['A', 'M']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>union(s1, s2), union(s1, s2, s3)</code></strong>
(['S', 'P', 'A', 'M', 'L'], ['S', 'P', 'A', 'M', 'L', 'C'])
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>intersect([1, 2, 3], (1, 4), range(5))</code></strong>                      # 3.X: range okay
[1]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>s1 = (9, (3.14, 1), "bye", [1, 2], "mello")</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>s2 = [[1, 2], "hello", (3.14, 0), 9]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>intersect(s1, s2)</code></strong>
[9, [1, 2]]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>union(s1, s2)</code></strong>
[9, (3.14, 1), 'bye', [1, 2], 'mello', 'hello', (3.14, 0)]</pre>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Set Classes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="set_classes"></a>Set Classes</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The preceding <a id="set18.3.3"></a><a id="cl18.3.3"></a>section’s set functions can operate on a variety of
          objects, but they aren’t as friendly as true objects. Among other
          things, your scripts need to keep track of the sequences passed into
          these functions manually. Classes can do better: the class in Example 18-10 implements a set
          object that can hold any type of object. Like the stack classes,
          it’s essentially a wrapper around a Python list with extra set
          operations.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_dstruct_reve-id9"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 18-10. PP4E\Dstruct\Basic\set.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"multi-instance, customizable, encapsulated set class"

class Set:
    def __init__(self, value = []):     # on object creation
        self.data = []                  # manages a local list
        self.concat(value)

    def intersect(self, other):         # other is any sequence type
        res = []                        # self is the instance subject
        for x in self.data:
            if x in other:
                res.append(x)
        return Set(res)                 # return a new Set

    def union(self, other):
        res = self.data[:]              # make a copy of my list
        for x in other:
            if not x in res:
                res.append(x)
        return Set(res)

    def concat(self, value):            # value: a list, string, Set...
        for x in value:                 # filters out duplicates
           if not x in self.data:
                self.data.append(x)

    def __len__(self):          return len(self.data)
    def __getitem__(self, key): return self.data[key]
    def __and__(self, other):   return self.intersect(other)
    def __or__(self, other):    return self.union(other)
    def __repr__(self):         return '&lt;Set:' + repr(self.data) + '&gt;'</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">Set</code> class is used like
          the <code class="epub__literal">Stack</code> class we saw earlier in
          this chapter: we make instances and apply sequence operators plus
          unique set operations to them. Intersection and union can be called
          as methods, or by using the <code class="epub__literal">&amp;</code>
          and <code class="epub__literal">|</code> operators normally used for
          built-in integer objects. Because we can string operators in
          expressions now (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">x &amp; y &amp;
          z</code>), there is no obvious need to support multiple operands
          in <code class="epub__literal">intersect</code>/<code class="epub__literal">union</code> methods here (though this model’s
          need to create temporary objects within expressions might eventually
          come to bear on performance). As with all rightly packaged objects,
          we can either use the <code class="epub__literal">Set</code> class
          within a program or test it interactively as <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e78925"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e78927"></a>follows:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e78930"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from set import Set</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>users1 = Set(['Bob', 'Emily', 'Howard', 'Peeper'])</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>users2 = Set(['Jerry', 'Howard', 'Carol'])</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>users3 = Set(['Emily', 'Carol'])</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>users1 &amp; users2</code></strong>
&lt;Set:['Howard']&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>users1 | users2</code></strong>
&lt;Set:['Bob', 'Emily', 'Howard', 'Peeper', 'Jerry', 'Carol']&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>users1 | users2 &amp; users3</code></strong>
&lt;Set:['Bob', 'Emily', 'Howard', 'Peeper', 'Carol']&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>(users1 | users2) &amp; users3</code></strong>
&lt;Set:['Emily', 'Carol']&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>users1.data</code></strong>
['Bob', 'Emily', 'Howard', 'Peeper']</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Optimization: Moving Sets to Dictionaries"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="optimization_colon_moving_sets_to_dictio"></a>Optimization: Moving Sets to Dictionaries</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Once you start using <a id="opt18.3.4"></a><a id="set18.3.4"></a><a id="dic18.3.4"></a>the <code class="epub__literal">Set</code> class, the
          first problem you might encounter is its performance: its nested
          <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops and <code class="epub__literal">in</code> scans become exponentially slow. That
          slowness may or may not be significant in your applications, but
          library classes should generally be coded as efficiently as
          possible.</p>
<p>One way to optimize set performance is by changing the
          implementation to use dictionaries rather than lists for storing
          sets internally—items may be stored as the keys of a dictionary
          whose values are all <code class="epub__literal">None</code>.
          Because lookup time is constant and short for dictionaries, the
          <code class="epub__literal">in</code> list scans of the original set
          can be replaced with direct dictionary fetches in this scheme. In
          traditional terms, moving sets to dictionaries replaces slow linear
          searches with fast hashtable fetches. A computer scientist would
          explain this by saying that the repeated nested scanning of the
          list-based intersection is an <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>exponential</em></span>
          algorithm in terms of its complexity, but dictionaries can be
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>linear</em></span>.</p>
<p>The module in Example 18-11 implements this
          idea. Its class is a subclass of the original set, and it redefines
          the methods that deal with the internal representation but inherits
          others. The inherited <code class="epub__literal">&amp;</code> and
          <code class="epub__literal">|</code> methods trigger the new
          <code class="epub__literal">intersect</code> and <code class="epub__literal">union</code> methods here, and the inherited
          <code class="epub__literal">len</code> method works on dictionaries
          as is. As long as <code class="epub__literal">Set</code> clients are
          not dependent on the order of items in a set, most can switch to
          this version directly by just changing the name of the module from
          which <code class="epub__literal">Set</code> is imported; the class
          name is the same.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_dstruct_reve-id10"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 18-11. PP4E\Dstruct\Basic\fastset.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"optimize with linear-time scans using dictionaries"

import set
                                           # fastset.Set extends set.Set
class Set(set.Set):
    def __init__(self, value = []):
        self.data = {}                     # manages a local dictionary
        self.concat(value)                 # hashing: linear search times

    def intersect(self, other):
        res = {}
        for x in other:                    # other: a sequence or Set
            if x in self.data:             # use hash-table lookup; 3.X
                res[x] = None
        return Set(res.keys())             # a new dictionary-based Set

    def union(self, other):
        res = {}                           # other: a sequence or Set
        for x in other:                    # scan each set just once
            res[x] = None
        for x in self.data.keys():         # '&amp;' and '|' come back here
            res[x] = None                  # so they make new fastset's
        return Set(res.keys())

    def concat(self, value):
        for x in value: self.data[x] = None

    # inherit and, or, len
    def __getitem__(self, ix):
        return list(self.data.keys())[ix]            # 3.X: list()

    def __repr__(self):
        return '&lt;Set:%r&gt;' % list(self.data.keys())  # ditto</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>This works about the same as the previous version, even though
          the internal implementation is radically different:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e79037"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from fastset import Set</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>users1 = Set(['Bob', 'Emily', 'Howard', 'Peeper'])</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>users2 = Set(['Jerry', 'Howard', 'Carol'])</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>users3 = Set(['Emily', 'Carol'])</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>users1 &amp; users2</code></strong>
&lt;Set:['Howard']&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>users1 | users2</code></strong>
&lt;Set:['Howard', 'Peeper', 'Jerry', 'Carol', 'Bob', 'Emily']&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>users1 | users2 &amp; users3</code></strong>
&lt;Set:['Peeper', 'Carol', 'Howard', 'Bob', 'Emily']&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>(users1 | users2) &amp; users3</code></strong>
&lt;Set:['Carol', 'Emily']&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>users1.data</code></strong>
{'Peeper': None, 'Bob': None, 'Howard': None, 'Emily': None}</pre>
<p>The main functional difference in this version is the
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>order</em></span> of items in the set: because dictionaries
          are randomly ordered, this set’s order will differ from the
          original. The order of results can even vary across Python releases
          (in fact it did, between Python 2.X and 3.X in the third and fourth
          editions of this book). For instance, you can store compound objects
          in sets, but the order of items varies in this version:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e79072"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import set, fastset</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a = set.Set([(1,2), (3,4), (5,6)])</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>b = set.Set([(3,4), (7,8)])</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a &amp; b</code></strong>
&lt;Set:[(3, 4)]&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a | b</code></strong>
&lt;Set:[(1, 2), (3, 4), (5, 6), (7, 8)]&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a = fastset.Set([(1,2), (3,4), (5,6)])</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>b = fastset.Set([(3,4), (7,8)])</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a &amp; b</code></strong>
&lt;Set:[(3, 4)]&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a | b</code></strong>
&lt;Set:[(1, 2), (5, 6), (3, 4), (7, 8)]&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>b | a</code></strong>
&lt;Set:[(1, 2), (5, 6), (3, 4), (7, 8)]&gt;</pre>
<p>Sets aren’t supposed to be ordered anyhow, so this isn’t a
          showstopper. A deviation that might matter, though, is that this
          version cannot be used to store <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>unhashable</em></span>
          (that is, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>immutable</em></span>) objects. This stems from
          the fact that dictionary keys must be immutable. Because values are
          stored in keys, dictionary sets can contain only things such as
          tuples, strings, numbers, and class objects with immutable
          signatures. Mutable objects such as lists and dictionaries won’t
          work directly in this dictionary-based set, but do in the original
          set class. Tuples do work here as compound set items, though,
          because they are immutable; Python computes hash values and tests
          key equality as expected:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e79113"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>set.Set([[1, 2],[3, 4]])</code></strong>
&lt;Set:[[1, 2], [3, 4]]&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>fastset.Set([[1, 2],[3, 4]])</code></strong>
TypeError: unhashable type: 'list'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = fastset.Set([(1, 2), (3, 4)])</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x &amp; fastset.Set([(3, 4), (1, 5)])</code></strong>
&lt;Set:[(3, 4)]&gt;</pre>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Timing the results under Python 3.1"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="timing_the_results_under_python_3.1"></a>Timing the results under Python 3.1</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>So how did we do on the optimization front this time? Again,
            guesses aren’t usually good enough, though algorithmic complexity
            seems a compelling piece of evidence here. To be sure, Example 18-12 codes a script
            to compare set class performance. It reuses the <code class="epub__literal">timer</code> module of Example 18-6 used earlier to
            compare stacks (our code may implement different objects, but it
            doesn’t warp time).</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_dstruct_reve-id11"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 18-12. PP4E\Dstruct\Basic\settime.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"compare set alternatives performance"
import timer, sys
import set, fastset

def setops(Class):                       # 3.X: range okay
    a = Class(range(50))                 # a 50-integer set
    b = Class(range(20))                 # a 20-integer set
    c = Class(range(10))
    d = Class(range(5))
    for i in range(5):
        t = a &amp; b &amp; c &amp; d                # 3 intersections
        t = a | b | c | d                # 3 unions

if __name__ == '__main__':
    rept = int(sys.argv[1])
    print('set =&gt;    ', timer.test(rept, setops, set.Set))
    print('fastset =&gt;', timer.test(rept, setops, fastset.Set))</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">setops</code> function makes
            four sets and combines them with intersection and union operators
            five times. A command-line argument controls the number of times
            this whole process is repeated. More accurately, each call to
            <code class="epub__literal">setops</code> makes 34 <code class="epub__literal">Set</code> instances (4 + [5 × (3 + 3)]) and
            runs the <code class="epub__literal">intersect</code> and <code class="epub__literal">union</code> methods 15 times each (5 × 3) in
            the <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop’s body. The
            performance improvement is equally dramatic this time around, on
            the same Windows 7 laptop under Python 3.1:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e79166"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Dstruct\Basic&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python settime.py 50</code></strong>
set =&gt;     0.637593916437
fastset =&gt; 0.20435049302

C:\...\PP4E\Dstruct\Basic&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python settime.py 100</code></strong>
set =&gt;     1.21924758303
fastset =&gt; 0.393896570828

C:\...\PP4E\Dstruct\Basic&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python settime.py 200</code></strong>
set =&gt;     2.51036677716
fastset =&gt; 0.802708664223</pre>
<p>These results will vary per machine, and they may vary per
            Python release. But at least for this specific test case, the
            dictionary-based set implementation (<code class="epub__literal">fastest</code>) is roughly <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>three
            times</em></span> faster than the simple list-based set (<code class="epub__literal">set</code>). In fact, this threefold speedup is
            probably sufficient. Python dictionaries are already optimized
            hashtables that you might be hard-pressed to improve on. Unless
            there is evidence that dictionary-based sets are still too slow,
            our work here is probably done.</p>
<p>By comparison, results for Python 2.4 in the prior edition
            of this book showed <code class="epub__literal">fastest</code> to be six times faster than
            <code class="epub__literal">set</code> in all cases. Either
            iteration operations sped up, or dictionary operations slowed down
            in 3.X. In the even older Python 1.5.2 and second edition, the
            relative results were the same as they are today in Python 3.1. In
            any event, this well underscores the fact that you must test
            performance on your machine and your Python—today’s Python
            performance observation may easily be tomorrow’s historic
            <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e79196"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e79198"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e79200"></a>anecdote.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Adding Relational Algebra to Sets (External)"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="adding_relational_algebra_to_sets_open_p"></a>Adding Relational Algebra to Sets (External)</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>If you are <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e79208"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e79213"></a>interested in studying additional set-like operations
          coded in Python, see the following files in this book’s examples
          distribution:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>PP4E\Dstruct\Basic\rset.py</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p><code class="epub__literal">RSet</code>
                implementation</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>PP4E\Dstruct\Basic\reltest.py</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Test script for <code class="epub__literal">RSet</code>;
                its expected output is in <em class="epub__filename">reltest.results.txt</em></p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">RSet</code> subclass defined
          in <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>rset.py</em></span> adds basic relational algebra
          operations for sets of dictionaries. It assumes the items in sets
          are mappings (rows), with one entry per column (field). <code class="epub__literal">RSet</code> inherits all the original <code class="epub__literal">Set</code> operations (iteration, intersection,
          union, <code class="epub__literal">&amp;</code> and <code class="epub__literal">|</code> operators, uniqueness filtering, and so
          on), and adds new operations as <span>methods</span>:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Select</span></dt><dd>
<p>Return a set of nodes that have a field equal to a given
                value.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Bagof</span></dt><dd>
<p>Collect set nodes that satisfy an expression
                string.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Find</span></dt><dd>
<p>Select tuples according to a comparison, field, and
                value.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Match</span></dt><dd>
<p>Find nodes in two sets with the same values for common
                fields.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Product</span></dt><dd>
<p>Compute a Cartesian product: concatenate tuples from two
                sets.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Join</span></dt><dd>
<p>Combine tuples from two sets that have the same value
                for a field.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Project</span></dt><dd>
<p>Extract named fields from the tuples in a table.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Difference</span></dt><dd>
<p>Remove one set’s tuples from another.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>These operations go beyond the tools provided by Python’s
          built-in set object, and are a prime example of why you may wish to
          implement a custom set type in the first place. Although I have
          ported this code to run under Python 3.X, I have not revisited it in
          any sort of depth for this edition, because today I would probably
          prefer to implement it as a subclass of the built-in set type,
          rather than a part of a proprietary set implementation.
          Coincidentally, that leads us to our next <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e79314"></a>topic.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
