<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Subclassing Built-in Types</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Subclassing Built-in Types"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="subclassing_built-in_types"></a>Subclassing Built-in Types</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Before we <a id="data18.4"></a><a id="sub18.4"></a>move on to other classical data structures, there is one
        more twist in the stack and set story. In recent Python releases, it
        is also possible to subclass built-in datatypes such as lists and
        dictionaries, in order to extend them. That is, because datatypes are
        now themselves customizable classes, we can code unique datatypes that
        are extensions of built-ins, with subclasses that inherit built-in
        tool sets. This is especially true in Python 3.X, where “type” and
        “class” have become veritable synonyms altogether.</p>
<p>To demonstrate, Example 18-13 shows the main
        parts of a module containing variants of our stack and set objects
        coded in the prior sections, revised as customized lists. For variety,
        the set union method has also been simplified slightly here to remove
        a redundant loop.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_dstruct_reve-id12"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 18-13. PP4E\Dstruct\Basic\typesubclass.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"customize built-in types to extend, instead of starting from scratch"

class Stack(list):
    "a list with extra methods"
    def top(self):
        return self[-1]

    def push(self, item):
        list.append(self, item)

    def pop(self):
        if not self:
            return None                 # avoid exception
        else:
            return list.pop(self)

class Set(list):
    " a list with extra methods and operators"
    def __init__(self, value=[]):      # on object creation
        list.__init__(self)
        self.concat(value)

    def intersect(self, other):         # other is any sequence type
        res = []                        # self is the instance subject
        for x in self:
            if x in other:
                res.append(x)
        return Set(res)                 # return a new Set

    def union(self, other):
        res = Set(self)                 # new set with a copy of my list
        res.concat(other)               # insert uniques from other
        return res

    def concat(self, value):            # value: a list, string, Set...
        for x in value:                 # filters out duplicates
           if not x in self:
                self.append(x)

    # len, getitem, iter inherited, use list repr
    def __and__(self, other):   return self.intersect(other)
    def __or__(self, other):    return self.union(other)
    def __str__(self):          return '&lt;Set:' + repr(self) + '&gt;'

class FastSet(dict):
    pass    # this doesn't simplify much

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...self-test code omitted: see examples package file...</span></em></pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>The stack and set implemented in this code are essentially like
        those we saw earlier, but instead of embedding and managing a list,
        these objects really are customized lists. They add a few additional
        methods, but they inherit all of the list object’s
        functionality.</p>
<p>This can reduce the amount of wrapper code required, but it can
        also expose functionality that might not be appropriate in some cases.
        As coded, for example, we’re able to sort and insert into stacks and
        reverse a set, because we’ve inherited these methods from the built-in
        list object. In most cases, such operations don’t make sense for these
        data structures, and barring extra code that disables such
        nonfeatures, the wrapper class approach of the prior sections may
        still be preferred.</p>
<p>For more on the class subtype classes, see the remainder of
        their implementation file in the examples package for self-test code
        and its expected output. Because these objects are used in the same
        way as our original stacks and sets, interacting with them is left as
        suggested exercise here.</p>
<p>Subclassing built-in types has other applications, which may be
        more useful than those demonstrated by the preceding code. Consider a
        queue, or ordered dictionary, for example. The queue could take the
        form of a list subclass with get and put methods to insert on one end
        and delete from the other; the dictionary could be coded as a
        dictionary subclass with an extra list of keys that is sorted on
        insertion or request. While this scheme works well for types that
        resemble built-ins, though, type subclasses may not address data
        structures of radically different form—like those of the next two
        <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e79352"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e79354"></a><span>sections</span>.</p>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
