<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Binary Search Trees</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Binary Search Trees"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="binary_search_trees"></a>Binary Search Trees</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Binary trees are a <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e79364"></a><a id="data18.5"></a>data structure that impose an order on inserted nodes:
        items less than a node are stored in the left subtree, and items
        greater than a node are inserted in the right. At the bottom, the
        subtrees are empty. Because of this structure, binary trees naturally
        support quick, recursive traversals, and hence fast lookup and search
        in a wide variety of applications—at least ideally, every time you
        follow a link to a subtree, you divide the search space in
        half.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Built-in Options"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="built-in_options-id2"></a>Built-in Options</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Here too, Python <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e79380"></a>supports search operations with built-in tools.
          Dictionaries, for example, already provide a highly optimized,
          C-coded search table tool. In fact, indexing a dictionary by key
          directly is likely to be faster than searching a Python-coded
          <span>equivalent</span>:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e79389"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = {}</code></strong>                                          # empty dict
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for i in [3, 1, 9, 2, 7]: x[i] = None</code></strong>           # insert
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x</code></strong>
{7: None, 1: None, 2: None, 3: None, 9: None}
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for i in range(8): print((i, i in x), end=' ')</code></strong>  # lookup
...
(0, False) (1, True) (2, True) (3, True) (4, False) (5, False) (6, False) (7, True)</pre>
<p>Because dictionaries are built into the language, they are
          always available and will usually be faster than Python-based data
          structure implementations. Built-in sets can often offer similar
          functionality—in fact, it’s not too much of an abstraction to think
          of sets as valueless dictionaries:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e79405"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = set()</code></strong>                                       # empty set
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for i in [3, 1, 9, 2, 7]: x.add(i)</code></strong>              # insert
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x</code></strong>
{7, 1, 2, 3, 9}
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for i in range(8): print((i, i in x), end=' ')</code></strong>  # lookup
...
(0, False) (1, True) (2, True) (3, True) (4, False) (5, False) (6, False) (7, True)</pre>
<p>In fact, there are a variety of ways to insert items into both
          sets and dictionaries; both are useful for checking if a key is
          stored, but dictionaries further allow search keys to have
          associated values:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e79421"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>v = [3, 1, 9]</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>{k for k in v}</code></strong>                       # set comprehension
{1, 3, 9}
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>set(v)</code></strong>                               # set constructor
{1, 3, 9}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>{k: k+100 for k in v}</code></strong>                # dict comprehension
{1: 101, 3: 103, 9: 109}
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dict(zip(v, [99] * len(v)))</code></strong>          # dict constructor
{1: 99, 3: 99, 9: 99}
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dict.fromkeys(v, 99)</code></strong>                 # dict method
{1: 99, 3: 99, 9: 99}</pre>
<p>So why bother with a custom search data structure
          implementation here, given such flexible built-ins? In some
          applications, you might not, but here especially, a custom
          implementation often makes sense to allow for customized tree
          algorithms. For instance, custom tree balancing can help speed
          lookups in pathological cases, and might outperform the generalized
          hashing algorithms used in dictionaries and sets. Moreover, the same
          motivations we gave for custom stacks and sets apply here as well—by
          encapsulating tree access in class-based interfaces, we support
          future extension and change in more manageable ways.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Implementing Binary Trees"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="implementing_binary_trees"></a>Implementing Binary Trees</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Binary trees are <a id="bi18.5.2"></a>named for the implied branch-like structure of their
          subtree links. Typically, their nodes are implemented as a triple of
          values: <code class="epub__literal">(LeftSubtree, NodeValue,
          RightSubtree)</code>. Beyond that, there is fairly wide latitude
          in the tree implementation. Here we’ll use a class-based
          approach:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">BinaryTree</code> is a header
              object, which initializes and manages the actual tree.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">EmptyNode</code> is the empty
              object, shared at all empty subtrees (at the bottom).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">BinaryNode</code> objects are
              nonempty tree nodes with a value and two subtrees.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Instead of coding distinct search functions, binary trees are
          constructed with “smart” objects—class instances that know how to
          handle insert/lookup and printing requests and pass them to subtree
          objects. In fact, this is another example of the object-oriented
          programming (OOP) composition relationship in action: tree nodes
          embed other tree nodes and pass search requests off to the embedded
          subtrees. A single empty class instance is shared by all empty
          subtrees in a binary tree, and inserts replace an <code class="epub__literal">EmptyNode</code> with a <code class="epub__literal">BinaryNode</code> at the bottom. Example 18-14 shows what this
          means in code.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_dstruct_reve-id13"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 18-14. PP4E\Dstruct\Classics\btree.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"a valueless binary search tree"

class BinaryTree:
    def __init__(self):       self.tree = EmptyNode()
    def __repr__(self):       return repr(self.tree)
    def lookup(self, value):  return self.tree.lookup(value)
    def insert(self, value):  self.tree = self.tree.insert(value)

class EmptyNode:
    def __repr__(self):
        return '*'
    def lookup(self, value):                      # fail at the bottom
        return False
    def insert(self, value):
        return BinaryNode(self, value, self)      # add new node at bottom

class BinaryNode:
    def __init__(self, left, value, right):
        self.data, self.left, self.right  =  value, left, right

    def lookup(self, value):
        if self.data == value:
            return True
        elif self.data &gt; value:
            return self.left.lookup(value)               # look in left
        else:
            return self.right.lookup(value)              # look in right

    def insert(self, value):
        if self.data &gt; value:
            self.left = self.left.insert(value)          # grow in left
        elif self.data &lt; value:
            self.right = self.right.insert(value)        # grow in right
        return self

    def __repr__(self):
        return ('( %s, %s, %s )' %
                 (repr(self.left), repr(self.data), repr(self.right)))</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>As usual, <code class="epub__literal">BinaryTree</code> can
          contain objects of any type that support the expected interface
          protocol—here, <code class="epub__literal">&gt;</code> and <code class="epub__literal">&lt;</code> comparisons. This includes class
          instances with the <code class="epub__literal">__lt__</code> and
          <code class="epub__literal">__gt__</code> methods. Let’s experiment
          with this module’s interfaces. The following code stuffs five
          integers into a new tree, and then searches for values 0 . . . 7, as
          we did earlier for dictionaries and sets:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e79506"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Dstruct\Classics&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from btree import BinaryTree</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = BinaryTree()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for i in [3, 1, 9, 2, 7]: x.insert(i)</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for i in range(8): print((i, x.lookup(i)), end=' ')</code></strong>
...
 (0, False) (1, True) (2, True) (3, True) (4, False) (5, False) (6, False) (7, True)</pre>
<p>To watch this tree grow, add a <code class="epub__literal">print</code> call statement after each insert.
          Tree nodes print themselves as triples, and empty nodes print as
          <code class="epub__literal">*</code>. The result reflects tree
          nesting:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e79531"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y = BinaryTree()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y</code></strong>
*
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for i in [3, 1, 9, 2, 7]:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y.insert(i); print(y)</code></strong>
...
( *, 3, * )
( ( *, 1, * ), 3, * )
( ( *, 1, * ), 3, ( *, 9, * ) )
( ( *, 1, ( *, 2, * ) ), 3, ( *, 9, * ) )
( ( *, 1, ( *, 2, * ) ), 3, ( ( *, 7, * ), 9, * ) )</pre>
<p>At the end of this chapter, we’ll see another way to visualize
          such trees in a GUI named PyTree (you’re invited to flip ahead now
          if you prefer). Node values in this tree object can be any
          comparable Python object—for instance, here is a tree of
          strings:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e79547"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>z = BinaryTree()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for c in 'badce':  z.insert(c)</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>z</code></strong>
( ( *, 'a', * ), 'b', ( ( *, 'c', * ), 'd', ( *, 'e', * ) ) )

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>z = BinaryTree()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for c in 'abcde':  z.insert(c)</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>z</code></strong>
( *, 'a', ( *, 'b', ( *, 'c', ( *, 'd', ( *, 'e', * ) ) ) ) )

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>z = BinaryTree()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for c in 'edcba':  z.insert(c)</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>z</code></strong>
( ( ( ( ( *, 'a', * ), 'b', * ), 'c', * ), 'd', * ), 'e', * )</pre>
<p>Notice the last tests here: if items inserted into a binary
          tree are already ordered, you wind up with a
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>linear</em></span> structure and lose the search-space
          partitioning magic of binary trees (the tree grows in right or left
          branches only). This is a worst-case scenario, and binary trees
          generally do a good job of dividing values in practice. But if you
          are interested in pursuing this topic further, see a data structures
          text for tree-balancing techniques that automatically keep the tree
          as dense as possible but are beyond our scope here.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Trees with Both Keys and Values"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="id3705309"></a>Trees with Both Keys and Values</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Also note that to keep the code simple, these trees store a
          value only and lookups return a true or false result. In practice,
          you sometimes may want to store both a key and an associated value
          (or even more) at each tree node. Example 18-15 shows what such
          a tree object looks like, for any prospective lumberjacks in the
          audience.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_dstruct_reve-id14"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 18-15. PP4E\Dstruct\Classics\btreevals.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"a binary search tree with values for stored keys"

class KeyedBinaryTree:
    def __init__(self):          self.tree = EmptyNode()
    def __repr__(self):          return repr(self.tree)
    def lookup(self, key):       return self.tree.lookup(key)
    def insert(self, key, val):  self.tree = self.tree.insert(key, val)

class EmptyNode:
    def __repr__(self):
        return '*'
    def lookup(self, key):                               # fail at the bottom
        return None
    def insert(self, key, val):
        return BinaryNode(self, key, val, self)          # add node at bottom

class BinaryNode:
    def __init__(self, left, key, val, right):
        self.key,  self.val   = key, val
        self.left, self.right = left, right

    def lookup(self, key):
        if self.key == key:
            return self.val
        elif self.key &gt; key:
            return self.left.lookup(key)                 # look in left
        else:
            return self.right.lookup(key)                # look in right

    def insert(self, key, val):
        if self.key == key:
            self.val = val
        elif self.key &gt; key:
            self.left = self.left.insert(key, val)       # grow in left
        elif self.key &lt; key:
            self.right = self.right.insert(key, val)     # grow in right
        return self

    def __repr__(self):
        return ('( %s, %s=%s, %s )' %
        (repr(self.left), repr(self.key), repr(self.val), repr(self.right)))

if __name__ == '__main__':
    t = KeyedBinaryTree()
    for (key, val) in [('bbb', 1), ('aaa', 2), ('ccc', 3)]:
        t.insert(key, val)
    print(t)
    print(t.lookup('aaa'), t.lookup('ccc'))
    t.insert('ddd', 4)
    t.insert('aaa', 5)                       # changes key's value
    print(t)</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>The following shows this script’s self-test code at work;
          nodes simply have more content this time around:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e79597"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Dstruct\Classics&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python btreevals.py</code></strong>
( ( *, 'aaa'=2, * ), 'bbb'=1, ( *, 'ccc'=3, * ) )
2 3
( ( *, 'aaa'=5, * ), 'bbb'=1, ( *, 'ccc'=3, ( *, 'ddd'=4, * ) ) )</pre>
<p>In fact, the effect is similar to the keys and values of a
          built-in dictionary, but a custom tree structure like this might
          support custom use cases and algorithms, as well as code evolution,
          more robustly. To see a data structure that departs even further
          from the built-in gang, though, we need to move on to the next
          <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e79604"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e79606"></a>section.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
