<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Reversing and Sorting Sequences</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Reversing and Sorting Sequences"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="reversing_and_sorting_sequences"></a>Reversing and Sorting Sequences</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The permutation <a id="data18.8"></a><a id="seq18.8"></a>utilities of the prior section are useful in a variety
        of applications, but there are even more fundamental operations that
        might seem prime candidates for automation. Reversing and sorting
        collections of values, for example, are core operations in a broad
        range of programs. To demonstrate coding techniques, and to provide
        examples that yield closure for a recurring theme of this chapter,
        let’s take a quick look at both of these in turn.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Implementing Reversals"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="implementing_reversals"></a>Implementing Reversals</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Reversal of collections can be coded either recursively or
          iteratively in Python, and as functions or class methods. Example 18-23 is a first
          attempt at two simple reversal functions.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_dstruct_reve-id22"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 18-23. PP4E\Dstruct\Classics\rev1.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def reverse(list):               # recursive
    if list == []:
        return []
    else:
        return reverse(list[1:]) + list[:1]

def ireverse(list):              # iterative
    res = []
    for x in list: res = [x] + res
    return res</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Both reversal functions work correctly on lists. But if we try
          reversing nonlist sequences (strings, tuples, and so on), the
          <code class="epub__literal">ireverse</code> function always returns
          a list for the result regardless of the type of sequence
          passed:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e80010"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>ireverse("spam")</code></strong>
['m', 'a', 'p', 's']</pre>
<p>Much worse, the recursive <code class="epub__literal">reverse</code> version won’t work at all for
          nonlists—it gets stuck in an infinite loop. The reason is subtle:
          when <code class="epub__literal">reverse</code> reaches the empty
          string (<code class="epub__literal">""</code>), it’s not equal to
          the empty list (<code class="epub__literal">[]</code>), so the
          <code class="epub__literal">else</code> clause is selected. But
          slicing an empty sequence returns another empty sequence (indexes
          are scaled): the <code class="epub__literal">else</code> clause
          recurs again with an empty sequence, without raising an exception.
          The net effect is that this function gets stuck in a loop, calling
          itself over and over again until Python runs out of memory.</p>
<p>The versions in Example 18-24 fix both
          problems by using generic sequence handling techniques much like
          that of the prior section’s permutation utilities:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">reverse</code> uses the
              <code class="epub__literal">not</code> operator to detect the
              end of the sequence and returns the empty sequence itself,
              rather than an empty list constant. Since the empty sequence is
              the type of the original argument, the <code class="epub__literal">+</code> operation always builds the correct
              type sequence as the recursion unfolds.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">ireverse</code> makes use of
              the fact that slicing a sequence returns a sequence of the same
              type. It first initializes the result to the slice <code class="epub__literal">[:0]</code>, a new, empty slice of <span>the argument’s</span> type. Later, it
              uses slicing to extract one-node sequences to add to the
              result’s front, instead of a list constant.</p></li></ul>
</div><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_dstruct_reve-id23"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 18-24. PP4E\Dstruct\Classics\rev2.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def reverse(list):
    if not list:                               # empty? (not always [])
        return list                            # the same sequence type
    else:
        return reverse(list[1:]) + list[:1]    # add front item on the end

def ireverse(list):
    res = list[:0]                             # empty, of same type
    for i in range(len(list)):
        res = list[i:i+1] + res                # add each item to front
    return res</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>The combination of the changes allows the new functions to
          work on any sequence, and return a new sequence of the same type as
          the sequence passed in. If we pass in a string, we get a new string
          as the result. In fact, they reverse any sequence object that
          responds to slicing, concatenation, and <code class="epub__literal">len</code>—even instances of Python classes and C
          types. In other words, they can reverse any object that has sequence
          interface protocols. Here they are working on lists, strings, and
          tuples:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e80073"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from rev2 import *</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>reverse([1, 2, 3]), ireverse([1, 2, 3])</code></strong>
([3, 2, 1], [3, 2, 1])
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>reverse("spam"), ireverse("spam")</code></strong>
('maps', 'maps')
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>reverse((1.2, 2.3, 3.4)), ireverse((1.2, 2.3, 3.4))</code></strong>
((3.4, 2.3, 1.2), (3.4, 2.3, 1.2))</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Implementing Sorts"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="implementing_sorts"></a>Implementing Sorts</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Another staple of many systems is sorting: ordering items in a
          collection according to some constraint. The script in Example 18-25 defines a simple
          sort routine in Python, which orders a list of objects on a field.
          Because Python indexing is generic, the field can be an index or a
          key—this function can sort lists of either sequences or
          mappings.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_dstruct_reve-id24"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 18-25. PP4E\Dstruct\Classics\sort1.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def sort(list, field):
    res = []                                     # always returns a list
    for x in list:
        i = 0
        for y in res:
            if x[field] &lt;= y[field]: break       # list node goes here?
            i += 1
        res[i:i] = [x]                           # insert in result slot
    return res

if __name__ == '__main__':
    table = [ {'name':'john', 'age':25}, {'name':'doe', 'age':32} ]
    print(sort(table, 'name'))
    print(sort(table, 'age'))
    table = [ ('john', 25), ('doe', 32) ]
    print(sort(table, 0))
    print(sort(table, 1))</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Here is this module’s self-test code in action; the first
          tests sort dictionaries, and the last sort tuples:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e80101"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Dstruct\Classics&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python sort1.py</code></strong>
[{'age': 32, 'name': 'doe'}, {'age': 25, 'name': 'john'}]
[{'age': 25, 'name': 'john'}, {'age': 32, 'name': 'doe'}]
[('doe', 32), ('john', 25)]
[('john', 25), ('doe', 32)]</pre>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Adding comparison functions"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="adding_comparison_functions"></a>Adding comparison functions</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Since functions can be passed in like any other object, we
            can easily allow for an optional comparison function. In the next
            version, Example 18-26, the second
            argument takes a function that should return <code class="epub__literal">true</code> if its first argument should be
            placed before its <span>second</span>. A
            <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code> is used to provide an
            ascending-order test by default. This sorter also returns a new
            sequence that is the same type as the sequence passed in, by
            applying the slicing techniques used in the reversal tools
            earlier—if you sort a tuple of nodes, you get back a tuple.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_dstruct_reve-id25"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 18-26. PP4E\Dstruct\Classics\sort2.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def sort(seq, func=(lambda x,y: x &lt;= y)):             # default: ascending
    res = seq[:0]                                     # return seq's type
    for j in range(len(seq)):
        i = 0
        for y in res:
            if func(seq[j], y): break
            i += 1
        res = res[:i] + seq[j:j+1] + res[i:]          # seq can be immutable
    return res

if __name__ == '__main__':
    table = ({'name':'doe'}, {'name':'john'})
    print(sort(list(table),  (lambda x, y: x['name'] &gt; y['name'])))
    print(sort(tuple(table), (lambda x, y: x['name'] &lt;= y['name'])))
    print(sort('axbyzc'))</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>This time, the table entries are ordered per a field
            comparison function passed in:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e80129"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Dstruct\Classics&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python sort2.py</code></strong>
[{'name': 'john'}, {'name': 'doe'}]
({'name': 'doe'}, {'name': 'john'})
abcxyz</pre>
<p>This version also dispenses with the notion of a field
            altogether and lets the passed-in function handle indexing if
            needed. That makes this version much more general; for instance,
            it’s also useful for sorting strings.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Data Structures Versus Built-ins: The Conclusion"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="data_structures_versus_built-ins_colon_t"></a>Data Structures Versus Built-ins: The Conclusion</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>But now that I’ve shown you these reversing and sorting
          algorithms, I need to also tell you that they may not be an optimal
          approach, especially in these specific cases. <span>Although</span> these examples serve an
          educational role, built-in lists and functions generally accomplish
          what we just did the hard way:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Built-in sorting tools</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Python’s two built-in sorting tools are so fast that you
                would be hard-pressed to beat them in most scenarios. To use
                the list object’s <code class="epub__literal">sort</code>
                method for arbitrary kinds of iterables, convert first if
                needed:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e80155"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">temp = list(sequence)
temp.sort()
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...use items in temp...</span></em></pre>
<p>Alternatively, the <code class="epub__literal">sorted</code> built-in function operates on
                any iterable so you don’t need to convert, and returns a new
                sorted result list so you can use it within a larger
                expression or context. Because it is not an in-place change,
                you also don’t need to be concerned about the possible side
                effects of changing the original list:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e80164"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">for item in sorted(iterable):
   ...use item...</pre>
<p>For custom sorts, simply pass in the <code class="epub__literal">key</code> keyword arguments to tailor the
                built-in sort’s operation—it maps values to sort keys instead
                of performing comparisons, but the effect is just as general
                (see the earlier graph searchers’ length ordering for another
                example):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e80171"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = [{'n':3}, {'n':20}, {'n':0}, {'n':9}]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L.sort(key=lambda x: x['n'])</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
[{'n': 0}, {'n': 3}, {'n': 9}, {'n': 20}]</pre>
<p>Both sorting tools also accept a Boolean <code class="epub__literal">reverse</code> flag to make the result
                order descending instead of ascending; there is no need to
                manually reverse after the sort. The underlying sort routine
                in Python is so good that its documentation claims that it has
                “supernatural performance”—not bad for a sort.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Built-in reversal tools</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Our reversal routines are generally superfluous by the
                same token—because Python provides for fast reversals in both
                in-place and iterable forms, you’re likely better off using
                them whenever possible:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e80194"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = [2, 4, 1, 3, 5]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L.reverse()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
[5, 3, 1, 4, 2]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = [2, 4, 1, 3, 5]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(reversed(L))</code></strong>
[5, 3, 1, 4, 2]</pre></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>In fact, this has been a recurring theme of this chapter on
          purpose, to underscore a key point in Python work: although there
          are plenty of exceptions, you’re generally better off not
          reinventing the data structure wheel unless you have to. Built-in
          functionality will often prove a better choice in the end.</p>
<p>Make no mistake: sometimes you really do need objects that add
          functionality to built-in types or do something more custom. The set
          classes we met, for instance, can add custom tools not directly
          supported by Python today, binary search trees may support some
          algorithms better than dictionaries and sets can, and the tuple-tree
          stack implementation was actually faster than one based on built-in
          lists for common usage patterns. Moreover, graphs and permutations
          are something you must code on your own.</p>
<p>As we’ve also seen, class encapsulations make it possible to
          change and extend object internals without impacting the rest of
          your system. Although subclassing built-in types can address much of
          the same goals, the end result is still a custom data
          structure.</p>
<p>Yet because Python comes with a set of built-in, flexible, and
          optimized datatypes, data structure implementations are often not as
          important in Python as they are in lesser-equipped and lower-level
          programming languages. Before you code that new datatype, be sure to
          ask yourself whether a built-in type or call might be more in line
          with the Python way of thinking.</p>
<p>For more on extended data structures for use in Python, see
          also the relatively new <code class="epub__literal">collections</code> module in its standard
          library. As mentioned in the preceding chapter, this module
          implements named tuples, ordered dictionaries, and more. It’s
          described in Python’s library manual, but its source code, like much
          in the standard library, can serve as a source of supplemental
          examples as <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e80224"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e80226"></a>well.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
