<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 19. Text and Language</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 19. Text and Language"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="text_and_language"></a>Chapter 19. Text and Language</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="“See Jack Hack. Hack, Jack, Hack”"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="quotation_mark_see_jack_hack._hack_comma"></a>“See Jack Hack. Hack, Jack, Hack”</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In one form or another, processing text-based information is one
        of the more common tasks that applications need to perform. This can
        include anything from scanning a text file by columns to analyzing
        statements in a language defined by a formal grammar. Such processing
        usually is called<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e80287"></a> <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>parsing</em></span>—analyzing the structure of
        a text string. In this chapter, we’ll explore ways to handle language
        and text-based information and summarize some Python development
        concepts in sidebars along the way. In the process, we’ll meet string
        methods, text pattern matching, XML and HTML parsers, and other
        tools.</p>
<p>Some of this material is advanced, but the examples are small to
        keep this chapter short. For instance, recursive descent parsing is
        illustrated with a simple example to show how it can be implemented in
        Python. We’ll also see that it’s often unnecessary to write custom
        parsers for each language processing task in Python. They can usually
        be replaced by exporting APIs for use in Python programs, and
        sometimes by a single built-in function call. Finally, this chapter
        closes by presenting PyCalc—a calculator GUI written in Python, and
        the last major Python coding example in this text. As we’ll see,
        writing calculators isn’t much more difficult than juggling stacks
        while scanning text.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
