<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Strategies for Processing Text in Python</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Strategies for Processing Text in Python"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="strategies_for_processing_text_in_python"></a>Strategies for Processing Text in Python</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In the grand <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e80303"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e80308"></a>scheme of things, there are a variety of ways to handle
        text processing and language analysis in Python:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Expressions</span></dt><dd>
<p>Built-in string object expressions</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Methods</span></dt><dd>
<p>Built-in string object method calls</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Patterns</span></dt><dd>
<p>Regular expression pattern matching</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Parsers: markup</span></dt><dd>
<p>XML and HTML text parsing</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Parsers: grammars</span></dt><dd>
<p>Custom language parsers, both handcoded and
              generated</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Embedding</span></dt><dd>
<p>Running Python code with <code class="epub__literal">eval</code> and <code class="epub__literal">exec</code> built-ins</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">And more</span></dt><dd>
<p>Natural language processing</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>For simpler tasks, Python’s built-in <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e80365"></a>string object is often all we really need. Python
        strings can be indexed, concatenated, sliced, and processed with both
        string method calls and built-in functions. Our main emphasis in this
        chapter is mostly on higher-level tools and techniques for analyzing
        textual information and language, but we’ll briefly explore each of
        these techniques in turn. Let’s get <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e80371"></a>started.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note"><h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p>Some readers may have come to this chapter seeking coverage of
          Unicode text, too, but this topic is not presented here. For a look
          at Python’s Unicode support, see Chapter 2’s
          discussion of string tools, Chapter 4’s discussion of text and
          binary file distinctions and encodings, and Chapter 9’s coverage of text in
          tkinter GUIs. Unicode also appears in various Internet and database
          topics throughout this book (e.g., email encodings).</p>
<p>Because Unicode is a core language topic, all these chapters
          will also refer you to the fuller coverage of Unicode in
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Learning
          Python</em></span>, Fourth Edition. Most of the topics in
          this chapter, including string methods and pattern matching, apply
          to Unicode automatically simply because the Python 3.X <code class="epub__literal">str</code> string type <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>is</em></span>
          Unicode, whether ASCII or wider.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
