<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>String Method Utilities</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="String Method Utilities"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="string_method_utilities"></a>String Method Utilities</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The first stop on <a id="text19.3"></a><a id="str19.3"></a>our text and language tour is the most basic: Python’s
        string objects come with an array of text processing tools, and serve
        as your first line of defense in this domain. As you undoubtedly know
        by now, concatenation, slicing, formatting, and other string
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>expressions</em></span> are workhorses of most programs (I’m
        including the newer <code class="epub__literal">format</code> method
        <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e80420"></a>in this category, as it’s really just an alternative to
        the <code class="epub__literal">%</code> expression):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e80429"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'spam eggs ham'[5:10]</code></strong>                     # slicing: substring extraction
'eggs '
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'spam ' + 'eggs ham'</code></strong>                      # concatenation (and *, len(), [ix])
'spam eggs ham'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'spam %s %s' % ('eggs',  'ham')</code></strong>           # formatting expression: substitution
'spam eggs ham'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'spam {} {}'.format('eggs',  'ham')</code></strong>       # formatting method: % alternative
'spam eggs ham'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'spam = "%-5s", %+06d' % ('ham',  99)</code></strong>     # more complex formatting
'spam = "ham  ", +00099'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'spam = "{0:&lt;5}", {1:+06}'.format('ham',  99)</code></strong>
'spam = "ham  ", +00099'</pre>
<p>These operations are covered in core language resources such as
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Learning
        Python</em></span>. For the purposes of this chapter, though,
        we’re interested in more powerful tools: Python’s string object
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>methods</em></span> include a wide variety of text-processing
        utilities that go above and beyond string expression operators. We saw
        some of these in action early on in Chapter 2,
        and have been using them ever since. For instance, given an instance
        <code class="epub__literal">str</code> of the built-in string object
        type, operations like the following are provided as object method
        calls:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">str.find(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>substr</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Performs <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e80476"></a>substring searches</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">str.replace(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>old</code></em><code class="epub__literal">,</code> <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>new</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Performs <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e80498"></a>substring substitutions</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">str.split(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>delimiter</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Chops up a <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e80515"></a>string around a delimiter or whitespace</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">str.join(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>iterable</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Puts <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e80532"></a>substrings together with delimiters between</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">str.strip()</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Removes l<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e80545"></a>eading and trailing whitespace</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">str.rstrip()</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Removes <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e80558"></a>trailing whitespace only, if any</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">str.rjust(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>width</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Right-justifies <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e80575"></a>a string in a fixed-width field</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">str.upper()</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Converts <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e80588"></a>to uppercase</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">str.isupper()</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Tests whether <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e80601"></a>the string is uppercase</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">str.isdigit()</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Tests <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e80614"></a>whether the string is all digit characters</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">str.endswith(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>substr-or-tuple</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Tests <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e80631"></a>for a substring (or a tuple of alternatives) at
              the end</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">str.startswith(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>substr-or-tuple</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Tests for a <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e80649"></a>substring (or a tuple of alternatives) at the
              front</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>This list is representative but partial, and some of these
        methods take additional optional arguments. For the full list of
        string methods, run a <code class="epub__literal">dir(str)</code> call
        at the Python interactive prompt and run <code class="epub__literal">help(str.</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>method</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code> on any method for some quick
        documentation. The Python library manual and reference books such as
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Python Pocket
        Reference</em></span> also include an exhaustive list.</p>
<p>Moreover, in Python today all normal string methods apply to
        both <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> and <code class="epub__literal">str</code> strings. The latter makes them
        applicable to arbitrarily encoded Unicode text, simply because the
        <code class="epub__literal">str</code> type is Unicode text, even if
        it’s only ASCII. These methods originally appeared as function in
        the<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e80682"></a> <code class="epub__literal">string</code> module, but
        are only object methods today; the <code class="epub__literal">string</code> module is still present because it
        contains predefined constants (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">string.ascii_uppercase</code>), <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e80698"></a>as well as the <code class="epub__literal">Template</code> substitution interface in 2.4 and
        <span>later—</span>one of the techniques
        discussed in the next <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e80710"></a>section.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Templating with Replacements and Formats"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="templating_with_replacements_and_formats"></a>Templating with Replacements and Formats</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>By way of <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e80718"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e80723"></a>review, let’s take a quick look at string methods in
          the context of some of their most common use cases. As we saw when
          generating HTML forwarding pages in Chapter 6, the string<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e80731"></a> <code class="epub__literal">replace</code> method is
          often adequate by itself as a string <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>templating</em></span>
          tool—we can compute values and insert them at fixed positions in a
          string with simple replacement calls:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e80743"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>template = '---$target1---$target2---'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>val1 = 'Spam'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>val2 = 'shrubbery'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>template = template.replace('$target1', val1)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>template = template.replace('$target2', val2)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>template</code></strong>
'---Spam---shrubbery---'</pre>
<p>As we also saw when generating HTML reply pages in the CGI
          scripts of Chapters 15 and 16,
          the string <code class="epub__literal">%</code> formatting operator
          is also a powerful templating tool, especially when combined with
          dictionaries—simply fill out a dictionary with values and apply
          multiple substitutions to the HTML string all at once:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e80773"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>template = """</code></strong>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>---</code></strong>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>---%(key1)s---</code></strong>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>---%(key2)s---</code></strong>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>"""</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>vals = {}</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>vals['key1'] = 'Spam'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>vals['key2'] = 'shrubbery'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(template % vals)</code></strong>

---
---Spam---
---shrubbery---</pre>
<p>Beginning with Python 2.4, the <code class="epub__literal">string</code> module’s <code class="epub__literal">Template</code> feature <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e80811"></a>is essentially a simplified and limited variation of
          the dictionary-based format scheme just shown, but it allows some
          additional call patterns which some may consider simpler:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e80817"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>vals</code></strong>
{'key2': 'shrubbery', 'key1': 'Spam'}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import string</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>template = string.Template('---$key1---$key2---')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>template.substitute(vals)</code></strong>
'---Spam---shrubbery---'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>template.substitute(key1='Brian', key2='Loretta')</code></strong>
'---Brian---Loretta---'</pre>
<p>See the library manual for more on this extension. Although
          the string datatype does not itself support the pattern-directed
          text processing that we’ll meet later in this chapter, its tools are
          powerful enough for many tasks.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Parsing with Splits and Joins"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="parsing_with_splits_and_joins"></a>Parsing with Splits and Joins</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In terms of this <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e80844"></a>chapter’s main focus, Python’s built-in tools for
          splitting and joining strings around tokens turn out to be
          especially useful when it comes to parsing text:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">str.split(delimiter?,
              maxsplits?)</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Splits a string <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e80858"></a>into a list of substrings, using either
                whitespace (tabs, spaces, newlines) or an explicitly passed
                string as a delimiter. <code class="epub__literal">maxsplits</code> limits the number of
                splits performed, if passed.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">delimiter.join(iterable)</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Concatenates <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e80874"></a>a sequence or other iterable of substrings
                (e.g., list, tuple, generator), adding the subject separator
                string between each.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>These two are among the most powerful of string methods. As we
          saw in Chapter 2, <code class="epub__literal">split</code> chops a string into a list of
          substrings and <code class="epub__literal">join</code> puts them
          back together:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e80890"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'A B C D'.split()</code></strong>
['A', 'B', 'C', 'D']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'A+B+C+D'.split('+')</code></strong>
['A', 'B', 'C', 'D']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'--'.join(['a', 'b', 'c'])</code></strong>
'a--b--c'</pre>
<p>Despite their simplicity, they can handle surprisingly complex
          text-parsing tasks. Moreover, string method calls are very fast
          because they are implemented in C language code. For instance, to
          quickly replace all tabs in a file with four periods, pipe the file
          into a script that looks like this:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e80903"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from sys import *
stdout.write(('.' * 4).join(stdin.read().split('\t')))</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">split</code> call here divides
          input around tabs, and the <code class="epub__literal">join</code>
          puts it back together with periods where tabs had been. In this
          case, the combination of the two calls is equivalent to using the
          simpler global replacement string method call as follows:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e80913"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">stdout.write(stdin.read().replace('\t', '.' * 4))</pre>
<p>As we’ll see in the next section, splitting strings is
          sufficient for many text-parsing goals.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Summing Columns in a File"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="summing_columns_in_a_file"></a>Summing Columns in a File</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Let’s look next at <a id="str19.3.3"></a><a id="files19.3.3"></a><a id="col19.3.3"></a><a id="sum9.3.3"></a>some practical applications of string splits and
          joins. In many domains, scanning files by columns is a fairly common
          task. For instance, suppose you have a file containing columns of
          numbers output by another system, and you need to sum each column’s
          numbers. In Python, string splitting is the core operation behind
          solving this problem, as demonstrated by Example 19-1. As an added bonus,
          it’s easy to make the solution a reusable tool in Python by
          packaging it as an importable function.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_lang_reverse"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 19-1. PP4E\Lang\summer.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">#!/usr/local/bin/python

def summer(numCols, fileName):
    sums = [0] * numCols                             # make list of zeros
    for line in open(fileName):                      # scan file's lines
        cols = line.split()                          # split up columns
        for i in range(numCols):                     # around blanks/tabs
            sums[i] += eval(cols[i])                 # add numbers to sums
    return sums

if __name__ == '__main__':
    import sys
    print(summer(eval(sys.argv[1]), sys.argv[2]))    # '% summer.py cols file'</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Notice that we use file iterators here to read line by line,
          instead of calling the file<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e80948"></a> <code class="epub__literal">readlines</code> method
          explicitly (recall from Chapter 4
          that iterators avoid loading the entire file into memory all at
          once). The file itself is a temporary object, which will be
          automatically closed when garbage collected.</p>
<p>As usual for properly architected scripts, you <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e80961"></a>can both <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>import</em></span> this module and
          call its function, and <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>run</em></span> it as a shell tool
          from the command line. The <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>summer.py</em></span> script
          calls <code class="epub__literal">split</code> to make a list of
          strings representing the line’s columns, and <code class="epub__literal">eval</code> to convert column strings to numbers.
          Here’s an input file that uses both blanks and tabs to separate
          columns, and the result of turning our script loose on it:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e80983"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Lang&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type table1.txt</code></strong>
1       5       10    2   1.0
2       10      20    4   2.0
3       15      30    8    3
4       20      40   16   4.0

C:\...\PP4E\Lang&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python summer.py 5 table1.txt</code></strong>
[10, 50, 100, 30, 10.0]</pre>
<p>Also notice that because the summer script uses <code class="epub__literal">eval</code> to convert file text to numbers, you
          could really store arbitrary Python expressions in the file. Here,
          for example, it’s run on a file of Python code snippets:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e80996"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Lang&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type table2.txt</code></strong>
2     1+1          1&lt;&lt;1           eval("2")
16    2*2*2*2      pow(2,4)       16.0
3     len('abc')   [1,2,3][2]     {'spam':3}['spam']

C:\...\PP4E\Lang&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python summer.py 4 table2.txt</code></strong>
[21, 21, 21, 21.0]</pre>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Summing with zips and comprehensions"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="summing_with_zips_and_comprehensions"></a>Summing with zips and comprehensions</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>We’ll revisit <code class="epub__literal">eval</code> later
            <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e81012"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e81015"></a>in this chapter, when we explore expression
            evaluators. Sometimes this is more than we want—if we can’t be
            sure that the strings that we run this way won’t contain malicious
            code, for instance, it may be necessary to run them with limited
            machine access or use more restrictive conversion tools. Consider
            the following recoding of the <code class="epub__literal">summer</code> function (this is in file
            <em class="epub__filename">summer2.py</em> in the examples
            package if you care to experiment with it):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e81025"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def summer(numCols, fileName):
    sums = [0] * numCols
    for line in open(fileName):                     # use file iterators
        cols = line.split(',')                      # assume comma-delimited
        nums = [int(x) for x in cols]               # use limited converter
        both = zip(sums, nums)                      # avoid nested for loop
        sums = [x + y for (x, y) in both]           # 3.X: zip is an iterable
    return sums</pre>
<p>This version uses <code class="epub__literal">int</code> for
            its conversions from strings to support only numbers, and not
            arbitrary and possibly unsafe expressions. Although the first four
            lines of this coding are similar to the original, for variety this
            version also assumes the data is separated by commas rather than
            whitespace, and runs list comprehensions and <code class="epub__literal">zip</code> to avoid the nested <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop statement. This version is also
            substantially trickier than the original and so might be less
            desirable from a maintenance perspective. If its code is
            confusing, try adding <code class="epub__literal">print</code>
            call statements after each step to trace the results of each
            operation. Here is its handiwork:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e81041"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Lang&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type table3.txt</code></strong>
1,5,10,2,1
2,10,20,4,2
3,15,30,8,3
4,20,40,16,4

C:\...\PP4E\Lang&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python summer2.py 5 table3.txt</code></strong>
[10, 50, 100, 30, 10]</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Summing with dictionaries"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="summing_with_dictionaries"></a>Summing with dictionaries</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The summer <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e81054"></a>logic so far works, but it can be even more general—
            by making the column numbers a key of a dictionary rather than an
            offset in a list, we can remove the need to pass in a
            number-columns value altogether. Besides allowing us to associate
            meaningful labels with data rather than numeric positions,
            dictionaries are often more flexible than lists in general,
            especially when there isn’t a fixed size to our problem. For
            instance, suppose you need to sum up columns of data stored in a
            text file where the number of columns is not known or
            fixed:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e81060"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Lang&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(open('table4.txt').read())</code></strong>
001.1 002.2 003.3
010.1 020.2 030.3 040.4
100.1 200.2 300.3</pre>
<p>Here, we cannot preallocate a fixed-length list of sums
            because the number of columns may vary. Splitting on whitespace
            extracts the columns, and <code class="epub__literal">float</code>
            converts to numbers, but a fixed-size list won’t easily
            accommodate a set of sums (at least, not without extra code to
            manage its size). Dictionaries are more convenient here because we
            can use column positions as keys instead of using absolute
            offsets. The following code demonstrates interactively (it’s also
            in file <em class="epub__filename">summer3.py</em> in the
            examples package):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e81076"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sums = {}</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for line in open('table4.txt'):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>cols = [float(col) for col in line.split()]</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for pos, val in enumerate(cols):</code></strong>
...        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sums[pos] = sums.get(pos, 0.0) + val</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for key in sorted(sums):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(key, '=', sums[key])</code></strong>
...
0 = 111.3
1 = 222.6
2 = 333.9
3 = 40.4

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sums</code></strong>
{0: 111.3, 1: 222.6, 2: 333.90000000000003, 3: 40.4}</pre>
<p>Interestingly, most of this code uses tools added to Python
            over the years—file and dictionary iterators, comprehensions,
            <code class="epub__literal">dict.get</code>, and the <code class="epub__literal">enumerate</code> and <code class="epub__literal">sorted</code> built-ins were not yet formed
            when Python was new. For related examples, also see the tkinter
            grid examples in Chapter 9
            for another case of <code class="epub__literal">eval</code> table
            magic at work. That chapter’s table sums logic is a variation on
            this theme, which obtains the number of columns from the first
            line of a data file and tailors its summations for display in a
            <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e81120"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e81122"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e81124"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e81126"></a>GUI.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Parsing and Unparsing Rule Strings"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="parsing_and_unparsing_rule_strings"></a>Parsing and Unparsing Rule Strings</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Splitting <a id="par19.3.4"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e81139"></a><a id="rule19.3.4"></a>comes in handy for dividing text into columns, but it
          can also be used as a more general parsing tool—by splitting more
          than once on different delimiters, we can pick apart more complex
          text. Although such parsing can also be achieved with more powerful
          tools, such as the regular expressions we’ll meet later in this
          chapter, split-based parsing is simper to code in quick prototypes,
          and may run faster.</p>
<p>For instance, Example 19-2 demonstrates one
          way that splitting and joining strings can be used to parse
          sentences in a simple language. It is taken from a rule-based expert
          system shell (holmes) that is written in Python and included in this
          book’s examples distribution (more on holmes in a moment). Rule
          strings in holmes take the form:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e81152"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"rule &lt;id&gt; if &lt;test1&gt;, &lt;test2&gt;... then &lt;conclusion1&gt;, &lt;conclusion2&gt;..."</pre>
<p>Tests and conclusions are conjunctions of terms (“,” means
          “and”). Each term is a <span>list of
          words</span> or variables separated by spaces; variables start
          with <code class="epub__literal">?</code>. To use a rule, it is
          translated to an internal form—a dictionary with nested lists. To
          display a rule, it is translated back to the string form. For
          instance, given the call:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e81162"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">rules.internal_rule('rule x if a ?x, b then c, d ?x')</pre>
<p>the conversion in function <code class="epub__literal">internal_rule</code> proceeds as follows:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e81169"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">string = 'rule x if a ?x, b then c, d ?x'
i = ['rule x', 'a ?x, b then c, d ?x']
t = ['a ?x, b', 'c, d ?x']
r = ['', 'x']
result = {'rule':'x', 'if':[['a','?x'], ['b']], 'then':[['c'], ['d','?x']]}</pre>
<p>We first split around the <code class="epub__literal">if</code>, then around the <code class="epub__literal">then</code>, and finally around <code class="epub__literal">rule</code>. The result is the three substrings
          that were separated by the keywords. Test and conclusion substrings
          are split around “,” first and spaces last. <code class="epub__literal">join</code> <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e81185"></a>is used later to convert back (unparse) to the
          original string for display. Example 19-2 is the concrete
          implementation of this scheme.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_lang_reverse-id1"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 19-2. PP4E\Lang\rules.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def internal_rule(string):
    i = string.split(' if ')
    t = i[1].split(' then ')
    r = i[0].split('rule ')
    return {'rule': r[1].strip(), 'if':internal(t[0]), 'then':internal(t[1])}

def external_rule(rule):
    return ('rule '    + rule['rule']           +
            ' if '     + external(rule['if'])   +
            ' then '   + external(rule['then']) + '.')

def internal(conjunct):
    res = []                                    # 'a b, c d'
    for clause in conjunct.split(','):          # -&gt; ['a b', ' c d']
        res.append(clause.split())              # -&gt; [['a','b'], ['c','d']]
    return res

def external(conjunct):
    strs = []
    for clause in conjunct:                     # [['a','b'], ['c','d']]
        strs.append(' '.join(clause))           # -&gt; ['a b', 'c d']
    return ', '.join(strs)                      # -&gt; 'a b, c d'</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Today we could use list comprehensions and generator
          expressions to gain some conciseness here. The <code class="epub__literal">internal</code> and <code class="epub__literal">external</code> functions, for instance, could be
          recoded to simply (see file <em class="epub__filename">rules2.py</em>):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e81211"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def internal(conjunct):
    return [clause.split() for clause in conjunct.split(',')]

def external(conjunct):
    return ', '.join(' '.join(clause) for clause in conjunct)</pre>
<p>to produce the desired nested lists and string by combining
          two steps into one. This form might run faster; we’ll leave it to
          the reader to decide whether it is more difficult to understand. As
          usual, we can test components of this module interactively:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e81215"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import rules</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rules.internal('a ?x, b')</code></strong>
[['a', '?x'], ['b']]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rules.internal_rule('rule x if a ?x, b then c, d ?x')</code></strong>
{'then': [['c'], ['d', '?x']], 'rule': 'x', 'if': [['a', '?x'], ['b']]}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>r = rules.internal_rule('rule x if a ?x, b then c, d ?x')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rules.external_rule(r)</code></strong>
'rule x if a ?x, b then c, d ?x.'</pre>
<p>Parsing by splitting strings around tokens like this takes you
          only so far. There is no direct support for recursive nesting of
          components, and syntax errors are not handled very gracefully. But
          for simple language tasks like this, string splitting might be
          enough, at least for prototyping or experimental systems. You can
          always add a more robust rule parser later or reimplement rules as
          Python code or classes.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="More on the holmes expert system shell"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="more_on_the_holmes_expert_system_shell"></a>More on the holmes expert system shell</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>So how are these <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e81239"></a>rules actually used? As mentioned, the rule parser
            we just met is part of the Python-coded holmes expert system
            shell. Holmes is an old system written around 1993 and before
            Python 1.0. It implemented both forward and backward chaining
            inference over rule sets. For example, the rule:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e81245"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">rule pylike if ?X likes coding, ?X likes spam then ?X likes Python</pre>
<p>can be used both to prove whether someone likes Python
            (chaining <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>backward</em></span>, from “then” to “if”), and
            to deduce that someone likes Python from a set of known facts
            (chaining <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>forward</em></span>, from “if” to “then”).
            Deductions may span multiple rules, multiple clauses represent
            conjunctions, and rules that name the same conclusion represent
            alternatives. holmes also performs simple pattern-matching along
            the way to assign the variables that appear in rules (e.g.,
            <code class="epub__literal">?X</code>), and it is able to explain
            both its deductions and questions.</p>
<p>Holmes also served as proof of concept for Python in general
            at a time when such evidence was still sometimes necessary, and at
            last check it still worked unchanged on Python 2.X platforms.
            However, its code no longer reflects modern Python best practice.
            Because of this, I no longer maintain this system today. In fact,
            it has suffered from bit rot so much and for so long that I’ve
            opted not to revisit it for this edition at all. Its original
            Python 0.X code is included in the book examples package, but it
            has not been ported to Python 3.X form, and does not accurately
            reflect Python as it exists today.</p>
<p>That is, holmes is an ex-system. It has ceased to be. And it
            won’t be discussed further here. For more modern AI tools and
            support for Python, search the Web. This is a fun field to
            explore, but holmes is probably best left to the foggy mists of
            Python prehistory (and souls brave enough to try the <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e81262"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e81264"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e81266"></a>port).</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="lesson_1_colon_prototype_and_migrate"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Lesson 1: Prototype and Migrate</p>
<p>If you care about <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e81274"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e81279"></a>performance, try to use the string object’s
              methods rather than things such as regular expressions whenever
              you can. Although this is a broad rule of thumb and can vary
              from release to release, some string methods may be faster
              because they have less work to do.</p>
<p>In fact, we can learn something from Python’s own history
              here. Today’s string object methods began life as Python-coded
              functions in the original<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e81287"></a> <code class="epub__literal">string</code> module.
              Due to their prevalence, they were later optimized by moving
              their implementation to the C language. When you imported
              <code class="epub__literal">string</code>, it internally
              replaced most of its content with functions imported from
              the<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e81299"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e81302"></a> <code class="epub__literal">strop</code> C
              extension module; <code class="epub__literal">strop</code>
              methods were reportedly 100 to 1,000 times faster than their
              Python-coded equivalents at the time.</p>
<p>The result was dramatically faster performance for
              <code class="epub__literal">string</code> client programs
              without impacting the interface. That is, string module clients
              became instantly faster without having to be modified for the
              new C-based module. Of course, these operations evolved further
              and were finally moved to string object methods, their only form
              today. But this reflects a common pattern in Python work. A
              similar migration path was applied to the<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e81320"></a> <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> module
              we met in Chapter 17—the later
              <code class="epub__literal">cPickle</code> recoding in Python
              2.X and <code class="epub__literal">_pickle</code> in 3.X are
              compatible but much faster.</p>
<p>This is a great lesson about Python development: modules
              can be coded quickly in Python at first and translated to C
              later for efficiency if required. Because the interface to
              Python and C extension modules is identical (both are imported
              modules with callable function attributes), C translations of
              modules are backward compatible with their Python prototypes.
              The only impact of the translation of such modules on clients
              usually is an improvement in performance.</p>
<p>There is normally no need to move every module to C for
              delivery of an application: you can pick and choose
              performance-critical modules (such as <code class="epub__literal">string</code> and <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code>) for translation and leave
              others coded in Python. Use the timing and profiling techniques
              discussed in Chapter 18 to isolate which
              modules will give the most improvement when translated to C.
              Once you do, the next chapter shows how to go about writing
              C-based extension modules.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
