<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Regular Expression Pattern Matching</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Regular Expression Pattern Matching"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="regular_expression_pattern_matching"></a>Regular Expression Pattern Matching</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Splitting and <a id="text19.4"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e81360"></a>joining strings is a simple way to process text, as long
        as it follows the format you expect. For more general text analysis
        tasks where the structure of your data is not so rigidly defined,
        Python provides regular expression matching utilities. Especially for
        the kinds of text associated with domains such as the Internet and
        databases today, this flexibility can be a powerful ally.</p>
<p>Regular expressions <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e81368"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e81373"></a>are simply strings that define
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>patterns</em></span> to be matched against other strings.
        Supply a pattern and a string and ask whether the string matches your
        pattern. After a match, parts of the string matched by parts of the
        pattern are made available to your script. That is, matches not only
        give a yes/no answer, but also can pick out substrings as well.</p>
<p>Regular expression pattern strings can be complicated (let’s be
        honest—they can be downright gross to look at). But once you get the
        hang of them, they can replace larger handcoded string search
        routines—a single pattern string generally does the work of dozens of
        lines of manual string scanning code and may run much faster. They are
        a concise way to encode the expected structure of text and extract
        portions of it.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The re Module"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_re_module"></a>The re Module</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In Python, <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e81389"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e81394"></a>regular expressions are not part of the syntax of the
          Python language itself, but they are supported by the <code class="epub__literal">re</code> standard library module that you must
          import to use. The module defines functions for running matches
          immediately, compiling pattern strings into pattern objects,
          matching these objects against strings, and fetching matched
          substrings after a match. It also provides tools for pattern-based
          splitting, replacing, and so on.</p>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">re</code> module implements a
          rich regular expression pattern syntax that tries to be close to
          that used to code patterns in the Perl language (regular expressions
          are a feature of Perl worth emulating). For instance, <code class="epub__literal">re</code> supports the notions of named groups;
          character classes; and <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>nongreedy</em></span>
          matches—regular expression pattern operators that match as few
          characters as possible (other operators always match the longest
          possible substring). The <code class="epub__literal">re</code>
          module has also been optimized repeatedly, and in Python 3.X
          supports matching for both <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>
          byte-strings and <code class="epub__literal">str</code> Unicode
          strings. The net effect is that Python’s pattern support uses
          Perl-like patterns, but is invoked with a different top-level module
          interface.</p>
<p>I need to point out up front that regular expressions are
          complex tools that cannot be covered in depth here. If this area
          sparks your interest, the text <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Mastering Regular
          Expressions</em></span>, written by Jeffrey E. F. Friedl
          (O’Reilly), is a good next step to take. We won’t be able to cover
          pattern construction itself well enough here to turn you into an
          expert. Once you learn how to code patterns, though, the top-level
          interface for performing matches is straightforward. In fact, they
          are so easy to use that we’ll jump right into some live examples
          before getting into more details.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="First Examples"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="first_examples"></a>First Examples</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>There are two <a id="reg19.4.2"></a>basic ways to kick off matches: through top-level
          function calls and via methods of precompiled pattern objects. The
          latter precompiled form is quicker if you will be applying the same
          pattern more than once—to all lines in a text file, for instance. To
          demonstrate, let’s do some matching on the following strings (see
          file <em class="epub__filename">re-interactive.txt</em> for all the
          interactive code run in this section):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e81444"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>text1 = 'Hello spam...World'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>text2 = 'Hello spam...other'</code></strong></pre>
<p>The match performed in the following code does not precompile:
          it executes an immediate match to look for all the characters
          between the words <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Hello</em></span> and
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>World</em></span> in our text strings:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e81459"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import re</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>matchobj = re.match('Hello(.*)World', text2)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(matchobj)</code></strong>
None</pre>
<p>When a match fails as it does here (the <code class="epub__literal">text2</code> string doesn’t end in
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>World</em></span>), we get back the <code class="epub__literal">None</code> object, which is Boolean false if
          tested in an <code class="epub__literal">if</code> statement.</p>
<p>In the pattern string we’re using here in the first argument
          to <code class="epub__literal">re.match</code>, the <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e81489"></a>words <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Hello</em></span> and
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>World</em></span> match themselves, and <code class="epub__literal">(.*)</code> means any character (<code class="epub__literal">.</code>) repeated zero or more times (<code class="epub__literal">*</code>). The fact that it is enclosed in
          parentheses tells Python to save away the part of the string matched
          by that part of the pattern as a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>group</em></span>—a
          matched substring available after the match. To see how, we need to
          make a match work:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e81514"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>matchobj = re.match('Hello(.*)World', text1)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(matchobj)</code></strong>
&lt;_sre.SRE_Match object at 0x009D6520&gt;

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>matchobj.group(1)</code></strong>
' spam...'</pre>
<p>When a match succeeds, we get back a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>match
          object</em></span>, <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e81530"></a>which has interfaces for extracting matched
          substrings—the <code class="epub__literal">group(1)</code> call
          returns the portion of the string matched by the first, leftmost,
          parenthesized portion of the pattern (our <code class="epub__literal">(.*)</code>). As mentioned, matching is not just
          a yes/no answer; by enclosing parts of the pattern in parentheses,
          it is also a way to extract matched substrings. In this case, we’ve
          parsed out the text between <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Hello</em></span> and
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>World</em></span>. Group number <code class="epub__literal">0</code> is the entire string matched by the
          pattern—useful if you want to be sure your pattern is consuming all
          the text you think it is.</p>
<p>The interface for precompiling is similar, but the pattern is
          implied in the<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e81552"></a> <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>pattern object</em></span> we get back from
          the<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e81559"></a> <code class="epub__literal">compile</code>
          call:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e81568"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pattobj  = re.compile('Hello(.*)World')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>matchobj = pattobj.match(text1)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>matchobj.group(1)</code></strong>
' spam...'</pre>
<p>Again, you should precompile for speed if you will run the
          pattern multiple times, and you normally will when scanning files
          line by line. Here’s something a bit more complex that hints at the
          generality of patterns. This one allows for zero or more blanks or
          tabs at the front (<code class="epub__literal">[ \t]*</code>), skips
          one or more after the word <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Hello</em></span> (<code class="epub__literal">[ \t]+</code>), captures characters in the middle
          (<code class="epub__literal">(.*)</code>), and allows the final word
          to begin with an upper- or lowercase letter (<code class="epub__literal">[Ww]</code>); as you can see, patterns can handle
          wide variations in data:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e81597"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>patt = '[ \t]*Hello[ \t]+(.*)[Ww]orld'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>line = ' Hello   spamworld'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mobj = re.match(patt, line)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mobj.group(1)</code></strong>
'spam'</pre>
<p>Notice that we matched a <code class="epub__literal">str</code> pattern to a <code class="epub__literal">str</code> string in the last listing. We can
          also match <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> to <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> in order to handle data such as
          encoded text, but we cannot mix the two string types (a constraint
          which is true in Python in general—Python wouldn’t have the encoding
          information needed to know how to convert between the raw bytes and
          the Unicode text):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e81625"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>patt = b'[ \t]*Hello[ \t]+(.*)[Ww]orld'</code></strong>      # both as bytes works too
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>line = b' Hello   spamworld'</code></strong>                 # and returns bytes groups
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>re.match(patt, line).group(1)</code></strong>                # but cannot mix str/bytes
b'spam'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>re.match(patt, ' Hello spamworld')</code></strong>
TypeError: can't use a bytes pattern on a string-like object

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>re.match('[ \t]*Hello[ \t]+(.*)[Ww]orld', line)</code></strong>
TypeError: can't use a string pattern on a bytes-like object</pre>
<p>In addition to the tools these examples demonstrate, there are
          methods for scanning ahead to find a match<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e81644"></a> (<code class="epub__literal">search</code>), scanning
          to find all matches<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e81653"></a> (<code class="epub__literal">findall</code>),
          splitting and replacing on patterns, and so on. All have analogous
          module and precompiled call forms. The next section turns to a few
          examples to demonstrate more of the <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e81662"></a>basics.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="String Operations Versus Patterns"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="string_operations_versus_patterns"></a>String Operations Versus Patterns</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Notice how the <a id="str19.4.3"></a><a id="reg19.4.3"></a>preceding example skips optional whitespace and allows
          for uppercase or lowercase letters. This underscores why you may
          want to use patterns in the first <span>place—</span>they support more general kinds
          of text than string object methods can. Here’s another case in
          point: we’ve seen that string methods can split on and replace a
          substring, but they don’t suffice if the delimiter might be more
          than one alternative:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e81684"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'aaa--bbb--ccc'.split('--')</code></strong>
['aaa', 'bbb', 'ccc']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'aaa--bbb--ccc'.replace('--', '...')</code></strong>        # string methods use fixed strings
'aaa...bbb...ccc'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'aaa--bbb==ccc'.split(['--', '=='])</code></strong>
TypeError: Can't convert 'list' object to str implicitly
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'aaa--bbb==ccc'.replace(['--', '=='], '...')</code></strong>
TypeError: Can't convert 'list' object to str implicitly</pre>
<p>Patterns can do similar work, but also can handle alternatives
          directly, by virtue of their pattern matching syntax. In the
          following, the syntax <code class="epub__literal">--|==</code>
          matches <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>either</em></span> string <code class="epub__literal">--</code> or string <code class="epub__literal">==</code>; the syntax <code class="epub__literal">[-=]</code> matches either the character <code class="epub__literal">-</code> or <code class="epub__literal">=</code>
          (a character set); and the form <code class="epub__literal">(?:)</code> can be used to group nested parts of
          a pattern without forming a saved substring group (split treats
          groups specially):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e81725"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import re</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>re.split('--', 'aaa--bbb--ccc')</code></strong>
['aaa', 'bbb', 'ccc']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>re.sub('--', '...', 'aaa--bbb--ccc')</code></strong>            # single string case
'aaa...bbb...ccc'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>re.split('--|==', 'aaa--bbb==ccc')</code></strong>              # split on -- or ==
['aaa', 'bbb', 'ccc']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>re.sub('--|==', '...', 'aaa--bbb==ccc')</code></strong>         # replace -- or ==
'aaa...bbb...ccc'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>re.split('[-=]', 'aaa-bbb=ccc')</code></strong>                 # single char alternative
['aaa', 'bbb', 'ccc']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>re.split('(--)|(==)', 'aaa--bbb==ccc')</code></strong>          # split includes groups
['aaa', '--', None, 'bbb', None, '==', 'ccc']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>re.split('(?:--)|(?:==)', 'aaa--bbb==ccc')</code></strong>      # expr part, not group
['aaa', 'bbb', 'ccc']</pre>
<p>Similarly, splits can extract simple substrings for fixed
          delimiters, but patterns can also handle surrounding context like
          brackets, mark parts as optional, ignore whitespace, and more. In
          the next tests <code class="epub__literal">\s*</code> means zero or
          more whitespace characters (a character class); <code class="epub__literal">\s+</code> means one or more of the same;
          <code class="epub__literal">/?</code> matches an optional slash;
          <code class="epub__literal">[a-z]</code> is any lowercase letter (a
          range);<code class="epub__literal">(.*?)</code> means a saved
          substring of zero or more of any character again—but only as many as
          needed to match the rest of the pattern (nongreedily); and the
          <code class="epub__literal">groups</code> method is used to fetch
          the substrings matched by the parenthesized subpatterns all at
          once:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e81773"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'spam/ham/eggs'.split('/')</code></strong>
['spam', 'ham', 'eggs']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>re.match('(.*)/(.*)/(.*)', 'spam/ham/eggs').groups()</code></strong>
('spam', 'ham', 'eggs')

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>re.match('&lt;(.*)&gt;/&lt;(.*)&gt;/&lt;(.*)&gt;', '&lt;spam&gt;/&lt;ham&gt;/&lt;eggs&gt;').groups()</code></strong>
('spam', 'ham', 'eggs')

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>re.match('\s*&lt;(.*)&gt;/?&lt;(.*)&gt;/?&lt;(.*)&gt;', '  &lt;spam&gt;/&lt;ham&gt;&lt;eggs&gt;').groups()</code></strong>
('spam', 'ham', 'eggs')

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'Hello pattern world!'.split()</code></strong>
['Hello', 'pattern', 'world!']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>re.match('Hello\s*([a-z]*)\s+(.*?)\s*!', 'Hellopattern   world !').groups()</code></strong>
('pattern', 'world')</pre>
<p>In fact, there’s more than one way to match. The <code class="epub__literal">findall</code> <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e81799"></a>method provides generality that leaves string objects
          in the dust—it locates all occurrences of a pattern and returns all
          the substrings it matched (or a list of tuples for multiple groups).
          The <code class="epub__literal">search</code> <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e81808"></a>method is similar but stops at the first match—it’s
          like <code class="epub__literal">match</code> <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e81818"></a>plus an initial forward scan. In the following, string
          object finds locate just one specific string, but patterns can be
          used to locate and extract bracketed text anywhere in a string, even
          pairs with optional text between:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e81824"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'&lt;spam&gt;/&lt;ham&gt;/&lt;eggs&gt;'.find('ham')</code></strong>               # find substring offset
8
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>re.findall('&lt;(.*?)&gt;', '&lt;spam&gt;/&lt;ham&gt;/&lt;eggs&gt;')</code></strong>    # find all matches/groups
['spam', 'ham', 'eggs']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>re.findall('&lt;(.*?)&gt;', '&lt;spam&gt; /  &lt;ham&gt;&lt;eggs&gt;')</code></strong>
['spam', 'ham', 'eggs']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>re.findall('&lt;(.*?)&gt;/?&lt;(.*?)&gt;', '&lt;spam&gt;/&lt;ham&gt; ... &lt;eggs&gt;&lt;cheese&gt;')</code></strong>
[('spam', 'ham'), ('eggs', 'cheese')]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>re.search('&lt;(.*?)&gt;/?&lt;(.*?)&gt;', 'todays menu: &lt;spam&gt;/&lt;ham&gt;...&lt;eggs&gt;&lt;s&gt;').groups()</code></strong>
('spam', 'ham')</pre>
<p>Especially when using <code class="epub__literal">findall</code>, the <code class="epub__literal">(?s)</code> operator comes in handy to force
          <code class="epub__literal">.</code> to match
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>end-of-line</em></span> characters in multiline text;
          without it <code class="epub__literal">.</code> matches everything
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>except</em></span> lines ends. The following searches look
          for two adjacent bracketed strings with arbitrary text between, with
          and without skipping line breaks:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e81862"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>re.findall('&lt;(.*?)&gt;.*&lt;(.*?)&gt;', '&lt;spam&gt; \n  &lt;ham&gt;\n&lt;eggs&gt;')</code></strong>        # stop at \n
[]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>re.findall('(?s)&lt;(.*?)&gt;.*&lt;(.*?)&gt;', '&lt;spam&gt; \n  &lt;ham&gt;\n&lt;eggs&gt;')</code></strong>    # greedy
[('spam', 'eggs')]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>re.findall('(?s)&lt;(.*?)&gt;.*?&lt;(.*?)&gt;', '&lt;spam&gt; \n  &lt;ham&gt;\n&lt;eggs&gt;')</code></strong>   # nongreedy
[('spam', 'ham')]</pre>
<p>To make larger patterns more mnemonic, we can even associate
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>names</em></span> with matched substring groups in using
          the <code class="epub__literal">&lt;?P&lt;name&gt;)</code> pattern
          syntax and fetch them by name after matches, though this is of
          limited utility for <code class="epub__literal">findall</code>. The
          next tests look for strings of “word” characters (<code class="epub__literal">\w</code>) separated by a <code class="epub__literal">/</code>—this isn’t much more than a string
          split, but parts are named, and <code class="epub__literal">search</code> and <code class="epub__literal">findall</code> both scan ahead:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e81898"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>re.search('(?P&lt;part1&gt;\w*)/(?P&lt;part2&gt;\w*)', '...aaa/bbb/ccc]').groups()</code></strong>
('aaa', 'bbb')
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>re.search('(?P&lt;part1&gt;\w*)/(?P&lt;part2&gt;\w*)', '...aaa/bbb/ccc]').groupdict()</code></strong>
{'part1': 'aaa', 'part2': 'bbb'}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>re.search('(?P&lt;part1&gt;\w*)/(?P&lt;part2&gt;\w*)', '...aaa/bbb/ccc]').group(2)</code></strong>
'bbb'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>re.search('(?P&lt;part1&gt;\w*)/(?P&lt;part2&gt;\w*)', '...aaa/bbb/ccc]').group('part2')</code></strong>
'bbb'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>re.findall('(?P&lt;part1&gt;\w*)/(?P&lt;part2&gt;\w*)', '...aaa/bbb ccc/ddd]')</code></strong>
[('aaa', 'bbb'), ('ccc', 'ddd')]</pre>
<p>Finally, although basic string operations such as slicing and
          splits are sometimes enough, patterns are much more flexible. The
          following uses <code class="epub__literal">[^ ]</code> to match any
          character <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>not</em></span> following the <code class="epub__literal">^</code>, and escapes a dash within a <code class="epub__literal">[]</code> alternative set using <code class="epub__literal">\-</code> so it’s not taken to be a character set
          range separator. It runs equivalent slices, splits, and matches,
          along with a more general match that the other two cannot
          approach:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e81932"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>line = 'aaa bbb ccc'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>line[:3], line[4:7], line[8:11]</code></strong>          # slice data at fixed offsets
('aaa', 'bbb', 'ccc')
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>line.split()</code></strong>                             # split data with fixed delimiters
['aaa', 'bbb', 'ccc']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>re.split(' +', line)</code></strong>                     # split on general delimiters
['aaa', 'bbb', 'ccc']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>re.findall('[^ ]+', line)</code></strong>                # find non-delimiter runs
['aaa', 'bbb', 'ccc']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>line =</code></strong> <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'aaa...bbb-ccc / ddd.-/e&amp;e*e'</code></strong>     # handle generalized text
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>re.findall('[^ .\-/]+', line)</code></strong>
['aaa', 'bbb', 'ccc', 'ddd', 'e&amp;e*e']</pre>
<p>At this point, if you’ve never used pattern syntax in the past
          your head may very well be spinning (or have blown off entirely!).
          Before we go into any further examples, let’s dig into a few of the
          details underlying the <code class="epub__literal">re</code> module
          and <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e81964"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e81966"></a>its patterns.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Using the re Module"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="using_the_re_module"></a>Using the re Module</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The Python <code class="epub__literal">re</code> module
          <a id="reg19.4.4"></a>comes with functions that can search for patterns
          right away or make compiled pattern objects for running matches
          later. Pattern objects (and module search calls) in turn generate
          match objects, which contain information about successful matches
          and matched substrings. For reference, the next few sections
          describe the module’s interfaces and some of the operators you can
          use to code patterns.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Module functions"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="module_functions"></a>Module functions</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The top level of the module provides functions for matching,
            substitution, precompiling, and so on:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">compile(pattern [,
                flags])</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Compile a <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e81996"></a>regular expression <code class="epub__literal">pattern</code> string into a regular
                  expression pattern object, for later matching. See the
                  reference manual <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>or </em></span><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Python
                  Pocket Reference</em></span> for the <code class="epub__literal">flags</code> argument’s meaning.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">match(pattern, string [,
                flags])</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>If zero or <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e82021"></a>more characters at the start of <code class="epub__literal">string</code> match the <code class="epub__literal">pattern</code> string, return a
                  corresponding match object, or <code class="epub__literal">None</code> if no match is found. Roughly
                  like a <code class="epub__literal">search</code> for a
                  pattern that begins with the <code class="epub__literal">^</code> operator.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">search(pattern, string [,
                flags])</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Scan <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e82050"></a>through <code class="epub__literal">string</code> for a location matching
                  <code class="epub__literal">pattern</code>, and return a
                  corresponding match object, or <code class="epub__literal">None</code> if no match is found.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">findall(pattern, string [,
                flags])</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Return a <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e82072"></a>list of strings giving all nonoverlapping
                  matches of <code class="epub__literal">pattern</code> in
                  <code class="epub__literal">string</code>. If there are any
                  groups in patterns, returns a list of groups, and a list of
                  tuples if the pattern has more than one group.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">finditer(pattern, string [,
                flags])</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Return <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e82091"></a>iterator over all nonoverlapping matches of
                  <code class="epub__literal">pattern</code> in <code class="epub__literal">string</code>.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">split(pattern, string [,
                maxsplit, flags])</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Split <code class="epub__literal">string</code> by
                  occurrences of <code class="epub__literal">pattern</code>.
                  If capturing parentheses (<code class="epub__literal">()</code>) are used in the pattern, the
                  text of all groups in the pattern are also returned in the
                  resulting list.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">sub(pattern, repl, string [,
                count, flags])</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Return the <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e82126"></a>string obtained by replacing the (first
                  <code class="epub__literal">count</code>) leftmost
                  nonoverlapping occurrences of <code class="epub__literal">pattern</code> (a string or a pattern
                  object) in <code class="epub__literal">string</code> by
                  <code class="epub__literal">repl</code> (which may be a
                  string with backslash escapes that may back-reference a
                  matched group, or a function that is passed a single match
                  object and returns the replacement string).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">subn(pattern, repl, string [,
                count, flags])</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Same as <code class="epub__literal">sub</code>,
                  <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e82154"></a>but returns a tuple: (new-string,
                  number-of-substitutions-made).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">escape(string)</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Return <code class="epub__literal">string</code> with
                  all <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e82170"></a>nonalphanumeric characters backslashed, such
                  that they can be compiled as a string literal.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Compiled pattern objects"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="compiled_pattern_objects"></a>Compiled pattern objects</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>At the next level, <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e82181"></a>pattern objects provide similar attributes, but the
            pattern string is implied. The <code class="epub__literal">re.compile</code> function in the previous
            section is useful to optimize patterns that may be matched more
            than once (compiled patterns match faster). Pattern objects
            returned by <code class="epub__literal">re.compile</code> have
            these sorts of attributes:</p><table border="0" class="epub__simplelist" summary="Simple list"><tbody><tr><td><code class="epub__literal">match(string [, pos] [,
                endpos])</code></td></tr><tr><td><code class="epub__literal">search(string [, pos] [,
                endpos])</code></td></tr><tr><td><code class="epub__literal">findall(string [, pos [,
                endpos]])</code></td></tr><tr><td><code class="epub__literal">finditer(string [, pos [,
                endpos]])</code></td></tr><tr><td><code class="epub__literal">split(string [,
                maxsplit])</code></td></tr><tr><td><code class="epub__literal">sub(repl, string [,
                count])</code></td></tr><tr><td><code class="epub__literal">subn(repl, string [,
                count])</code></td></tr></tbody></table>
<p>These are the same as the <code class="epub__literal">re</code> module functions, but the pattern is
            implied, and <code class="epub__literal">pos</code> and <code class="epub__literal">endpos</code> give start/end string indexes for
            the match.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Match objects"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="match_objects"></a>Match objects</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Finally, when<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e82232"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e82237"></a> a <code class="epub__literal">match</code> or
            <code class="epub__literal">search</code> function or method is
            successful, you get back a match object (<code class="epub__literal">None</code> comes back on failed matches).
            Match objects export a set of attributes of their own,
            including:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">group(g)</code><br/></span><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">group(g1, g2,
                ...)</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Return the substring that matched a parenthesized
                  group (or groups) in the pattern. Accept group numbers or
                  names. Group numbers start at 1; group 0 is the entire
                  string matched by the pattern. Returns a tuple when passed
                  multiple group numbers, and group number defaults to 0 if
                  omitted.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">groups()</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Returns a tuple of all groups’ substrings of the match
                  (for group numbers 1 and higher).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">groupdict()</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Returns a dictionary containing all named groups of
                  the match (see <code class="epub__literal">(?P&lt;name&gt;R)</code> syntax
                  ahead).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">start([group])
                end([group])</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Indices of the start and end of the substring matched
                  by <code class="epub__literal">group</code> (or the entire
                  matched string, if no <code class="epub__literal">group</code> is passed).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">span([group])</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Returns the two-item tuple: <code class="epub__literal">(start(group), end(group))</code>.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">expand([template])</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Performs backslash group substitutions; see the Python
                  library manual.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Regular expression patterns"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="regular_expression_patterns"></a>Regular expression patterns</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Regular expression strings <a id="reg19.4.4.4"></a>are built up by concatenating single-character
            regular expression forms, shown in Table 19-1. The longest-matching string is
            usually matched by each form, except for the nongreedy operators.
            In the table, <code class="epub__literal">R</code> means any
            regular expression form, <code class="epub__literal">C</code> is a
            character, and <code class="epub__literal">N</code> denotes a
            digit.</p><div class="epub__table"><a id="re_pattern_syntax"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Table 19-1. re pattern syntax</p><div class="epub__table-contents"><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; " summary="re pattern syntax"><colgroup><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Operator</p></th><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Interpretation</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">.</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Matches any
                    character (including newline if <code class="epub__literal">DOTALL</code> flag is specified or
                    <code class="epub__literal">(?s)</code> at pattern
                    front)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">^</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Matches start of
                    the string (of every line in <code class="epub__literal">MULTILINE</code> mode)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">$</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Matches end of the
                    string (of every line in <code class="epub__literal">MULTILINE</code> mode)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">C</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Any nonspecial (or
                    backslash-escaped) character matches itself</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">R*</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Zero or more of
                    preceding regular expression <code class="epub__literal">R</code> (as many as
                    possible)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">R+</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>One or more of
                    preceding regular expression <code class="epub__literal">R</code> (as many as
                    possible)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">R?</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Zero or one
                    occurrence of preceding regular expression <code class="epub__literal">R</code> (optional)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">R{m}</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Matches exactly
                    <code class="epub__literal">m</code> copies preceding
                    <code class="epub__literal">R</code>: <code class="epub__literal">a{5}</code> matches <code class="epub__literal">'aaaaa'</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">R{m,n}</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Matches from
                    <code class="epub__literal">m</code> to <code class="epub__literal">n</code> repetitions of preceding
                    regular expression <code class="epub__literal">R</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">R*?, R+?, R??,
                    R{m,n}?</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Same as <code class="epub__literal">*</code>, <code class="epub__literal">+</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">?</code> but matches as few
                    characters/times as possible; these are known as
                    <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>nongreedy</em></span> match operators (unlike
                    others, they match and consume as few characters as
                    possible)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">[...]</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Defines character
                    set: e.g., <code class="epub__literal">[a-zA-Z]</code> to
                    match all letters (alternatives, with <code class="epub__literal">-</code> for ranges)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">[^...]</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Defines
                    complemented character set: matches if <code class="epub__literal">char</code> is not in
                    set</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">\</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Escapes special
                    <code class="epub__literal">char</code>s (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">*?+|()</code>) and introduces special
                    sequences in Table 19-2</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">\\</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Matches a literal
                    <code class="epub__literal">\</code> (write as <code class="epub__literal">\\\\</code> in pattern, or use <code class="epub__literal">r'\\'</code>)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">\N</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Matches the
                    contents of the group of the same number N: <code class="epub__literal">'(.+) \1'</code> matches “42
                    42”</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">R|R</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Alternative:
                    matches left or right <code class="epub__literal">R</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">RR</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Concatenation:
                    match both <code class="epub__literal">R</code>s</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">(R)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Matches any regular
                    expression inside <code class="epub__literal">()</code>,
                    and delimits a group (retains matched
                    substring)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">(?:R)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Same as <code class="epub__literal">(R)</code> but simply delimits part R
                    and does not denote a saved group</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">(?=R)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Look-ahead
                    assertion: matches if <code class="epub__literal">R</code>
                    matches next, but doesn’t consume any of the string (e.g.,
                    <code class="epub__literal">X (?=Y)</code> matches
                    <code class="epub__literal">X</code> only if followed by
                    <code class="epub__literal">Y</code>)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">(?!R)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Matches if <code class="epub__literal">R</code> doesn’t match next; negative
                    of <code class="epub__literal">(?=R)</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">(?P&lt;name&gt;R)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Matches any regular
                    expression inside <code class="epub__literal">()</code>,
                    and delimits a named group</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">(?P=name)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Matches whatever
                    text was matched by the earlier group named <code class="epub__literal">name</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">(?#...)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>A comment;
                    ignored</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">(?letter)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Set mode flag;
                    <code class="epub__literal">letter</code> is one of
                    <code class="epub__literal">aiLmsux</code> (see the
                    library manual)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">(?&lt;=R)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Look-behind
                    assertion: matches if the current position in the string
                    is preceded by a match of <code class="epub__literal">R</code> that ends at the current
                    position</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">(?&lt;!R)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Matches if the
                    current position in the string is not preceded by a match
                    for <code class="epub__literal">R</code>; negative of
                    <code class="epub__literal">(?&lt;=
                    R)</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">(?(id/name)</code><code class="epub__literal">yespattern</code><code class="epub__literal">|</code><code class="epub__literal">nopattern</code><code class="epub__literal">)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Will try to match
                    with <code class="epub__literal">yespattern</code> if the
                    group with given <code class="epub__literal">id</code> or
                    <code class="epub__literal">name</code> exists, else with
                    optional <code class="epub__literal">nopattern</code></p></td></tr></tbody></table>
</div>
</div>
<p>Within patterns, ranges and selections can be combined. For
            instance, <code class="epub__literal">[a-zA-Z0-9_]+</code> matches
            the longest possible string of one or more letters, digits, or
            underscores. Special characters can be escaped as usual in Python
            strings: <code class="epub__literal">[\t ]*</code> matches zero or
            more tabs and spaces (i.e., it skips such whitespace).</p>
<p>The parenthesized grouping construct, <code class="epub__literal">(R)</code>, lets you extract matched substrings
            after a successful match. The portion of the string matched by the
            expression in parentheses is retained in a numbered register. It’s
            available through the <code class="epub__literal">group</code>
            method of a match object after a successful match.</p>
<p>In addition to the entries in this table, special sequences
            in Table 19-2 can be used in
            patterns, too. Because of Python string rules, you sometimes must
            double up on backslashes (<code class="epub__literal">\\</code>)
            or use Python raw strings (<code class="epub__literal">r'...'</code>) to retain backslashes in the
            pattern verbatim. Python ignores backslashes in normal strings if
            the letter following the backslash is not recognized as an escape
            code. Some of the entries in Table 19-2 are affected by Unicode when
            matching <code class="epub__literal">str</code> instead of
            <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>, and an ASCII flag may be
            set to emulate the behavior for <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>; see Python’s manuals for more
            details.</p><div class="epub__table"><a id="re_special_sequences"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Table 19-2. re special sequences</p><div class="epub__table-contents"><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; " summary="re special sequences"><colgroup><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Sequence</p></th><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Interpretation</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">\</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>number</code></em></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Matches text of
                    group <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>number</code></em> (numbered from
                    1)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">\A</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Matches only at the
                    start of the string</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">\b</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Empty string at
                    word boundaries</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">\B</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Empty string not at
                    word boundaries</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">\d</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Any decimal digit
                    character (<code class="epub__literal">[0-9]</code> for
                    ASCII)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">\D</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Any nondecimal
                    digit character (<code class="epub__literal">[^O-9]</code>
                    for ASCII)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">\s</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Any whitespace
                    character (<code class="epub__literal">[
                    \t\n\r\f\v]</code> for ASCII)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">\S</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Any nonwhitespace
                    character (<code class="epub__literal">[^
                    \t\n\r\f\v]</code> for ASCII)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">\w</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Any alphanumeric
                    character (<code class="epub__literal">[a-zA-Z0-9_]</code>
                    for ASCII)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">\W</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Any nonalphanumeric
                    character (<code class="epub__literal">[^a-zA-Z0-9_]</code> for ASCII
                    )</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">\Z</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Matches only at the
                    end of the string</p></td></tr></tbody></table>
</div>
</div>
<p>Most of the standard escapes supported by Python string
            literals are also accepted by the regular expression parser:
            <code class="epub__literal">\a</code>, <code class="epub__literal">\b</code>, <code class="epub__literal">\f</code>, <code class="epub__literal">\n</code>, <code class="epub__literal">\r</code>, <code class="epub__literal">\t</code>, <code class="epub__literal">\v</code>, <code class="epub__literal">\x</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">\\</code>. The Python library manual gives
            these escapes’ interpretation and additional details on pattern
            syntax in general. But to further demonstrate how the <code class="epub__literal">re</code> pattern syntax is typically used in
            scripts, let’s go back to writing some <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e82917"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e82920"></a>code.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="More Pattern Examples"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="more_pattern_examples"></a>More Pattern Examples</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>For more context, <a id="reg19.4.5"></a>the next few examples present short test files that
          match simple but representative pattern forms. Comments in Example 19-3 describe the
          operations exercised; check Table 19-1 to
          see which operators are used in these patterns. If they are still
          confusing, try running these tests interactively, and call <code class="epub__literal">group(0)</code> instead of <code class="epub__literal">start()</code> to see which strings are being
          matched by the patterns.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_lang_reverse-id2"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 19-3. PP4E\Lang\re-basics.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
literals, sets, ranges, alternatives, and escapes
all tests here print 2: offset where pattern found
"""

import re                                  # the one to use today

pattern, string = "A.C.", "xxABCDxx"       # nonspecial chars match themselves
matchobj = re.search(pattern, string)      # '.' means any one char
if matchobj:                               # search returns match object or None
    print(matchobj.start())                # start is index where matched

pattobj  = re.compile("A.*C.*")            # 'R*' means zero or more Rs
matchobj = pattobj.search("xxABCDxx")      # compile returns pattern obj
if matchobj:                               # patt.search returns match obj
    print(matchobj.start())

# selection sets
print(re.search(" *A.C[DE][D-F][^G-ZE]G\t+ ?", "..ABCDEFG\t..").start())

# alternatives: R1|R2 means R1 or R2
print(re.search("(A|X)(B|Y)(C|Z)D", "..AYCD..").start())       # test each char
print(re.search("(?:A|X)(?:B|Y)(?:C|Z)D", "..AYCD..").start()) # same, not saved
print(re.search("A|XB|YC|ZD", "..AYCD..").start())             # matches just A!
print(re.search("(A|XB|YC|ZD)YCD", "..AYCD..").start())        # just first char

# word boundaries
print(re.search(r"\bABCD", "..ABCD ").start())     # \b means word boundary
print(re.search(r"ABCD\b", "..ABCD ").start())     # use r'...' to escape '\'</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Notice again that there are different ways to kick off a match
          with <code class="epub__literal">re</code>: by calling module search
          functions and by making compiled pattern objects. In either event,
          you can hang on to the resulting match object or not. All the print
          call statements in this script show a result of <code class="epub__literal">2</code>—the offset where the pattern was found
          in the string. In the first test, for example, <code class="epub__literal">A.C.</code> matches the <code class="epub__literal">ABCD</code> at offset <code class="epub__literal">2</code> in the search string (i.e., after the
          first <code class="epub__literal">xx</code>):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e82970"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Lang&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python re-basic.py</code></strong>
2
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...8 more 2s omitted...</span></em></pre>
<p>Next, in Example 19-4, parts of the
          pattern strings enclosed in parentheses delimit
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>groups</em></span>; the parts of the string they matched
          are available after the match.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_lang_reverse-id3"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 19-4. PP4E\Lang\re-groups.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
groups: extract substrings matched by REs in '()' parts
groups are denoted by position, but (?P&lt;name&gt;R) can also name them
"""

import re

patt = re.compile("A(.)B(.)C(.)")                  # saves 3 substrings
mobj = patt.match("A0B1C2")                        # each '()' is a group, 1..n
print(mobj.group(1), mobj.group(2), mobj.group(3)) # group() gives substring

patt = re.compile("A(.*)B(.*)C(.*)")               # saves 3 substrings
mobj = patt.match("A000B111C222")                  # groups() gives all groups
print(mobj.groups())

print(re.search("(A|X)(B|Y)(C|Z)D", "..AYCD..").groups())
print(re.search("(?P&lt;a&gt;A|X)(?P&lt;b&gt;B|Y)(?P&lt;c&gt;C|Z)D", "..AYCD..").groupdict())

patt = re.compile(r"[\t ]*#\s*define\s*([a-z0-9_]*)\s*(.*)")
mobj = patt.search(" # define  spam  1 + 2 + 3")            # parts of C #define
print(mobj.groups())                                        # \s is whitespace</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>In the first test here, for instance, the three <code class="epub__literal">(.)</code> groups each match a single character,
          but they retain the character matched; calling <code class="epub__literal">group</code> pulls out the character matched. The
          second test’s <code class="epub__literal">(.*)</code> groups match
          and retain any number of characters. The third and fourth tests
          shows how alternatives can be grouped by both position and name, and
          the last test matches C <code class="epub__literal">#define</code>
          lines—more on this pattern in a moment:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e83003"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Lang&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python re-groups.py</code></strong>
0 1 2
('000', '111', '222')
('A', 'Y', 'C')
{'a': 'A', 'c': 'C', 'b': 'Y'}
('spam', '1 + 2 + 3')</pre>
<p>Finally, besides matches and substring extraction, <code class="epub__literal">re</code> also includes tools for string
          replacement or substitution (see Example 19-5).</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_lang_reverse-id4"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 19-5. PP4E\Lang\re-subst.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"substitutions: replace occurrences of pattern in string"

import re
print(re.sub('[ABC]', '*', 'XAXAXBXBXCXC'))
print(re.sub('[ABC]_', '*', 'XA-XA_XB-XB_XC-XC_'))        # alternatives char + _

print(re.sub('(.) spam', 'spam\\1',  'x spam, y spam'))   # group back ref (or r'')

def mapper(matchobj):
    return 'spam' + matchobj.group(1)

print(re.sub('(.) spam', mapper, 'x spam, y spam'))       # mapping function</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>In the first test, all characters in the set are replaced; in
          the second, they must be followed by an underscore. The last two
          tests illustrate more advanced group back-references and mapping
          functions in the replacement. Note the <code class="epub__literal">\\1</code> required to escape <code class="epub__literal">\1</code> for Python’s string rules; <code class="epub__literal">r'spam\1'</code> would work just as well. See
          also the earlier interactive tests in the section for additional
          substitution and splitting <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83032"></a>examples:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e83035"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Lang&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python re-subst.py</code></strong>
X*X*X*X*X*X*
XA-X*XB-X*XC-X*
spamx, spamy
spamx, spamy</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Scanning C Header Files for Patterns"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="scanning_c_header_files_for_patterns"></a>Scanning C Header Files for Patterns</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To wrap up, <a id="c19.4.6"></a><a id="reg19.4.6"></a><a id="scan19.4.6"></a>let’s turn to a more realistic example: the script in
          Example 19-6 puts these
          pattern operators to more practical use. It uses regular expressions
          to find <code class="epub__literal">#define</code> and <code class="epub__literal">#include</code> lines in C header files and
          extract their components. The generality of the patterns makes them
          detect a variety of line formats; pattern groups (the parts in
          parentheses) are used to extract matched substrings from a line
          after a match.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_lang_reverse-id5"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 19-6. PP4E\Lang\cheader.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"Scan C header files to extract parts of #define and #include lines"

import sys, re
pattDefine = re.compile(                             # compile to pattobj
    '^#[\t ]*define[\t ]+(\w+)[\t ]*(.*)')           # "# define xxx yyy..."
                                                     # \w like [a-zA-Z0-9_]
pattInclude = re.compile(
    '^#[\t ]*include[\t ]+[&lt;"]([\w\./]+)')           # "# include &lt;xxx&gt;..."

def scan(fileobj):
    count = 0
    for line in fileobj:                             # scan by lines: iterator
        count += 1
        matchobj = pattDefine.match(line)            # None if match fails
        if matchobj:
            name = matchobj.group(1)                 # substrings for (...) parts
            body = matchobj.group(2)
            print(count, 'defined', name, '=', body.strip())
            continue
        matchobj = pattInclude.match(line)
        if matchobj:
            start, stop = matchobj.span(1)           # start/stop indexes of (...)
            filename = line[start:stop]              # slice out of line
            print(count, 'include', filename)        # same as matchobj.group(1)

if len(sys.argv) == 1:
    scan(sys.stdin)                    # no args: read stdin
else:
    scan(open(sys.argv[1], 'r'))       # arg: input filename</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>To test, let’s run this script on the text file in Example 19-7.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_lang_reverse-id6"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 19-7. PP4E\Lang\test.h</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">#ifndef TEST_H
#define TEST_H

#include &lt;stdio.h&gt;
#include &lt;lib/spam.h&gt;
#  include   "Python.h"

#define DEBUG
#define HELLO 'hello regex world'
#  define SPAM    1234

#define EGGS sunny + side + up
#define  ADDER(arg) 123 + arg
#endif</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Notice the spaces after <code class="epub__literal">#</code>
          in some of these lines; regular expressions are flexible enough to
          account for such departures from the norm. Here is the script at
          work; picking out <code class="epub__literal">#include</code> and
          <code class="epub__literal">#define</code> lines and their parts.
          For each matched line, it prints the line number, the line type, and
          any matched substrings:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e83094"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Lang&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python cheader.py test.h</code></strong>
2 defined TEST_H =
4 include stdio.h
5 include lib/spam.h
6 include Python.h
8 defined DEBUG =
9 defined HELLO = 'hello regex world'
10 defined SPAM = 1234
12 defined EGGS = sunny + side + up
13 defined ADDER = (arg) 123 + arg</pre>
<p>For an additional example of regular expressions at work, see
          the file <em class="epub__filename">pygrep1.py</em> in the book
          examples package; it implements a simple pattern-based “grep” file
          search utility, but was cut here for space. As we’ll see, we can
          also sometimes use regular expressions to parse information from XML
          and HTML text—the topics of the next <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83104"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83106"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83108"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83110"></a>section.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
