<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>XML and HTML Parsing</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="XML and HTML Parsing"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="xml_and_html_parsing"></a>XML and HTML Parsing</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Beyond string <a id="text19.5"></a>objects and regular expressions, Python ships with
        support for parsing some specific and commonly used types of formatted
        text. In particular, it provides precoded parsers for XML and HTML
        which we can deploy and customize for our text processing
        goals.</p>
<p>In the XML department, Python includes <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83126"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83131"></a>parsing support in its standard library and plays host
        to a prolific XML special-interest group. XML (for eXtensible Markup
        Language) is a tag-based markup language for describing many kinds of
        structured data. Among other things, it has been adopted in roles such
        as a standard database and Internet content representation in many
        contexts. As an object-oriented scripting language, Python mixes
        remarkably well with XML’s core notion of structured document
        interchange.</p>
<p>XML is based upon a tag syntax familiar to web page writers,
        used to describe and package data. The <code class="epub__literal">xml</code> <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83142"></a>module package in Python’s standard library includes
        tools for <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>parsing</em></span> this data from XML text, with
        both the SAX and the DOM standard parsing models, as well as the
        Python-specific<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83151"></a> ElementTree package. Although regular expressions can
        sometimes extract information from XML documents, too, they can be
        easily misled by unexpected text, and don’t directly support the
        notion of arbitrarily nested XML constructs (more on this limitation
        later when we explore languages in general).</p>
<p>In short, SAX parsers provide a subclass with methods called
        during the parsing operation, and DOM parsers are given access to an
        object tree representing the (usually) already parsed document.
        <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83157"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83160"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83165"></a>SAX parsers are essentially state machines and must
        record (and possibly stack) page details as the parse progresses;
        <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83171"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83174"></a>DOM parsers walk object trees using loops, attributes,
        and methods defined by the DOM standard. <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83180"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83185"></a>ElementTree is roughly a Python-specific analog of DOM,
        and as such can often yield simpler code; it can also be used to
        generate XML text from their object-based representations.</p>
<p>Beyond these parsing tools, Python also ships with an<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83191"></a> <code class="epub__literal">xmlrpc</code> package to
        support the client and server sides of the XML-RPC protocol (remote
        procedure calls that transmit objects encoded as XML over HTTP), as
        well as a standard <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83198"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83203"></a>HTML parser, <code class="epub__literal">html.parser</code>, <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83212"></a>that works on similar principles and is presented later
        in this chapter. The third-party domain has even more XML-related
        tools; most of these are maintained separately from Python to allow
        for more flexible release schedules. Beginning with Python 2.3, the
        <code class="epub__literal">Expat</code> parser <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83222"></a>is also included as the underlying engine that drives
        the parsing process.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="XML Parsing in Action"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="xml_parsing_in_action"></a>XML Parsing in Action</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>XML processing is a <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83231"></a><a id="par19.5.1"></a>large, evolving topic, and it is mostly beyond the
          scope of this book. For an example of a simple XML parsing task,
          though, consider the XML file in Example 19-8. This file
          defines a handful of O’Reilly Python books—ISBN numbers as
          attributes, and titles, publication dates, and authors as nested
          tags (with apologies to Python books not listed in this completely
          random sample—there are many!).</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_lang_reverse-id7"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 19-8. PP4E\Lang\Xml\books.xml</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&lt;catalog&gt;
    &lt;book isbn="0-596-00128-2"&gt;
        &lt;title&gt;Python &amp; XML&lt;/title&gt;
        &lt;date&gt;December 2001&lt;/date&gt;
        &lt;author&gt;Jones, Drake&lt;/author&gt;
    &lt;/book&gt;
    &lt;book isbn="0-596-15810-6"&gt;
        &lt;title&gt;Programming Python, 4th Edition&lt;/title&gt;
        &lt;date&gt;October 2010&lt;/date&gt;
        &lt;author&gt;Lutz&lt;/author&gt;
    &lt;/book&gt;
    &lt;book isbn="0-596-15806-8"&gt;
        &lt;title&gt;Learning Python, 4th Edition&lt;/title&gt;
        &lt;date&gt;September 2009&lt;/date&gt;
        &lt;author&gt;Lutz&lt;/author&gt;
    &lt;/book&gt;
    &lt;book isbn="0-596-15808-4"&gt;
        &lt;title&gt;Python Pocket Reference, 4th Edition&lt;/title&gt;
        &lt;date&gt;October 2009&lt;/date&gt;
        &lt;author&gt;Lutz&lt;/author&gt;
    &lt;/book&gt;
    &lt;book isbn="0-596-00797-3"&gt;
        &lt;title&gt;Python Cookbook, 2nd Edition&lt;/title&gt;
        &lt;date&gt;March 2005&lt;/date&gt;
        &lt;author&gt;Martelli, Ravenscroft, Ascher&lt;/author&gt;
    &lt;/book&gt;
    &lt;book isbn="0-596-10046-9"&gt;
        &lt;title&gt;Python in a Nutshell, 2nd Edition&lt;/title&gt;
        &lt;date&gt;July 2006&lt;/date&gt;
        &lt;author&gt;Martelli&lt;/author&gt;
    &lt;/book&gt;
    &lt;!-- plus many more Python books that should appear here --&gt;
&lt;/catalog&gt;</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Let’s quickly explore ways to extract this file’s book ISBN
          numbers and corresponding titles by example, using each of the four
          primary Python tools at our disposal—patterns, SAX, DOM, and
          ElementTree.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Regular expression parsing"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="regular_expression_parsing"></a>Regular expression parsing</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In some contexts, <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83256"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83261"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83266"></a>the regular expressions we met earlier can be used
            to parse information from XML files. They are not complete
            parsers, and are not very robust or accurate in the presence of
            arbitrary text (text in tag attributes can especially throw them
            off). Where applicable, though, they offer a simple option. Example 19-9 shows how we
            might go about parsing the XML file in Example 19-8 with the prior
            section’s <code class="epub__literal">re</code> module. Like all
            four examples in this section, it scans the XML file looking at
            ISBN numbers and associated titles, and stores the two as keys and
            values in a Python dictionary.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_lang_reverse-id8"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 19-9. PP4E\Lang\Xml\rebook.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
XML parsing: regular expressions (no robust or general)
"""

import re, pprint
text    = open('books.xml').read()                        # str if str pattern
pattern = '(?s)isbn="(.*?)".*?&lt;title&gt;(.*?)&lt;/title&gt;'       # *?=nongreedy
found   = re.findall(pattern, text)                       # (?s)=dot matches /n
mapping = {isbn: title for (isbn, title) in found}        # dict from tuple list
pprint.pprint(mapping)</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>When run, the <code class="epub__literal">re.findall</code>
<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83289"></a>method locates all the nested tags we’re interested
            in, extracts their content, and returns a list of tuples
            representing the two parenthesized groups in the pattern.
            <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83295"></a>Python’s <code class="epub__literal">pprint</code>
            module displays the dictionary created by the comprehension
            nicely. The extract works, but only as long as the text doesn’t
            deviate from the expected pattern in ways that would invalidate
            our script. Moreover, the XML entity for “&amp;” in the first
            book’s title is not un-escaped automatically:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e83304"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Lang\Xml&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python rebook.py</code></strong>
{'0-596-00128-2': 'Python &amp; XML',
 '0-596-00797-3': 'Python Cookbook, 2nd Edition',
 '0-596-10046-9': 'Python in a Nutshell, 2nd Edition',
 '0-596-15806-8': 'Learning Python, 4th Edition',
 '0-596-15808-4': 'Python Pocket Reference, 4th Edition',
 '0-596-15810-6': 'Programming Python, 4th Edition'}</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="SAX parsing"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="sax_parsing"></a>SAX parsing</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To do better, Python’s full-blown XML <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83314"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83317"></a>parsing tools let us perform this data extraction in
            a more accurate and robust way. Example 19-10, for instance,
            defines a SAX-based parsing procedure: its class implements
            callback methods that will be called during the parse, and its
            top-level code creates and runs a parser.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_lang_reverse-id9"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 19-10. PP4E\Lang\Xml\saxbook.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
XML parsing: SAX is a callback-based API for intercepting parser events
"""

import xml.sax, xml.sax.handler, pprint

class BookHandler(xml.sax.handler.ContentHandler):
    def __init__(self):
        self.inTitle = False                        # handle XML parser events
        self.mapping = {}                           # a state machine model

    def startElement(self, name, attributes):
        if name == "book":                          # on start book tag
            self.buffer = ""                        # save ISBN for dict key
            self.isbn = attributes["isbn"]
        elif name == "title":                       # on start title tag
            self.inTitle = True                     # save title text to follow

    def characters(self, data):
        if self.inTitle:                            # on text within tag
            self.buffer += data                     # save text if in title

    def endElement(self, name):
      if name == "title":
          self.inTitle = False                      # on end title tag
          self.mapping[self.isbn] = self.buffer     # store title text in dict

parser  = xml.sax.make_parser()
handler = BookHandler()
parser.setContentHandler(handler)
parser.parse('books.xml')
pprint.pprint(handler.mapping)</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>The SAX model is efficient, but it is potentially confusing
            at first glance, because the class must keep track of where the
            parse currently is using state information. For example, when the
            title tag is first detected, we set a state flag and initialize a
            buffer; as each character within the title tag is parsed, we
            append it to the buffer until the ending portion of the title tag
            is encountered. The net effect saves the title tag’s content as a
            string. This model is simple, but can be complex to manage; in
            cases of potentially arbitrary nesting, for instance, state
            information may need to be stacked as the class receives callbacks
            for nested tags.</p>
<p>To kick off the parse, we make a parser object, set its
            handler to an instance of our class, and start the parse; as
            Python scans the XML file, our class’s methods are called
            automatically as components are encountered. When the parse is
            complete, we use the Python <code class="epub__literal">pprint</code> <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83337"></a>module to display the result again—the <code class="epub__literal">mapping</code> dictionary object attached to
            our handler. The result is the mostly the same this time, but
            notice that the “&amp;” escape sequence is properly un-escaped
            now—SAX performs XML parsing, not text matching:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e83346"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Lang\Xml&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python saxbook.py</code></strong>
{'0-596-00128-2': 'Python &amp; XML',
 '0-596-00797-3': 'Python Cookbook, 2nd Edition',
 '0-596-10046-9': 'Python in a Nutshell, 2nd Edition',
 '0-596-15806-8': 'Learning Python, 4th Edition',
 '0-596-15808-4': 'Python Pocket Reference, 4th Edition',
 '0-596-15810-6': 'Programming Python, 4th Edition'}</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="DOM parsing"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="dom_parsing"></a>DOM parsing</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The DOM parsing <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83356"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83359"></a>model for XML is perhaps simpler to understand—we
            simply traverse a tree of objects after the parse—but it might be
            less efficient for large documents, if the document is parsed all
            at once ahead of time and stored in memory. DOM also supports
            random access to document parts via tree fetches, nested loops for
            known structures, and recursive traversals for arbitrary nesting;
            in SAX, we are limited to a single linear parse. Example 19-11 is a DOM-based
            equivalent to the SAX parser of the preceding section.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_lang_reverse-id10"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 19-11. PP4E\Lang\Xml\dombook.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
XML parsing: DOM gives whole document to the application as a traversable object
"""

import pprint
import xml.dom.minidom
from xml.dom.minidom import Node

doc = xml.dom.minidom.parse("books.xml")          # load doc into object
                                                  # usually parsed up front
mapping = {}
for node in doc.getElementsByTagName("book"):     # traverse DOM object
    isbn = node.getAttribute("isbn")              # via DOM object API
    L = node.getElementsByTagName("title")
    for node2 in L:
        title = ""
        for node3 in node2.childNodes:
            if node3.nodeType == Node.TEXT_NODE:
                title += node3.data
        mapping[isbn] = title

# mapping now has the same value as in the SAX example
pprint.pprint(mapping)</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>The output of this script is the same as what we generated
            interactively for the SAX parser; here, though, it is built up by
            walking the document object tree after the parse has finished
            using method calls and attributes defined by the cross-language
            DOM standard specification. This is both a strength and potential
            weakness of DOM—its API is language neutral, but it may seem a bit
            nonintuitive and verbose to some Python programmers accustomed to
            simpler models:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e83374"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Lang\Xml&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python dombook.py</code></strong>
{'0-596-00128-2': 'Python &amp; XML',
 '0-596-00797-3': 'Python Cookbook, 2nd Edition',
 '0-596-10046-9': 'Python in a Nutshell, 2nd Edition',
 '0-596-15806-8': 'Learning Python, 4th Edition',
 '0-596-15808-4': 'Python Pocket Reference, 4th Edition',
 '0-596-15810-6': 'Programming Python, 4th Edition'}</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="ElementTree parsing"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="elementtree_parsing"></a>ElementTree parsing</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As a fourth option, the popular <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83384"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83387"></a>ElementTree package is a standard library tool for
            both parsing and generating XML. As a parser, it’s essentially a
            more Pythonic type of <span>DOM—</span>it
            parses documents into a tree of objects again, but the API for
            navigating the tree is more lightweight, because it’s
            Python-specific.</p>
<p>ElementTree provides easy-to-use tools for parsing,
            changing, and generating XML documents. For both parsing and
            generating, it represents documents as a tree of <span>Python</span> “element” objects. Each
            element in the tree has a tag name, attribute dictionary, text
            value, and sequence of child elements. The element object produced
            by a parse can be navigating with normal Python loops for a known
            structures, and with recursion where arbitrary nesting is
            possible.</p>
<p>The ElementTree system began its life as a third-party
            extension, but it was largely incorporated into Python’s standard
            library as the package<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83403"></a> <code class="epub__literal">xml.etree</code>. Example 19-12 shows how to
            use it to parse our book catalog file one last time.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_lang_reverse-id11"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 19-12. PP4E\Lang\Xml\etreebook.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
XML parsing: ElementTree (etree) provides a Python-based API for parsing/generating
"""

import pprint
from xml.etree.ElementTree import parse

mapping = {}
tree = parse('books.xml')
for B in tree.findall('book'):
    isbn = B.attrib['isbn']
    for T in B.findall('title'):
        mapping[isbn] = T.text
pprint.pprint(mapping)</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>When run we get the exact same results as for SAX and DOM
            again, but the code required to extract the file’s details seems
            noticeably simpler this time around:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e83419"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\...\PP4E\Lang\Xml&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python etreebook.py</code></strong>
{'0-596-00128-2': 'Python &amp; XML',
 '0-596-00797-3': 'Python Cookbook, 2nd Edition',
 '0-596-10046-9': 'Python in a Nutshell, 2nd Edition',
 '0-596-15806-8': 'Learning Python, 4th Edition',
 '0-596-15808-4': 'Python Pocket Reference, 4th Edition',
 '0-596-15810-6': 'Programming Python, 4th Edition'}</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Other XML topics"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="other_xml_topics"></a>Other XML topics</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Naturally, there <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83429"></a>is much more to Python’s XML support than these
            simple examples imply. In deference to space, though, here are
            pointers to XML resources in lieu of additional examples:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Standard library</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>First, be sure to consult the Python library manual
                  for more on the standard library’s XML support tools. See
                  the entries for <code class="epub__literal">re</code>,
                  <code class="epub__literal">xml.sax</code>., <code class="epub__literal">xml.dom</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">xml.etree</code> for more on this
                  section’s examples.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>PyXML SIG tools</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>You can also find <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83462"></a>Python XML tools and documentation at the XML
                  Special Interest Group (SIG) web page at http://www.python.org. This SIG is dedicated
                  to wedding XML technologies with Python, and it publishes
                  free XML tools independent of Python itself. Much of the
                  standard library’s XML support originated with this group’s
                  work.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Third-party tools</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>You can <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83475"></a>also find free, third-party Python support
                  tools for XML on the Web by following links at the XML SIGs
                  web page. Of special interest, the 4Suite open source
                  package provides integrated tools for XML processing,
                  including open technologies such as DOM, SAX, RDF, XSLT,
                  XInclude, XPointer, XLink, and XPath.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Documentation</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>A variety of <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83488"></a>books have been published which specifically
                  address XML and text processing in Python. O’Reilly offers a
                  book dedicated to the subject of XML processing in Python,
                  <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Python &amp;
                  XML</em></span>, written by <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83498"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83501"></a>Christopher A. Jones and Fred L. Drake,
                  Jr.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>As usual, be sure to also see your favorite web search
            engine for more recent developments on this <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83507"></a>front.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="HTML Parsing in Action"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="html_parsing_in_action"></a>HTML Parsing in Action</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Although more limited <a id="par19.5.2"></a>in scope, Python’s <code class="epub__literal">html.parser</code> <a id="html19.5.2"></a><a id="htmlp19.5.2"></a>standard library module also supports HTML-specific
          parsing, useful in “screen scraping” roles to extract information
          from web pages. Among other things, this parser can be used to
          process Web replies fetched with the <code class="epub__literal">urllib.request</code> module <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83538"></a>we met in the Internet part of this book, to extract
          plain text from HTML email messages, and more.</p>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">html.parser</code> module has
          an API reminiscent of the XML SAX model of the prior section: it
          provides a parser which we subclass to intercept tags and their data
          during a parse. Unlike SAX, we don’t provide a handler class, but
          extend the parser class directly. Here’s a quick interactive example
          to demonstrate the basics (I copied all of this section’s code into
          file <em class="epub__filename">htmlparser.py</em> in the
          examples package if you wish to experiment with it yourself):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e83552"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from html.parser import HTMLParser</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class ParsePage(HTMLParser):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def handle_starttag(self, tag, attrs):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('Tag start:', tag, attrs)</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def handle_endtag(self, tag):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('tag end:  ', tag)</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def handle_data(self, data):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('data......', data.rstrip())</code></strong>
...</pre>
<p>Now, create a web page’s HTML text string; we hardcode one
          here, but it might also be loaded from a file, or fetched from a
          website with <code class="epub__literal">urllib.request</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e83584"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>page = """</code></strong>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>&lt;html&gt;</code></strong>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>&lt;h1&gt;Spam!&lt;/h1&gt;</code></strong>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>&lt;p&gt;Click this &lt;a href="http://www.python.org"&gt;python&lt;/a&gt; link&lt;/p&gt;</code></strong>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>&lt;/html&gt;"""</code></strong></pre>
<p>Finally, kick off the parse by feeding text to a parser
          instance—tags in the HTML text trigger class method callbacks, with
          tag names and attribute sequences passed in as arguments:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e83602"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>parser = ParsePage()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>parser.feed(page)</code></strong>
data......
Tag start: html []
data......
Tag start: h1 []
data...... Spam!
tag end:   h1
data......
Tag start: p []
data...... Click this
Tag start: a [('href', 'http://www.python.org')]
data...... python
tag end:   a
data......  link
tag end:   p
data......
tag end:   html</pre>
<p>As you can see, the parser’s methods receive callbacks for
          events during the parse. Much like SAX XML parsing, your parser
          class will need to keep track of its state in attributes as it goes
          if it wishes to do something more specific than print tag names,
          attributes, and content. Watching for specific tags’ content,
          though, might be as simple as checking names and setting state
          flags. Moreover, building object trees to reflect the page’s
          structure during the parse would be straightforward.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Handling HTML entity references (revisited)"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="handling_html_entity_references_open_par"></a>Handling HTML entity references (revisited)</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Here’s another HTML <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83617"></a>parsing example: in Chapter 15, we used a simple method
            exported by this module to unquote HTML escape sequences (a.k.a.
            entities) in strings embedded in an HTML reply page:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e83623"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import cgi, html.parser</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>s = cgi.escape("1&lt;2 &lt;b&gt;hello&lt;/b&gt;")</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>s</code></strong>
'1&lt;2 &lt;b&gt;hello&lt;/b&gt;'
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>html.parser.HTMLParser().unescape(s)</code></strong>
'1&lt;2 &lt;b&gt;hello&lt;/b&gt;'</pre>
<p>This works for undoing HTML escapes, but that’s all. When we
            saw this solution, I implied that there was a more general
            approach; now that you know about the method callback model of the
            HTML parser class, the more idiomatic way to handle entities
            during a parse should make sense—simply catch entity callbacks in
            a parser subclass, and translate as needed:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e83639"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class Parse(html.parser.HTMLParser):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def handle_data(self, data):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(data, end='')</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def handle_entityref(self, name):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>map = dict(lt='&lt;', gt='&gt;')</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(map[name], end='')</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>p = Parse()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>p.feed(s); print()</code></strong>
1&lt;2 &lt;b&gt;hello&lt;/b&gt;</pre>
<p>Better still, we can use Python’s related <code class="epub__literal">html.entities</code> module to avoid hardcoding
            entity-to-character mappings for HTML entities. This module
            defines many more entity names than the simple dictionary in the
            prior example and includes all those you’ll likely encounter when
            parsing HTML text in the wild:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e83671"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>s</code></strong>
'1&lt;2 &lt;b&gt;hello&lt;/b&gt;'
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from html.entities import entitydefs</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class Parse(html.parser.HTMLParser):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def handle_data(self, data):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(data, end='')</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def handle_entityref(self, name):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(entitydefs[name], end='')</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>P = Parse()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>P.feed(s); print()</code></strong>
1&lt;2 &lt;b&gt;hello&lt;/b&gt;</pre>
<p>Strictly speaking, the <code class="epub__literal">html.entities</code> module is able to map
            entity name to Unicode code point and vice versa; its table used
            here simply converts code point integers to characters with
            <code class="epub__literal">chr</code>. See this module’s
            documentation, as well as its source code in the Python standard
            library for more details.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Extracting plain text from HTML (revisited)"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="extracting_plain_text_from_html_open_par"></a>Extracting plain text from HTML (revisited)</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Now that you understand the basic principles of the HTML
            parser class in Python’s standard library, the plain text
            extraction module <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83714"></a>used by Chapter 14’s
            PyMailGUI (Example 14-8)
            will also probably make significantly more sense (this was an
            unavoidable forward reference which we’re finally able to
            close).</p>
<p>Rather than repeating its code here, I’ll simply refer you
            back to that example, as well as its self-test and test input
            files, for another example of HTML parsing in Python to study on
            your own. It’s essentially a minor elaboration on the examples
            here, which detects more types of tags in its parser callback
            methods.</p>
<p>Because of space concerns, we have to cut short our
            treatment of HTML parsing here; as usual, knowing that it exists
            is enough to get started. For more details on the API, consult the
            Python library <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83728"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83730"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83732"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83734"></a>manual. And for additional HTML support, check the
            Web for the 3.X status of third-party HTML parser packages like
            those mentioned in <span>Chapter 14.</span></p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
