<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Advanced Language Tools</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Advanced Language Tools"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="advanced_language_tools"></a>Advanced Language Tools</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>If you have a <a id="text19.6"></a>background in parsing theory, you may know that neither
        regular expressions nor string splitting is powerful enough to handle
        more complex language grammars. Roughly, <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83751"></a>regular expressions don’t have the stack “memory”
        required by true language grammars, and so cannot support arbitrary
        nesting of language constructs—nested <code class="epub__literal">if</code> statements in a programming language, for
        instance. In fact, this is why the XML and HTML parsers of the prior
        section are required at all: both are languages of potentially
        arbitrary nesting, which are beyond the scope of regular expressions
        in general.</p>
<p>From a theoretical perspective, regular expressions are really
        intended to handle just the first stage of parsing—separating text
        into components, otherwise <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83762"></a>known as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>lexical analysis</em></span>. Though
        patterns can often be used to extract data from text, true language
        parsing requires more. There are a number of ways to fill this gap
        with Python:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Python as language tool</span></dt><dd>
<p>In most applications, the Python language itself can
              replace custom languages and parsers—user-entered code can be
              passed to Python for evaluation with tools <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83778"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83783"></a>such as <code class="epub__literal">eval</code>
              and <code class="epub__literal">exec</code>. By augmenting the
              system with custom modules, user code in this scenario has
              access to both the full Python language and any <span>application</span>-<span>specific</span> extensions required. In a
              sense, such systems <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>embed</em></span> Python in Python.
              Since this is a common Python role, we’ll revisit this approach
              later in this chapter.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Custom language parsers: manual or toolkit</span></dt><dd>
<p>For some sophisticated language analysis tasks, though, a
              full-blown parser may still be required. Such parsers can always
              be written by hand, but since Python is built for integrating C
              tools, we can write integrations to traditional parser generator
              systems such as yacc and bison, tools that create parsers from
              language <span>grammar</span>
              definitions. Better yet, we could use an integration that
              already exists—interfaces to such common parser generators are
              freely available in the open source domain (run a web search for
              up-to-date details and links).</p>
<p>In addition, a number of Python-specific parsing systems
              are available on the Web. Among them:<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83816"></a> PLY is an implementation of lex and yacc parsing
              tools in and for Python; the<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83820"></a> kwParsing system is a parser generator written in
              Python; PyParsing <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83824"></a>is a pure-Python class library that makes it easy
              to build recursive-descent parsers quickly; and the<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83828"></a> SPARK toolkit is a lightweight system that
              employs the Earley algorithm<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83832"></a> to work around technical problems with LALR
              parser generation<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83837"></a> (if you don’t know what that means, you probably
              don’t need to care).</p>
<p>Of special interest to this chapter<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83843"></a>, YAPPS (Yet Another Python Parser System) is a
              parser generator written in Python. It uses supplied grammar
              rules to generate human-readable Python code that implements a
              recursive descent parser; that is, it’s Python code that
              generates Python code. The parsers generated by YAPPS look much
              like (and were inspired by) the handcoded custom expression
              parsers shown in the next section. YAPPS creates LL(1) parsers,
              which are not as powerful as LALR parsers but are sufficient for
              many language tasks. For more on YAPPS, see http://theory.stanford.edu/~amitp/Yapps or search
              the Web at large.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Natural language processing</span></dt><dd>
<p>Even more <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83855"></a>demanding language analysis tasks require
              techniques developed in artificial intelligence research, such
              as semantic analysis and machine learning. For instance, the
              Natural Language Toolkit, or NLTK, <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83859"></a>is an open source suite of Python libraries and
              programs for symbolic and statistical natural language
              processing. It applies linguistic techniques to textual data,
              and it can be used in the development of natural language
              recognition software and systems. For much more on this subject,
              be sure to also see the O’Reilly book <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Natural Language
              Processing with Python</em></span>, which explores, among
              other things, ways to use NLTK in Python. Not every system’s
              users will pose questions in a natural language, of course, but
              there are many applications which can make good use of such
              utility.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Though widely useful, parser generator systems and natural
        language analysis toolkits are too complex for us to cover in any sort
        of useful detail in this text. Consult http://python.org/ or search the Web for more
        information on language analysis tools available for use in Python
        programs. For the purposes of this chapter, let’s move on to explore a
        more basic and manual approach that illustrates concepts underlying
        the <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83871"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83873"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83876"></a>domain—<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>recursive descent
        parsing</em></span>.</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="lesson_2_colon_don_apostrophy_t_reinvent"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Lesson 2: Don’t Reinvent the Wheel (Usually)</p>
<p>Speaking of parser generators, to use some of these tools in
          Python programs, you’ll need an extension module that integrates
          them. The first step in such scenarios should always be to see
          whether the extension already exists in the public domain.
          Especially for common tools like these, chances are that someone
          else has already implemented an integration that you can use
          off-the-shelf instead of writing one from scratch.</p>
<p>Of course, not everyone can donate all their extension modules
          to the public domain, but there’s a growing library of available
          components that you can pick up for free and a community of experts
          to query. Visit the<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e83892"></a> PyPI site at http://www.python.org for links to Python software
          resources, or search the Web at large. With at least one million
          Python users out there as I write this book, much can be found in
          the prior-art <span>department</span>.</p>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Unless, of course, the wheel does not
          work</em></span>: We’ve also seen a handful of cases in this book
          where standard libraries were either not adequate or were broken
          altogether. For instance, the Python 3.1 <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package issues we explored in Chapter 13 required us to code workarounds
          of our own. In such cases, you may still ultimately need to code
          your own infrastructure support. The “not invented here” syndrome
          can still claim victory when software dependencies break
          down.</p>
<p>Still, you’re generally better off trying to use the standard
          support provided by Python in most cases, even if doing so requires
          manually coded fixes. In the <code class="epub__literal">email</code> package example, fixing its problems
          seems much easier than coding an email parser and generator from
          scratch—a task far too large to have even attempted in this book.
          Python’s <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>batteries included</em></span> approach to
          development can be amazingly productive—even when some of those
          batteries require a charge.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
