<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Extending Python in C: Overview</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Extending Python in C: Overview"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="extending_python_in_c_colon_overview"></a>Extending Python in C: Overview</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Because Python <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e85735"></a><a id="c20.2"></a>itself is coded in C today, compiled Python extensions
        can be coded in any language that is C compatible in terms of call
        stacks and linking. That includes C, but also C++ with appropriate
        “extern C” declarations (which are automatically provided in Python
        header files). Regardless of the implementation language, the compiled
        Python extensions language can take two forms:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>C modules</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Libraries of tools that look and feel like Python module
              files to their clients</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>C types</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Multiple instance objects that behave like standard
              built-in types and classes</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Generally, C extension modules are used to implement flat
        function libraries, and they wind up appearing as importable modules
        to Python code (hence their name). C extension types are used to code
        objects that generate multiple instances, carry per-<span>instance</span> state information, and may
        optionally support expression operators just like Python classes. C
        extension types can do anything that built-in types and Python-coded
        classes can: method calls, addition, indexing, slicing, and so
        on.</p>
<p>To make the interface work, both C modules and types must
        provide a layer of “glue” code that translates calls and data between
        the two languages. This layer registers <span>C-coded</span> operations with the Python
        interpreter as C function pointers. In all cases, the C layer is
        responsible for converting arguments passed from Python to C form and
        for converting results from C to Python form. Python scripts simply
        import C extensions and use them as though they were really coded in
        Python. Because C code does all the translation work, the interface is
        very seamless and simple in Python scripts.</p>
<p>C modules and types are also responsible for communicating
        errors back to Python, detecting errors raised by Python API calls,
        and managing garbage-collector reference counters on objects retained
        by the C layer indefinitely—Python objects held by your C code won’t
        be garbage-collected as long as you make sure their reference counts
        don’t fall to zero. Once coded, C modules and types may be linked to
        Python either statically (by rebuilding Python) or dynamically (when
        first imported). Thereafter, the C extension becomes another toolkit
        available for use in Python scripts.</p>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
