<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>A Simple C Extension Module</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="A Simple C Extension Module"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="a_simple_c_extension_module"></a>A Simple C Extension Module</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>At least that’s <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e85778"></a>the short story; C modules require C code, and C types
        require more of it than we can reasonably present in this chapter.
        Although this book can’t teach you C development skills if you don’t
        already have them, we need to turn to some code to make this domain
        more concrete. Because C modules are simpler, and because C types
        generally export a C module with an instance constructor function,
        let’s start off by exploring the basics of C module coding with a
        quick example.</p>
<p>As mentioned, when you add new or existing C components to
        Python in the traditional integration model, you need to code an
        interface (“glue”) logic layer in C that handles cross-language
        dispatching and data translation. The C source file in Example 20-1 shows how to code one by
        hand. It implements a simple C extension module named <code class="epub__literal">hello</code> for use in Python scripts, with a
        function named <code class="epub__literal">message</code> that simply
        returns its input string argument with extra text prepended. Python
        scripts will call this function as usual, but this one is coded in C,
        not in Python.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_integrate"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 20-1. PP4E\Integrate\Extend\Hello\hello.c</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">/********************************************************************
 * A simple C extension module for Python, called "hello"; compile
 * this into a ".so" on python path, import and call hello.message;
 ********************************************************************/

#include &lt;Python.h&gt;
#include &lt;string.h&gt;

/* module functions */
static PyObject *                                 /* returns object */
message(PyObject *self, PyObject *args)           /* self unused in modules */
{                                                 /* args from Python call */
    char *fromPython, result[1024];
    if (! PyArg_Parse(args, "(s)", &amp;fromPython))  /* convert Python -&gt; C */
        return NULL;                              /* null=raise exception */
    else {
        strcpy(result, "Hello, ");                /* build up C string */
        strcat(result, fromPython);               /* add passed Python string */
        return Py_BuildValue("s", result);        /* convert C -&gt; Python */
    }
}

/* registration table  */
static PyMethodDef hello_methods[] = {
    {"message",  message, METH_VARARGS, "func doc"},    /* name, &amp;func, fmt, doc */
    {NULL, NULL, 0, NULL}                               /* end of table marker */
};

/* module definition structure */
static struct PyModuleDef hellomodule = {
   PyModuleDef_HEAD_INIT,
   "hello",         /* name of module */
   "mod doc",       /* module documentation, may be NULL */
   −1,              /* size of per-interpreter module state, −1=in global vars */
   hello_methods    /* link to methods table */
};

/* module initializer */
PyMODINIT_FUNC
PyInit_hello()                         /* called on first import */
{                                      /* name matters if loaded dynamically */
    return PyModule_Create(&amp;hellomodule);
}</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>This C module has a 4-part standard structure described by its
        comments, which all C modules follow, and which has changed noticeably
        in Python 3.X. Ultimately, Python code will call this C file’s
        <code class="epub__literal">message</code> function, passing in a
        string object and getting back a new string object. First, though, it
        has to be somehow linked into the Python interpreter. To use this C
        file in a Python script, compile it into a dynamically loadable object
        file (e.g., <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>hello.so</em></span> on Linux,
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>hello.dll</em></span> under <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e85810"></a>Cygwin on Windows) with a makefile like the one listed
        in Example 20-2, and drop the
        resulting object file into a directory listed on your module import
        search path exactly as though it were a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>.py</em></span> or
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>.pyc</em></span> file.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_integrate-id1"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 20-2. PP4E\Integrate\Extend\Hello\makefile.hello</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">#############################################################
# Compile hello.c into a shareable object file on Cygwin,
# to be loaded dynamically when first imported by Python.
#############################################################

PYLIB = /usr/local/bin
PYINC = /usr/local/include/python3.1

hello.dll: hello.c
        gcc hello.c -g -I$(PYINC) -shared -L$(PYLIB) -lpython3.1 -o hello.dll

clean:
        rm -f hello.dll core</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>This is a Cygwin makefile that uses <code class="epub__literal">gcc</code> to <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e85835"></a>compile our C code on Windows; other platforms are
        analogous but will vary. As we learned in Chapter 5, Cygwin provides a Unix-like
        environment and libraries on Windows. To work along with the examples
        here, either install Cygwin on your Windows platform, or change the
        makefiles listed per your compiler and platform requirements. Be sure
        to include the path to Python’s install directory with <code class="epub__literal">-I</code> flags to access Python include (a.k.a.
        header) files, as well as the path to the Python binary library file
        with <code class="epub__literal">-L</code> flags, if needed; mine
        point to <span>Python 3.1’s</span> location
        on my laptop after building it from its source. Also note that you’ll
        need tabs for the indentation in makefile rules if a cut-and-paste
        from an ebook substituted or dropped spaces.</p>
<p>Now, to use the makefile in Example 20-2 to build the extension
        module in Example 20-1, simply
        type a standard <code class="epub__literal">make</code> command at
        your shell (the Cygwin shell is used here, and I add a line break for
        clarity):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e85860"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">.../PP4E/Integrate/Extend/Hello$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>make -f makefile.hello</code></strong>
gcc hello.c -g -I/usr/local/include/python3.1 -shared
               -L/usr/local/bin -lpython3.1 -o hello.dll</pre>
<p>This generates a shareable object file—a
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>.dll</em></span> under Cygwin on Windows. When compiled this
        way, Python automatically loads and links the C module when it is
        first imported by a Python script. At import time, the
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>.dll</em></span> binary library file will be located in a
        directory on the Python import search path, just like a
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>.py</em></span> file. Because Python always searches the
        current working directory on imports, this chapter’s examples will run
        from the directory you compile them in (.) without any file copies or
        moves. In larger systems, you will generally place compiled extensions
        in a directory listed in <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code>
        or <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>.pth</em></span> files instead, or use Python’s
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>distutils</em></span> to install them in the site-packages
        subdirectory of the standard library.</p>
<p>Finally, to call the C function from a Python program, simply
        import the module <code class="epub__literal">hello</code> and call
        its <code class="epub__literal">hello.message</code> function with a
        string; you’ll get back a normal Python string:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e85895"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">.../PP4E/Integrate/Extend/Hello$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import hello</code></strong>                                   # import a C module
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>hello.message('world')</code></strong>                         # call a C function
'Hello, world'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>hello.message('extending')</code></strong>
'Hello, extending'</pre>
<p>And that’s it—you’ve just called an integrated C module’s
        function from Python. The most important thing to notice here is that
        the C function looks exactly as if it were coded in Python. Python
        callers send and receive normal string objects from the call; the
        Python interpreter handles routing calls to the C function, and the C
        function itself handles Python/C data conversion chores.</p>
<p>In fact, there is little to distinguish <code class="epub__literal">hello</code> as a C extension module at all, apart
        from its filename. Python code imports the module and fetches its
        attributes as if it had been written in Python. C extension modules
        even respond to <code class="epub__literal">dir</code> calls as usual
        and have the standard module and filename attributes, though the
        filename doesn’t end in a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>.py</em></span> or
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>.pyc</em></span> this time around—the only obvious way you
        can tell it’s a C library:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e85925"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dir(hello)</code></strong>                                     # C module attributes
['__doc__', '__file__', '__name__', '__package__', 'message']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>hello.__name__, hello.__file__</code></strong>
('hello', 'hello.dll')

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>hello.message</code></strong>                                  # a C function object
&lt;built-in function message&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>hello</code></strong>                                          # a C module object
&lt;module 'hello' from 'hello.dll'&gt;

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>hello.__doc__</code></strong>                                  # docstrings in C code
'mod doc'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>hello.message.__doc__</code></strong>
'func doc'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>hello.message()</code></strong>                                # errors work too
TypeError: argument must be sequence of length 1, not 0</pre>
<p>Like any module in Python, you can also access the C extension
        from a script file. The Python file in Example 20-3, for instance, imports
        and uses the C extension module in Example 20-1.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_integrate-id2"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 20-3. PP4E\Integrate\Extend\Hello\hellouse.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"import and use a C extension library module"

import hello
print(hello.message('C'))
print(hello.message('module ' + hello.__file__))

for i in range(3):
    reply = hello.message(str(i))
    print(reply)</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Run this script as any other—when the script first imports the
        module <code class="epub__literal">hello</code>, Python automatically
        finds the C module’s <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>.dll</em></span> object file in a
        directory on the module search path and links it into the process
        dynamically. All of this script’s output represents strings returned
        from the C function in the file <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>hello.c</em></span>:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e85971"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">.../PP4E/Integrate/Extend/Hello$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python hellouse.py</code></strong>
Hello, C
Hello, module /cygdrive/c/.../PP4E/Integrate/Extend/Hello/hello.dll
Hello, 0
Hello, 1
Hello, 2</pre>
<p>See Python’s manuals for more details on the code in our C
        module, as well as tips for compilation and linkage. Of note, as an
        alternative to makefiles, also see the <em class="epub__filename">disthello.py</em> and <em class="epub__filename">disthello-alt.py</em> files in the examples
        package. Here’s a quick peek at the source code of the first of
        these:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e85984"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"># to build: python disthello.py build
# resulting dll shows up in build subdir

from distutils.core import setup, Extension
setup(ext_modules=[Extension('hello', ['hello.c'])])</pre>
<p>This is a Python script that specifies compilation of the C
        extension using tools in the<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e85988"></a> <code class="epub__literal">distutils</code> package—a
        standard part of Python that is used to build, install, and distribute
        Python extensions coded in Python or C. <code class="epub__literal">distutil</code>’s larger goal is automated and
        portable builds and installs for distributed packages, but it also
        knows how to build C extensions portably. Systems generally include a
        <em class="epub__filename">setup.py</em> which installs in
        <em class="epub__filename">site-</em><em class="epub__filename">packages</em> of the standard library.
        Regrettably, <code class="epub__literal">distutils</code> is also too
        large to have survived the cleaver applied to this chapter’s material;
        see its two manuals in Python’s manuals set for more <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e86010"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e86012"></a>details.</p>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
