<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>The SWIG Integration Code Generator</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="The SWIG Integration Code Generator"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="the_swig_integration_code_generator"></a>The SWIG Integration Code Generator</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As you can probably <a id="swig20.4"></a><a id="ex20.4"></a><a id="c20.4"></a>tell, manual coding of C extensions can become fairly
        involved (this is almost inevitable in C language work). I’ve
        introduced the basics in this chapter thus far so that you understand
        the underlying structure. But today, C extensions are usually better
        and more easily implemented with a tool that generates all the
        required integration glue code automatically. There are a variety of
        such tools for use in the Python world, including SIP, SWIG, and
        Boost.Python; we’ll explore alternatives at the end of this chapter.
        Among these, the SWIG system is widely used by Python <span>developers</span>.</p>
<p>SWIG—the Simplified Wrapper and Interface Generator, is an open
        source system created by Dave <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e86039"></a>Beazley and now developed by its community, much like
        Python. It uses C and C++ type declarations to generate complete C
        extension modules that integrate existing libraries for use in Python
        scripts. The generated C (and C++) extension modules are complete:
        they automatically handle data conversion, error protocols, <span>reference</span>-count management, and
        more.</p>
<p>That is, SWIG is a program that automatically generates all the
        glue code needed to plug C and C++ components into Python programs;
        simply run SWIG, compile its output, and your extension work is done.
        You still have to manage compilation and linking details, but the rest
        of the C extension task is largely performed by SWIG.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="A Simple SWIG Example"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="a_simple_swig_example"></a>A Simple SWIG Example</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To use SWIG, instead of writing the C code in the prior
          section, write the C function you want to use from Python without
          any Python integration logic at all, as though it is to be used from
          C alone. For instance, Example 20-4 is a recoding of
          Example 20-1 as a straight C
          function.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_integrate-id3"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 20-4. PP4E\Integrate\Extend\HelloLib\hellolib.c</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">/*********************************************************************
 * A simple C library file, with a single function, "message",
 * which is to be made available for use in Python programs.
 * There is nothing about Python here--this C function can be
 * called from a C program, as well as Python (with glue code).
 *********************************************************************/

#include &lt;string.h&gt;
#include &lt;hellolib.h&gt;

static char result[1024];                /* this isn't exported */

char *
message(char *label)                     /* this is exported */
{
    strcpy(result, "Hello, ");           /* build up C string */
    strcat(result, label);               /* add passed-in label */
    return result;                       /* return a temporary */
}</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>While you’re at it, define the usual C header file to declare
          the function externally, as shown in Example 20-5. This is probably
          overkill for such a small example, but it will prove a point.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_integrate-id4"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 20-5. PP4E\Integrate\Extend\HelloLib\hellolib.h</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">/********************************************************************
 * Define hellolib.c exports to the C namespace, not to Python
 * programs--the latter is defined by a method registration
 * table in a Python extension module's code, not by this .h;
 ********************************************************************/

extern char *message(char *label);</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Now, instead of all the Python extension glue code shown in
          the prior sections, simply write a SWIG type declarations input
          file, as in Example 20-6.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_integrate-id5"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 20-6. PP4E\Integrate\Extend\Swig\hellolib.i</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">/******************************************************
 * Swig module description file, for a C lib file.
 * Generate by saying "swig -python hellolib.i".
 ******************************************************/

%module hellowrap

%{
#include &lt;hellolib.h&gt;
%}

extern char *message(char*);    /* or: %include "../HelloLib/hellolib.h"   */
                                /* or: %include hellolib.h, and use -I arg */</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>This file spells out the C function’s type signature. In
          general, SWIG scans files containing ANSI C and C++ declarations.
          Its input file can take the form of an interface description file
          (usually with a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>.i</em></span> suffix) or a C/C++ header or
          source file. Interface files like this one are the most common input
          form; they can contain comments in C or <span>C++</span> format, type declarations just
          like standard header files, and SWIG directives that all start with
          <code class="epub__literal">%</code>. For example:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">%module</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Sets the module’s name as known to Python
                importers.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">%{...%}</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Encloses code added to generated wrapper file
                verbatim.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">extern</code>
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>statements</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Declare exports in normal ANSI C/C++ syntax.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">%include</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Makes SWIG scan another file (<code class="epub__literal">-I</code> flags give search paths).</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>In this example, SWIG could also be made to read the
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>hellolib.h</em></span> header file of Example 20-5 directly. But one of
          the advantages of writing special SWIG input files like
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>hellolib.i</em></span> is that you can pick and choose
          which functions are wrapped and exported to Python, and you may use
          directives to gain more control over the generation process.</p>
<p>SWIG is a utility program that you run from your build
          scripts; it is not a programming language, so there is not much more
          to show here. Simply add a step to your makefile that runs SWIG and
          compile its output to be linked with Python. Example 20-7 shows one way to do
          it on Cygwin.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_integrate-id6"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 20-7. PP4E\Integrate\Extend\Swig\makefile.hellolib-swig</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">##################################################################
# Use SWIG to integrate hellolib.c for use in Python programs on
# Cygwin.  The DLL must have a leading "_" in its name in current
# SWIG (&gt;1.3.13) because also makes a .py without "_" in its name.
##################################################################

PYLIB = /usr/local/bin
PYINC = /usr/local/include/python3.1
CLIB  = ../HelloLib
SWIG  = /cygdrive/c/temp/swigwin-2.0.0/swig

# the library plus its wrapper
_hellowrap.dll: hellolib_wrap.o $(CLIB)/hellolib.o
        gcc -shared hellolib_wrap.o $(CLIB)/hellolib.o \
                       -L$(PYLIB) -lpython3.1 -o $@

# generated wrapper module code
hellolib_wrap.o: hellolib_wrap.c $(CLIB)/hellolib.h
        gcc hellolib_wrap.c -g -I$(CLIB) -I$(PYINC) -c -o $@

hellolib_wrap.c: hellolib.i
        $(SWIG) -python -I$(CLIB) hellolib.i

# C library code (in another directory)
$(CLIB)/hellolib.o: $(CLIB)/hellolib.c $(CLIB)/hellolib.h
        gcc $(CLIB)/hellolib.c -g -I$(CLIB) -c -o $(CLIB)/hellolib.o

clean:
        rm -f *.dll *.o *.pyc core
force:
        rm -f *.dll *.o *.pyc core hellolib_wrap.c hellowrap.py</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>When run on the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>hellolib.i</em></span> input file by
          this makefile, SWIG generates two files:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>hellolib_wrap.c</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>The generated C extension module glue code file.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>hellowrap.py</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>A Python module that imports the generated C extension
                module.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>The former is named for the input file, and the latter per the
          <code class="epub__literal">%module</code> directive. Really, SWIG
          generates two modules today: it uses a
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>combination</em></span> of Python and C code to achieve the
          integration. Scripts ultimately import the generated Python module
          file, which internally imports the generated and compiled C module.
          You can wade through this generated code in the book’s examples
          distribution if you are so inclined, but it is prone to change over
          time and is too generalized to be simple.</p>
<p>To build the C module, the makefile runs SWIG to generate the
          glue code; compiles its output; compiles the original C library code
          if needed; and then combines the result with the compiled wrapper to
          produce <em class="epub__filename">_hellowrap.dll</em>, the DLL
          which <em class="epub__filename">hellowrap.py</em> will expect
          to find when imported by a Python script:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e86182"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">.../PP4E/Integrate/Extend/Swig$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dir</code></strong>
hellolib.i  makefile.hellolib-swig

.../PP4E/Integrate/Extend/Swig$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>make -f makefile.hellolib-swig</code></strong>
/cygdrive/c/temp/swigwin-2.0.0/swig -python -I../HelloLib hellolib.i
gcc hellolib_wrap.c -g -I../HelloLib -I/usr/local/include/python3.1
                 -c -o hellolib_wrap.o
gcc ../HelloLib/hellolib.c -g -I../HelloLib -c -o ../HelloLib/hellolib.o
gcc -shared hellolib_wrap.o ../HelloLib/hellolib.o \
                -L/usr/local/bin -lpython3.1 -o _hellowrap.dll

.../PP4E/Integrate/Extend/Swig$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dir</code></strong>
_hellowrap.dll  hellolib_wrap.c  hellowrap.py
hellolib.i      hellolib_wrap.o  makefile.hellolib-swig</pre>
<p>The result is a dynamically loaded C extension module file
          ready to be imported by Python code. Like all modules, <em class="epub__filename">_hellowrap.dll</em> must, along with <em class="epub__filename">hellowrap.py</em>, be placed in a directory on
          your Python module search path (the directory where you compile will
          suffice if you run Python there too). Notice that the <em class="epub__filename">.dll</em> file must be built with a leading
          underscore in its name; this is required because SWIG also created
          the <em class="epub__filename">.py</em> file of the same name
          without the underscore—if named the same, only one could be <span>imported</span>, and we need both (scripts
          import the <em class="epub__filename">.py</em> which in turn
          imports the <em class="epub__filename">.dll</em> <span>internally</span>).</p>
<p>As usual in C development, you may have to barter with the
          makefile to get it to work on your system. Once you’ve run the
          makefile, though, you are finished. The generated C module is used
          exactly like the manually coded version shown before, except that
          SWIG has taken care of the complicated parts automatically. Function
          calls in our Python code are routed through the generated SWIG
          layer, to the C code in Example 20-4, and back again;
          with SWIG, this all “just works”:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e86224"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">.../PP4E/Integrate/Extend/Swig$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
 &gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import hellowrap</code></strong>                       # import glue + library file
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>hellowrap.message('swig world')</code></strong>         # cwd always searched on imports
'Hello, swig world'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>hellowrap.__file__</code></strong>
'hellowrap.py'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dir(hellowrap)</code></strong>
['__builtins__', '__doc__', '__file__', '__name__', '_hellowrap', ... 'message']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>hellowrap._hellowrap</code></strong>
&lt;module '_hellowrap' from '_hellowrap.dll'&gt;</pre>
<p>In other words, once you learn how to use SWIG, you can often
          largely forget the details behind integration coding. In fact, SWIG
          is so adept at generating Python glue code that it’s usually easier
          and less error prone to code C extensions for Python as purely C- or
          C++-based libraries first, and later add them to Python by running
          their header files through SWIG, as demonstrated here.</p>
<p>We’ve mostly just scratched the SWIG surface here, and there’s
          more for you to learn about it from its Python-specific
          manual—available with SWIG at http://www.swig.org. Although its examples in this
          book are simple, SWIG is powerful enough to integrate libraries as
          complex as Windows extensions and commonly used graphics APIs such
          as OpenGL. We’ll apply it again later in this chapter, and explore
          its “shadow class” model for wrapping C++ classes too. For now,
          let’s move on to a more useful extension <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e86251"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e86253"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e86255"></a>example.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
