<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Wrapping C++ Classes with SWIG</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Wrapping C++ Classes with SWIG"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="wrapping_c_plus_plus_classes_with_swig"></a>Wrapping C++ Classes with SWIG</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>So far in this <a id="wrap20.6"></a><a id="c20.6"></a><a id="swig20.6"></a>chapter, we’ve been dealing with C extension
        modules—flat function libraries. To implement multiple-instance
        objects in C, you need to code a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>C extension
        type</em></span>, not a module. Like Python classes, C types generate
        multiple-instance objects and can overload (i.e., intercept and
        implement) Python expression operators and type operations. C types
        can also support subclassing just like Python classes, largely because
        the type/class distinction has largely evaporated in Python
        3.X.</p>
<p>You can see what C types look like in Python’s own source
        library tree; look for the <em class="epub__filename">Objects</em> directory there. The code required
        for a C type can be large—it defines instance creation, named methods,
        operator implementations, an iterator type, and so on, and links all
        these together with tables—but is largely boilerplate code that is
        structurally the same for most types.</p>
<p>You can code new object types in C manually like this, and in
        some applications, this approach may make sense. But you don’t
        necessarily have to—because SWIG knows how to generate glue code for
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>C++ classes</em></span>, you can instead
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>automatically</em></span> generate all the C extension and
        wrapper class code required to integrate such an object, simply by
        running SWIG over an appropriate class declaration. The wrapped C++
        class provides a multiple-instance datatype much like the C extension
        type, but it can be substantially simpler for you to code because SWIG
        handles language integration details.</p>
<p>Here’s how—given a C++ class declaration and special
        command-line settings, SWIG generates the following:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>A C++-coded Python extension module with accessor functions
            that interface with the C++ class’s methods and members</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>A Python-coded module with a wrapper class (called a
            “shadow” or “proxy” class in SWIG-speak) that interfaces with the
            C++ class accessor functions module</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>As we did earlier, to use SWIG in this domain, write and debug
        your class as though it would be used only from C++. Then, simply run
        SWIG in your makefile to scan the <span>C++</span> class declaration and compile and
        link its output. The end result is that by importing the shadow class
        in your Python scripts, you can utilize C++ classes as though they
        were really coded in Python. Not only can Python programs make and use
        instances of the C++ class, they can also customize it by subclassing
        the generated shadow class.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="A Simple C++ Extension Class"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="a_simple_c_plus_plus_extension_class"></a>A Simple C++ Extension Class</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To see how this <a id="ex20.6.1"></a>works, we need a C++ class. To illustrate, let’s code
          one to be used in Python scripts. You have to understand C++ to make
          sense of this section, of course, and SWIG supports advanced C++
          tools (including templates and overloaded functions and operators),
          but I’ll keep this example simple for illustration. The following
          C++ files define a <code class="epub__literal">Number</code> class
          with four methods (<code class="epub__literal">add</code>, <code class="epub__literal">sub</code>, <code class="epub__literal">square</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">display</code>), a data member (<code class="epub__literal">data</code>), and a constructor and destructor.
          Example 20-14 shows the
          header file.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_integrate-id13"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 20-14. PP4E\Integrate\Extend\Swig\Shadow\number.h</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Number
{
public:
    Number(int start);             // constructor
    ~Number();                     // destructor
    void add(int value);           // update data member
    void sub(int value);
    int  square();                 // return a value
    void display();                // print data member
    int data;
};</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Example 20-15 is the
          C++ class’s implementation file; most methods print a message when
          called to trace class operations. Notice how this uses <code class="epub__literal">printf</code> instead of C++’s <code class="epub__literal">cout</code>; this once resolved an output overlap
          issue when mixing C++ <code class="epub__literal">cout</code> with
          Python 2.X standard output streams on Cygwin. It’s probably a moot
          point today—because Python 3.X’s output system and buffering might
          mix with C++’s arbitrarily, C++ should generally flush the output
          stream (with <code class="epub__literal">fflush(stdout)</code> or
          <code class="epub__literal">cout&lt;&lt;flush</code>) if it prints
          intermixed text that doesn’t end in a newline. Obscure but true when
          disparate language systems are mixed.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_integrate-id14"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 20-15. PP4E\Integrate\Extend\Swig\Shadow\number.cxx</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">///////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////
// implement a C++ class, to be used from Python code or not;
// caveat: cout and print usually both work, but I ran into a
// c++/py output overlap issue on Cygwin that prompted printf
///////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////

#include "number.h"
#include "stdio.h"                       // versus #include "iostream.h"

Number::Number(int start) {
    data = start;                        // python print goes to stdout
    printf("Number: %d\n", data);        // or: cout &lt;&lt; "Number: " &lt;&lt; data &lt;&lt; endl;
}

Number::~Number() {
    printf("~Number: %d\n", data);
}

void Number::add(int value) {
    data += value;
    printf("add %d\n", value);
}

void Number::sub(int value) {
    data -= value;
    printf("sub %d\n", value);
}

int Number::square() {
    return data * data;       // if print label, fflush(stdout) or cout &lt;&lt; flush
}

void Number::display() {
    printf("Number=%d\n", data);
}</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>So that you can compare languages, the following is how this
          class is used in a C++ program. Example 20-16 makes a <code class="epub__literal">Number</code> object, calls its methods, and
          fetches and sets its data attribute directly (C++ distinguishes
          between “members” and “methods,” while they’re usually both called
          “attributes” in Python).</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_integrate-id15"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 20-16. PP4E\Integrate\Extend\Swig\Shadow\main.cxx</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">#include "iostream.h"
#include "number.h"

main()
{
    Number *num;
    int res, val;

    num = new Number(1);            // make a C++ class instance
    num-&gt;add(4);                    // call its methods
    num-&gt;display();
    num-&gt;sub(2);
    num-&gt;display();

    res = num-&gt;square();                     // method return value
    cout &lt;&lt; "square: " &lt;&lt; res &lt;&lt; endl;

    num-&gt;data = 99;                          // set C++ data member
    val = num-&gt;data;                         // fetch C++ data member
    cout &lt;&lt; "data:   " &lt;&lt; val &lt;&lt; endl;
    cout &lt;&lt; "data+1: " &lt;&lt; val + 1 &lt;&lt; endl;

    num-&gt;display();
    cout &lt;&lt; num &lt;&lt; endl;            // print raw instance ptr
    delete num;                     // run destructor
}</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>You can use the <code class="epub__literal">g++</code>
          command-line C++ compiler program to compile and run this code
          on<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e86804"></a> Cygwin (it’s the same on Linux). If you don’t use a
          similar system, you’ll have to extrapolate; there are far too many
          C++ compiler differences to list here. Type the compile command
          directly or use the <code class="epub__literal">cxxtest</code>
          target in this example directory’s makefile shown ahead, and then
          run the purely C++ program <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e86813"></a>created:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e86816"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">.../PP4E/Integrate/Extend/Swig/Shadow$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>make -f makefile.number-swig cxxtest</code></strong>
g++ main.cxx number.cxx -Wno-deprecated

.../PP4E/Integrate/Extend/Swig/Shadow$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>./a.exe</code></strong>
Number: 1
add 4
Number=5
sub 2
Number=3
square: 9
data:   99
data+1: 100
Number=99
0xe502c0
~Number: 99</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Wrapping the C++ Class with SWIG"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="wrapping_the_c_plus_plus_class_with_swig"></a>Wrapping the C++ Class with SWIG</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>But enough C++: let’s get back to Python. To use the C++
          <code class="epub__literal">Number</code> class of the preceding
          section in Python scripts, you need to code or generate a glue logic
          layer between the two languages, just as in prior C extension
          examples. To generate that layer automatically, write a SWIG input
          file like the one shown in Example 20-17.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_integrate-id16"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 20-17. PP4E\Integrate\Extend\Swig\Shadow\number.i</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">/********************************************************
 * Swig module description file for wrapping a C++ class.
 * Generate by running "swig -c++ -python number.i".
 * The C++ module is generated in file number_wrap.cxx;
 * module 'number' refers to the number.py shadow class.
 ********************************************************/

%module number

%{
#include "number.h"
%}

%include number.h</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>This interface file simply directs SWIG to read the C++
          class’s type signature information from the %-included
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>number.h</em></span> header file. SWIG uses the class
          declaration to generate two different Python modules again:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">number_wrap.cxx</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>A C++ extension module with class accessor
                functions</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">number.py</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>A Python shadow class module that wraps accessor
                functions</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>The former must be compiled into a binary library. The latter
          imports and uses the former’s compiled form and is the file that
          Python scripts ultimately import. As for simple functions, SWIG
          achieves the integration with a combination of Python and <span>C++</span> code.</p>
<p>After running SWIG, the Cygwin makefile shown in Example 20-18 combines the
          generated <em class="epub__filename">number_wrap.cxx</em> C++
          wrapper code module with the C++ class implementation file to create
          a <em class="epub__filename">_number.dll</em>—a dynamically
          loaded extension module that must be in a directory on your Python
          module search path when imported from a Python script, along with
          the generated <em class="epub__filename">number.py</em> (all
          files are in the same current working directory here).</p>
<p>As before, the compiled C extension module must be named with
          a leading underscore in SWIG today: <em class="epub__filename">_number.dll</em>, following a Python
          convention, rather than the other formats used by earlier releases.
          The shadow class module <em class="epub__filename">number.py</em> internally imports <em class="epub__filename">_number.dll</em>. Be sure to use a <code class="epub__literal">-c++</code> command-line argument for SWIG; an
          older <code class="epub__literal">-shadow</code> argument is no longer needed
          to create the wrapper class in addition to the lower-level
          functional interface module, as this is enabled by default.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_integrate-id17"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 20-18. PP4E\Integrate\Extend\Swig\Shadow\makefile.number-swig</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">###########################################################################
# Use SWIG to integrate the number.h C++ class for use in Python programs.
# Update: name "_number.dll" matters, because shadow class imports _number.
# Update: the "-shadow" swig command line arg is deprecated (on by default).
# Update: swig no longer creates a .doc file to rm here (ancient history).
###########################################################################

PYLIB = /usr/local/bin
PYINC = /usr/local/include/python3.1
SWIG  = /cygdrive/c/temp/swigwin-2.0.0/swig

all: _number.dll number.py

# wrapper + real class
_number.dll: number_wrap.o number.o
        g++ -shared number_wrap.o number.o -L$(PYLIB) -lpython3.1 -o $@

# generated class wrapper module(s)
number_wrap.o: number_wrap.cxx number.h
        g++ number_wrap.cxx -c -g -I$(PYINC)

number_wrap.cxx: number.i
        $(SWIG) -c++ -python number.i

number.py: number.i
        $(SWIG) -c++ -python number.i

# wrapped C++ class code
number.o: number.cxx number.h
        g++ number.cxx -c -g -Wno-deprecated

# non Python test
cxxtest:
        g++ main.cxx number.cxx -Wno-deprecated

clean:
        rm -f *.pyc *.o *.dll core a.exe
force:
        rm -f *.pyc *.o *.dll core a.exe number_wrap.cxx number.py</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>As usual, run this makefile to generate and compile the
          necessary glue code into an extension module that can be imported by
          Python programs:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e86901"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">.../PP4E/Integrate/Extend/Swig/Shadow$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>make -f makefile.number-swig</code></strong>
/cygdrive/c/temp/swigwin-2.0.0/swig -c++ -python number.i
g++ number_wrap.cxx -c -g -I/usr/local/include/python3.1
g++ number.cxx -c -g -Wno-deprecated
g++ -shared number_wrap.o number.o -L/usr/local/bin -lpython3.1 -o _number.dll

.../PP4E/Integrate/Extend/Swig/Shadow$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>ls</code></strong>
_number.dll  makefile.number-swig  number.i   number_wrap.cxx
a.exe        number.cxx            number.o   number_wrap.o
main.cxx     number.h              number.py</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Using the C++ Class in Python"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="using_the_c_plus_plus_class_in_python"></a>Using the C++ Class in Python</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Once the glue code is generated and compiled, Python scripts
          can access the C++ class as though it were coded in Python. In fact,
          it is—the imported <em class="epub__filename">number.py</em>
          shadow class which runs on top of the extension module is generated
          Python code. Example 20-19
          repeats the <em class="epub__filename">main.cxx</em> file’s
          class tests. Here, though, the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>C++</em></span> class is
          being utilized from the Python programming language—an arguably
          amazing feat, but the code is remarkably natural on the Python side
          of the fence.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_integrate-id18"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 20-19. PP4E\Integrate\Extend\Swig\Shadow\main.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
use C++ class in Python code (c++ module + py shadow class)
this script runs the same tests as the main.cxx C++ file
"""

from number import Number         # imports .py C++ shadow class module

num = Number(1)                   # make a C++ class object in Python
num.add(4)                        # call its methods from Python
num.display()                     # num saves the C++ 'this' pointer
num.sub(2)
num.display()

res = num.square()                # converted C++ int return value
print('square: ', res)

num.data = 99                     # set C++ data member, generated __setattr__
val = num.data                    # get C++ data member, generated __getattr__
print('data:   ', val)            # returns a normal Python integer object
print('data+1: ', val + 1)

num.display()
print(num)                        # runs repr in shadow/proxy class
del num                           # runs C++ destructor automatically</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Because the C++ class and its wrappers are automatically
          loaded when imported by the <em class="epub__filename">number.py</em> shadow class module, you run
          this script like any other:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e86935"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">.../PP4E/Integrate/Extend/Swig/Shadow$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python main.py</code></strong>
Number: 1
add 4
Number=5
sub 2
Number=3
square:  9
data:    99
data+1:  100
Number=99
&lt;number.Number; proxy of &lt;Swig Object of type 'Number *' at 0x7ff4bb48&gt; &gt;
~Number: 99</pre>
<p>Much of this output is coming from the C++ class’s methods and
          is largely the same as the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>main.cxx</em></span> results
          shown in Example 20-16
          (less the instance output format—it’s a Python shadow class instance
          now).</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Using the low-level extension module"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="using_the_low-level_extension_module"></a>Using the low-level extension module</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>SWIG implements integrations as a C++/Python combination,
            but you can always use the generated accessor functions module if
            you want to, as in Example 20-20. This version
            runs the C++ extension module directly without the shadow class,
            to demonstrate how the shadow class maps calls back to C++.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_integrate-id19"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 20-20. PP4E\Integrate\Extend\Swig\Shadow\main_low.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
run similar tests to main.cxx and main.py
but use low-level C accessor function interface
"""

from _number import *           # c++ extension module wrapper

num = new_Number(1)
Number_add(num, 4)              # pass C++ 'this' pointer explicitly
Number_display(num)             # use accessor functions in the C module
Number_sub(num, 2)
Number_display(num)
print(Number_square(num))

Number_data_set(num, 99)
print(Number_data_get(num))
Number_display(num)
print(num)
delete_Number(num)</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>This script generates essentially the same output as
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>main.py</em></span>, but it’s been slightly simplified,
            and the C++ class instance is something lower level than the proxy
            class here:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e86964"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">.../PP4E/Integrate/Extend/Swig/Shadow$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python main_low.py</code></strong>
Number: 1
add 4
Number=5
sub 2
Number=3
9
99
Number=99
_6025aa00_p_Number
~Number: 99</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Subclassing the C++ class in Python"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="subclassing_the_c_plus_plus_class_in_pyt"></a>Subclassing the C++ class in Python</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Using the <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e86974"></a>extension module directly works, but there is no
            obvious advantage to moving from the shadow class to functions
            here. By using the shadow class, you get both an object-based
            interface to C++ and a customizable Python object. For instance,
            the Python module shown in Example 20-21 extends the C++
            class, adding an extra <code class="epub__literal">print</code>
            call statement to the C++ <code class="epub__literal">add</code>
            method and defining a brand-new <code class="epub__literal">mul</code> method. Because the shadow class is
            pure Python, this works naturally.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_integrate-id20"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 20-21. PP4E\Integrate\Extend\Swig\Shadow\main_subclass.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"sublass C++ class in Python (generated shadow class)"

from number import Number                # import shadow class

class MyNumber(Number):
    def add(self, other):                # extend method
        print('in Python add...')
        Number.add(self, other)
    def mul(self, other):                # add new method
        print('in Python mul...')
        self.data = self.data * other

num = MyNumber(1)               # same tests as main.cxx, main.py
num.add(4)                      # using Python subclass of shadow class
num.display()                   # add() is specialized in Python
num.sub(2)
num.display()
print(num.square())

num.data = 99
print(num.data)
num.display()

num.mul(2)                      # mul() is implemented in Python
num.display()
print(num)                      # repr from shadow superclass
del num</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Now we get extra messages out of <code class="epub__literal">add</code> calls, and <code class="epub__literal">mul</code> changes the C++ class’s data member
            automatically when it assigns <code class="epub__literal">self.data</code>—the Python code extends the
            C++ code:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e87007"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">.../PP4E/Integrate/Extend/Swig/Shadow$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python main_subclass.py</code></strong>
Number: 1
in Python add...
add 4
Number=5
sub 2
Number=3
9
99
Number=99
in Python mul...
Number=198
&lt;__main__.MyNumber; proxy of &lt;Swig Object of type 'Number *' at 0x7ff4baa0&gt; &gt;
~Number: 198</pre>
<p>In other words, SWIG makes it easy to use C++ class
            libraries as base classes in your Python scripts. Among other
            things, this allows us to leverage existing C++ class libraries in
            Python scripts and optimize by coding parts of class hierarchies
            in C++ when needed. We can do much the same with C extension types
            today since types are classes (and vice versa), but wrapping C++
            classes with SWIG is often much simpler.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Exploring the wrappers interactively"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="exploring_the_wrappers_interactively"></a>Exploring the wrappers interactively</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As usual, you can import the C++ class interactively to
            experiment with it some <span>more—</span>besides demonstrating a few
            more salient properties here, this technique allows us to test
            wrapped C++ classes at the Python interactive prompt:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e87022"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">.../PP4E/Integrate/Extend/Swig/Shadow$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import _number</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>_number.__file__</code></strong>              # the C++ class plus generated glue module
'_number.dll'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import number</code></strong>                 # the generated Python shadow class module
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>number.__file__</code></strong>
'number.py'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = number.Number(2)</code></strong>          # make a C++ class instance in Python
Number: 2
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y = number.Number(4)</code></strong>          # make another C++ object
Number: 4
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x, y</code></strong>
(&lt;number.Number; proxy of &lt;Swig Object of type 'Number *' at 0x7ff4bcf8&gt; &gt;,
 &lt;number.Number; proxy of &lt;Swig Object of type 'Number *' at 0x7ff4b998&gt; &gt;)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.display()</code></strong>                   # call C++ method (like C++ x-&gt;display())
Number=2
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.add(y.data)</code></strong>                 # fetch C++ data member, call C++ method
add 4
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.display()</code></strong>
Number=6

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y.data = x.data + y.data + 32</code></strong>         # set C++ data member
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y.display()</code></strong>                           # y records the C++ this pointer
Number=42

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y.square()</code></strong>                            # method with return value
1764
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>t = y.square()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>t, type(t)</code></strong>                            # type is class in Python 3.X
(1764, &lt;class 'int'&gt;)</pre>
<p>Naturally, this example uses a small C++ class to underscore
            the basics, but even at this level, the seamlessness of the
            Python-to-C++ integration we get from SWIG is astonishing. Python
            code uses C++ members and methods as though they are Python code.
            Moreover, this integration transparency still applies once we step
            up to more realistic C++ class libraries.</p>
<p>So what’s the catch? Nothing much, really, but if you start
            using SWIG in earnest, the biggest downside may be that SWIG
            cannot handle every feature of C++ today. If your classes use some
            esoteric C++ tools (and there are many), you may need to handcode
            simplified class type declarations for SWIG instead of running
            SWIG over the original class header files. SWIG development is
            ongoing, so you should consult the SWIG manuals and website for
            more details on these and other topics.</p>
<p>In return for any such trade-offs, though, SWIG can
            completely obviate the need to code glue layers to access C and
            C++ libraries from Python scripts. If you have ever coded such
            layers by hand in the past, you already know that this can be a
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>very</em></span> big win.</p>
<p>If you do go the handcoded route, though, consult Python’s
            standard extension manuals for more details on both API calls used
            in this chapter, as well as additional extension tools we don’t
            have space to cover in this text. C extensions can run the gamut
            from short SWIG input files to code that is staunchly wedded to
            the internals of the Python interpreter; as a rule of thumb, the
            former survives the ravages of time much better than the
            <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87085"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87087"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87089"></a>latter.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
