<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Other Extending Tools</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Other Extending Tools"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="other_extending_tools"></a>Other Extending Tools</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In closing the <a id="ex20.7"></a>extending topic, I should mention that there are
        alternatives to SWIG, many of which have a loyal user base of their
        own. This section briefly introduces some of the more popular tools in
        this domain today; as usual, search the Web for more details on these
        and others. Like SWIG, all of the following began life as third-party
        tools installed separately, though Python 2.5 and later incorporates
        the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>ctypes</em></span> extension as a standard library
        module.</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>SIP</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Just as a sip <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87114"></a>is a smaller swig in the drinking world, so too is
              the SIP system a lighter alternative to SWIG in the Python world
              (in fact, it was named on purpose for the joke). According to
              its web page, SIP makes it easy to create Python bindings for C
              and C++ libraries. Originally developed to create the PyQt
              Python bindings for the Qt toolkit, it can be used to create
              bindings for any C or C++ library. SIP includes a code generator
              and a Python support module.</p>
<p>Much like SWIG, the code generator processes a set of
              specification files and generates C or C++ code, which is
              compiled to create the bindings extension module. The SIP Python
              module provides support functions to the automatically generated
              code. Unlike SWIG, SIP is specifically designed just for
              bringing together Python and C/C++. SWIG also generates wrappers
              for many other scripting languages, and so is viewed by some as
              a more complex project.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>ctypes</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>The ctypes system <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87127"></a>is a foreign function interface (FFI)<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87133"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87136"></a> module for Python. It allows Python scripts to
              access and call compiled functions in a binary library file
              directly and dynamically, by writing dispatch code in Python
              itself, instead of generating or writing the integration C
              wrapper code we’ve studied in this chapter. That is, library
              glue code is written in pure Python instead of C. The main
              advantage is that you don’t need C code or a C build system to
              access C functions from a Python script. The disadvantage is
              potential speed loss on dispatch, though this depends upon the
              alternative measured.</p>
<p>According to its documentation, ctypes allows Python to
              call functions exposed from DLLs and shared libraries and has
              facilities to create, access, and manipulate complex C datatypes
              in Python. It is also possible to implement C callback functions
              in pure Python, and an experimental ctypes code generator
              feature allows automatic creation of library wrappers from C
              header files. ctypes works on Windows, Mac OS X, Linux, Solaris,
              FreeBSD, and OpenBSD. It may run on additional systems, provided
              that the <code class="epub__literal">libffi</code> package it
              employs is supported. For Windows, ctypes contains a <em class="epub__filename">ctypes.com</em> package, which allows
              Python code to call and implement custom COM interfaces. See
              Python’s library manuals for more on the ctypes functionality
              included in the standard library.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Boost.Python</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>The Boost.Python system<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87155"></a> is a C++ library that enables seamless
              interoperability between C++ and the Python programming language
              through an IDL-like model. Using it, developers generally write
              a small amount of C++ wrapper code to create a shared library
              for use in Python scripts. Boost.Python handles references,
              callbacks, type mappings, and cleanup tasks. Because it is
              designed to wrap C++ interfaces nonintrusively, C++ code need
              not be changed to be wrapped. Like other tools, this makes the
              system useful for wrapping existing libraries, as well as
              <span>developing</span> new extensions
              from scratch.</p>
<p>Writing interface code for large libraries can be more
              involved than the code generation approaches of SWIG and SIP,
              but it’s easier than manually wrapping libraries and may afford
              greater control than a fully automated wrapping tool. In
              addition, the Py++ and older Pyste systems provide Boost.Python
              code generators, in which users specify classes and functions to
              be exported using a simple interface file. Both use GCC-XML to
              parse all the headers and extract the necessary information to
              generate C++ code.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Cython (and Pyrex)</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Cython, a <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87171"></a>successor to the <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87175"></a>Pyrex system, is a language specifically for
              writing <span>Python</span> extension
              modules. It lets you write files that mix Python code and C
              datatypes as you wish, and compiles the combination into a C
              extension for Python. In principle, developers need not deal
              with the Python/C API at all, because Cython takes care of
              things such as error-checking and reference counts
              automatically.</p>
<p>Technically, Cython is a distinct language that is
              Python-<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>like</em></span>, with extensions for mixing in
              C datatype declarations and C function calls. However, almost
              any Python code is also valid Cython code. The Cython compiler
              converts Python code into C code, which makes calls to the
              Python/C API. In this aspect, Cython is similar to the now much
              older Python2C conversion project. By combining Python and C
              code, Cython offers a different approach than the generation or
              coding of integration code in other systems.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>CXX, weave, and more</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>The <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>CXX</em></span> system <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87197"></a>is roughly a C++ version of Python’s usual C API,
              which handles reference counters, exception translation, and
              much of the type checking and cleanup inherent in C++
              extensions. As such, CXX lets you focus on the <span>application</span>-specific parts of your
              code. CXX also exposes parts of the C++ Standard Template
              Library containers to be compatible with Python
              sequences.</p>
<p>The <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>weave</em></span> package <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87209"></a>allows the inclusion of C/C++ in Python code. It’s
              part of the <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87213"></a>SciPy package (http://www.scipy.org) but is also available as a
              standalone system. A page at http://www.python.org chronicles additional
              projects in this domain, which we don’t have space to mention
              here.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Other languages: Java, C#, FORTRAN, Objective-C,
            and others</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Although we’re focused on C and C++ in this chapter,
              you’ll also find direct support for mixing Python with other
              programming languages in the open source world. This includes
              languages that are compiled to binary form like C, as well as
              some that are not.</p>
<p>For example, by providing full byte code compilers,
              <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87230"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87235"></a>the Jython and IronPython systems allow code
              written in Python to interface with Java and C#/.NET components
              in a largely seamless fashion. Alternatively, the JPype and
              Python for .NET projects support Java and C#/.NET integration
              for normal CPython (the standard C-based implementation of
              Python) code, without requiring alternative byte code
              compilers.</p>
<p>Moreover, the f2py and PyFort systems <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87243"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87246"></a>provide integration with FORTRAN <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87250"></a>code, and other tools provide access to languages
              such as Delphi and Objective-C. Among these, the PyObjC project
              aims to provide a bridge between Python and Objective-C; this
              supports writing Cocoa GUI applications on <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87254"></a>Mac OS X in Python.</p>
<p>Search the Web for details on other language integration
              tools. Also look for a wiki page currently at http://www.python.org that lists a large number
              of other integratable languages, including Prolog, Lisp, TCL,
              and more.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Because many of these systems support
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>bidirectional</em></span> control flows—both extending and
        embedding—we’ll return to this category at the end of this chapter in
        the context of integration at large. First, though, we need to shift
        our perspective 180 degrees to explore the other mode of Python/C
        <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87269"></a>integration: <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>embedding</em></span>.</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="mixing_python_and_c_plus_plus"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Mixing Python and C++</p>
<p>Python’s standard <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87280"></a>implementation is currently coded in C, so all the
          normal rules about mixing C programs with C++ programs apply to the
          Python interpreter. In fact, there is nothing special about Python
          in this context, but here are a few pointers.</p>
<p>When <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>embedding</em></span> Python in a C++ program,
          there are no special rules to follow. Simply link in the Python
          library and call its functions from C++. Python’s header files
          automatically wrap themselves in <code class="epub__literal">extern "C"
          {...}</code> declarations to suppress C++ name mangling. Hence,
          the Python library looks like any other C component to C++; there is
          no need to recompile Python itself with a C++ compiler.</p>
<p>When <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>extending</em></span> Python with C++
          components, Python header files are still C++ friendly, so Python
          API calls in C++ extensions work like any other C++-to-C call. But
          be sure to wrap the parts of your extension code made visible to
          Python with <code class="epub__literal">extern "C"</code>
          declarations so that they can be called by Python’s C code. For
          example, to wrap a C++ class, SWIG generates a C++ extension module
          that declares its initialization function this way.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
