<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Embedding Python in C: Overview</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Embedding Python in C: Overview"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="embedding_python_in_c_colon_overview"></a>Embedding Python in C: Overview</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>So far in this chapter, we’ve explored only half of the Python/C
        integration picture: calling C services from Python. This mode is
        perhaps the most commonly deployed; it allows programmers to speed up
        operations by moving them to C and to utilize external libraries by
        wrapping them in C extension modules and types. But the inverse can be
        just as useful: calling Python from C. By delegating selected
        components of an application to embedded Python code, we can open them
        up to onsite changes without having to ship or rebuild a system’s full
        code base.</p>
<p>This section tells this other half of the Python/C integration
        tale. It introduces the Python C interfaces that make it possible for
        programs written in C-compatible <span>languages</span> to run Python program code. In
        this mode, Python acts as an embedded control language (what some call
        a “macro” language). Although embedding is mostly <span>presented</span> in isolation here, keep in
        mind that Python’s integration support is best viewed as a whole. A
        system’s structure usually determines an appropriate integration
        approach: C extensions, embedded code calls, or both. To wrap up, this
        chapter concludes by discussing a handful of alternative integration
        platforms such as Jython and IronPython, which offer broad integration
        possibilities.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The C Embedding API"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_c_embedding_api"></a>The C Embedding API</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The first thing <a id="em20.8"></a><a id="c20.8"></a>you should know about Python’s embedded-call API is
          that it is less structured than the extension interfaces. Embedding
          Python in C may require a bit more creativity on your part than
          extending: you must pick tools from a general collection of calls to
          implement the Python integration instead of coding to a boilerplate
          structure. The upside of this loose structure is that programs can
          combine embedding calls and strategies to build up arbitrary
          integration architectures.</p>
<p>The lack of a more rigid model for embedding is largely the
          result of a less clear-cut goal. When <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>extending</em></span>
          Python, there is a distinct separation for Python and C
          responsibilities and a clear structure for the integration. C
          modules and types are required to fit the Python module/type model
          by conforming to standard extension structures. This makes the
          integration seamless for Python clients: C extensions look like
          Python objects and handle most of the work. It also supports
          automation tools such as SWIG.</p>
<p>But when Python is <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>embedded</em></span>, the
          structure isn’t as obvious; because C is the enclosing level, there
          is no clear way to know what model the embedded Python code should
          fit. C may want to run objects fetched from modules, strings fetched
          from files or parsed out of documents, and so on. Instead of
          deciding what C can and cannot do, Python provides a collection of
          general embedding interface tools, which you use and structure
          according to your embedding goals.</p>
<p>Most of these tools correspond to tools available to Python
          programs. Table 20-1 lists some of the
          more common API calls used for embedding, as well as their Python
          equivalents. In general, if you can figure out how to accomplish
          your embedding goals in pure Python code, you can probably
          <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87343"></a>find C API tools that achieve the same <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87349"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87352"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87355"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87358"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87361"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87364"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87368"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87371"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87374"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87377"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87380"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87383"></a>results.</p><div class="epub__table"><a id="common_api_functions"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Table 20-1. Common API functions</p><div class="epub__table-contents"><table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; " summary="Common API functions"><colgroup><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>C API
                  call</p></th><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Python
                  equivalent</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">PyImport_ImportModule</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">import module</code>, <code class="epub__literal">__import__</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">PyImport_GetModuleDict</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">sys.modules</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">PyModule_GetDict</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">module</code>.<code class="epub__literal">__dict__</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">PyDict_GetItemString</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">dict[key]</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">PyDict_SetItemString</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">dict[key]=val</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">PyDict_New</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">dict = {}</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">PyObject_GetAttrString</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">getattr(obj, attr)</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">PyObject_SetAttrString</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">setattr(obj, attr,
                  val)</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">PyObject_CallObject</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">funcobj(*argstuple)</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">PyEval_CallObject</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">funcobj(*argstuple)</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">PyRun_String</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">eval(exprstr)</code>, <code class="epub__literal">exec(stmtstr)</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">PyRun_File</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">exec(open(filename().read())</code></p></td></tr></tbody></table>
</div>
</div>
<p>Because <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87522"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87527"></a>embedding relies on API call selection, becoming
          familiar with the Python C API is fundamental to the embedding task.
          This chapter presents a handful of representative embedding examples
          and discusses common API calls, but it does not provide a
          comprehensive list of all tools in the API. Once you’ve mastered the
          examples here, you’ll probably need to consult Python’s integration
          manuals for more details on available calls in this domain. As
          mentioned previously, Python offers two standard manuals for C/C++
          integration programmers: <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Extending and
          Embedding</em></span>, an integration tutorial; and
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Python/C API</em></span>, the Python runtime library
          reference.</p>
<p>You can find the most recent releases of these <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87541"></a>manuals at http://www.python.org, and possibly installed on your
          computer alongside Python itself. Beyond this chapter, these manuals
          are likely to be your best resource for up-to-date and complete
          Python API tool information.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="What Is Embedded Code?"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="what_is_embedded_code_question"></a>What Is Embedded Code?</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Before we jump into details, let’s get a handle on some of the
          core ideas in the embedding domain. When this book speaks of
          “embedded” Python code, it simply means any Python program structure
          that can be executed from C with a direct in-process function call
          interface. Generally speaking, embedded Python code can take a
          variety of forms:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Code strings</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>C programs can <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87562"></a>represent Python programs as character strings
                and run them as either expressions or statements (much like
                using the <code class="epub__literal">eval</code> and <code class="epub__literal">exec</code> built-in functions in
                Python).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Callable objects</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>C programs can <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87581"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87586"></a>load or reference Python callable objects such
                as functions, methods, and classes, and call them with
                argument list objects (much like <code class="epub__literal">func(*pargs, *kargs)</code> Python
                syntax).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Code files</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>C programs <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87602"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87605"></a>can execute entire Python program files by
                importing modules and running script files through the API or
                general system calls (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">popen</code>).</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>The Python binary library is usually what is physically
          embedded and linked in the C program. The actual Python code run
          from C can come from a wide variety of sources:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Code strings might be loaded from files, obtained from an
              interactive user at a console or GUI, fetched from persistent
              databases and shelves, parsed out of HTML or XML files, read
              over sockets, built or hardcoded in a C program, passed to C
              extension functions from Python registration code, and so
              on.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Callable objects might be fetched from Python modules,
              returned from other <span>Python</span>
              API calls, passed to C extension functions from Python
              registration code, and so on.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Code files simply exist as files, modules, and executable
              scripts in the filesystem.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Registration is a technique commonly used in callback
          scenarios that we will explore in more detail later in this chapter.
          But especially for strings of code, there are as many possible
          sources as there are for C character strings in general. For
          example, C programs can construct arbitrary Python code dynamically
          by building and running strings.</p>
<p>Finally, once you have some Python code to run, you need a way
          to communicate with it: the Python code may need to use inputs
          passed in from the C layer and may want to generate outputs to
          communicate results back to C. In fact, embedding generally becomes
          interesting only when the embedded code has access to the enclosing
          C layer. Usually, the form of the embedded code suggests its
          communication media:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Code strings that are Python expressions return an
              expression result as their output. In addition, both inputs and
              outputs can take the form of global variables in the namespace
              in which a code string is run; C may set variables to serve as
              input, run Python code, and fetch variables as the code’s
              result. Inputs and outputs can also be passed with exported C
              extension <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>function calls</em></span>—Python code may
              use C module or type interfaces that we met earlier in this
              chapter to get or set variables in the enclosing C layer.
              Communications schemes are often combined; for instance, C may
              preassign global names to objects that export both state and
              interface functions for use in the embedded Python
              code.<sup>[72]</sup></p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Callable objects may accept inputs as function arguments
              and produce results as function return values. Passed-in mutable
              arguments (e.g., lists, dictionaries, class instances) can be
              used as both input and output for the embedded code—changes made
              in Python are retained in objects held by C. Objects can also
              make use of the global variable and C extension functions
              interface techniques described for strings to communicate with
              C.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Code files can communicate with most of the same
              techniques as code strings; when run as separate programs, files
              can also employ Inter-Process Communication (IPC)
              techniques.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Naturally, all embedded code forms can also communicate with C
          using general system-level tools: files, sockets, pipes, and so on.
          These techniques are generally less direct and slower, though. Here,
          we are still interested in in-process function <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87651"></a>call integration.</p>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[72] </sup>For a concrete example, consider the discussion of
                  server-side templating languages in the Internet part of
                  this book. Such systems usually fetch Python code embedded
                  in an HTML web page file, assign global variables in a
                  namespace to objects that give access to the web browser’s
                  environment, and run the Python code in the namespace where
                  the objects were assigned. I worked on a project where we
                  did something similar, but Python code was embedded in XML
                  documents, and objects that were preassigned to globals in
                  the code’s namespace represented widgets in a GUI. At the
                  bottom, it was simply Python code embedded in and run by C
                  code.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
