<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Basic Embedding Techniques</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Basic Embedding Techniques"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="basic_embedding_techniques"></a>Basic Embedding Techniques</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As you can <a id="em20.9"></a>probably tell from the preceding overview, there is much
        flexibility in the embedding domain. To illustrate common embedding
        techniques in action, this section presents a handful of short C
        programs that run Python code in one form or another. Most of these
        examples will make use of the simple Python module file shown in Example 20-22.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_integrate-id21"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 20-22. PP4E\Integrate\Embed\Basics\usermod.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
#############################################################
C code runs Python code in this module in embedded mode.
Such a file can be changed without changing the C layer.
This is just standard Python code (C handles conversions).
Must be on the Python module search path if imported by C.
C can also run code in standard library modules like string.
#############################################################
"""

message = 'The meaning of life...'

def transform(input):
    input = input.replace('life', 'Python')
    return input.upper()</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>If you know any Python at all, you probably know that this file
        defines a string and a function; the function returns whatever it is
        passed with string substitution and uppercase conversions applied.
        It’s easy to use from Python:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e87674"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">.../PP4E/Integrate/Embed/Basics$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import usermod</code></strong>                                      # import a module
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>usermod.message</code></strong>                                     # fetch a string
'The meaning of life...'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>usermod.transform(usermod.message)</code></strong>                  # call a function
'THE MEANING OF PYTHON...'</pre>
<p>With a little Python API wizardry, it’s not much more difficult
        to use this module the same way in C.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Running Simple Code Strings"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="running_simple_code_strings"></a>Running Simple Code Strings</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Perhaps the simplest <a id="code20.9.1"></a>way to run Python code from C is by calling the
          <code class="epub__literal">PyRun_SimpleString</code> API function.
          With it, C programs can execute Python programs represented as C
          character string arrays. This call is also very limited: all code
          runs in the same namespace (the module <code class="epub__literal">__main__</code>), the code strings must be Python
          statements (not expressions), and there is no direct way to
          communicate inputs or outputs with the Python code run.</p>
<p>Still, it’s a simple place to start. Moreover, when augmented
          with an imported C extension module that the embedded Python code
          can use to communicate with the enclosing C layer, this technique
          can satisfy many embedding goals. To demonstrate the basics, the C
          program in Example 20-23
          runs Python code to accomplish the same results as the Python
          interactive session listed in the prior section.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_integrate-id22"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 20-23. PP4E\Integrate\Embed\Basics\embed-simple.c</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">/*******************************************************
 * simple code strings: C acts like the interactive
 * prompt, code runs in __main__, no output sent to C;
 *******************************************************/

#include &lt;Python.h&gt;    /* standard API def */

main() {
    printf("embed-simple\n");
    Py_Initialize();
    PyRun_SimpleString("import usermod");                /* load .py file */
    PyRun_SimpleString("print(usermod.message)");        /* on Python path */
    PyRun_SimpleString("x = usermod.message");           /* compile and run */
    PyRun_SimpleString("print(usermod.transform(x))");
    Py_Finalize();
}</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>The first thing you should notice here is that when Python is
          embedded, C programs always call <code class="epub__literal">Py_Initialize</code> to initialize linked-in
          Python libraries before using any other API functions and normally
          call <code class="epub__literal">Py_Finalize</code> to shut the
          interpreter down.</p>
<p>The rest of this code is straightforward—C submits hardcoded
          strings to Python that are roughly what we typed interactively. In
          fact, we could concatenate all the Python code strings here with
          <code class="epub__literal">\n</code> characters between, and submit
          it once as a single string. Internally, <code class="epub__literal">PyRun_SimpleString</code> invokes <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87732"></a>the Python compiler and interpreter to run the strings
          sent from C; as usual, the Python compiler is always available in
          systems that contain Python.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Compiling and running"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h3 class="epub__title"><a id="compiling_and_running"></a>Compiling and running</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To build a standalone executable from this C source file,
            you need to link its compiled form with the Python library file.
            In this chapter, “library” usually means the binary library file
            that is generated when Python is compiled, not the Python source
            code standard library.</p>
<p>Today, everything in Python that you need in C is compiled
            into a single Python library file when the interpreter is built
            (e.g., <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>libpython3.1.dll</em></span> on Cygwin). The
            program’s <code class="epub__literal">main</code> function comes
            from your C code, and depending on your platform and the
            extensions installed in your Python, you may also need to link any
            external libraries referenced by the Python library.</p>
<p>Assuming no extra extension libraries are needed, Example 20-24 is a minimal
            makefile for building the C program in Example 20-23 under <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87755"></a>Cygwin on Windows. Again, makefile details vary per
            platform, but see Python manuals for hints. This makefile uses the
            Python include-files path to find <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Python.h</em></span> in
            the compile step and adds the Python library file to the final
            link step to make API calls available to the C program.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_integrate-id23"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 20-24. PP4E\Integrate\Embed\Basics\makefile.1</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting"># a Cygwin makefile that builds a C executable that embeds
# Python, assuming no external module libs must be linked in;
# uses Python header files, links in the Python lib file;
# both may be in other dirs (e.g., /usr) in your install;

PYLIB = /usr/local/bin
PYINC = /usr/local/include/python3.1

embed-simple: embed-simple.o
        gcc embed-simple.o -L$(PYLIB) -lpython3.1 -g -o embed-simple

embed-simple.o: embed-simple.c
        gcc embed-simple.c -c -g -I$(PYINC)</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>To build a program with this file, launch <code class="epub__literal">make</code> on it as usual (as before, make
            sure indentation in rules is tabs in your copy of this
            makefile):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e87774"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">.../PP4E/Integrate/Embed/Basics$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>make -f makefile.1</code></strong>
gcc embed-simple.c -c -g -I/usr/local/include/python3.1
gcc embed-simple.o -L/usr/local/bin -lpython3.1 -g -o embed-simple</pre>
<p>Things may not be quite this simple in practice, though, at
            least not without some coaxing. The makefile in Example 20-25 is the one I
            actually used to build all of this section’s C programs on
            Cygwin.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_integrate-id24"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 20-25. PP4E\Integrate\Embed\Basics\makefile.basics</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting"># cygwin makefile to build all 5 basic embedding examples at once

PYLIB = /usr/local/bin
PYINC = /usr/local/include/python3.1

BASICS = embed-simple.exe   \
         embed-string.exe   \
         embed-object.exe   \
         embed-dict.exe     \
         embed-bytecode.exe

all:    $(BASICS)

embed%.exe: embed%.o
        gcc embed$*.o -L$(PYLIB) -lpython3.1 -g -o $@

embed%.o: embed%.c
        gcc embed$*.c -c -g -I$(PYINC)

clean:
        rm -f *.o *.pyc $(BASICS) core</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>On some platforms, you may need to also link in other
            libraries because the Python library file used may have been built
            with external dependencies enabled and required. In fact, you may
            have to link in arbitrarily many more externals for your Python
            library, and frankly, chasing down all the linker dependencies can
            be tedious. Required libraries may vary per platform and Python
            install, so there isn’t a lot of advice I can offer to make this
            process simple (this is C, after all). The standard C development
            techniques will apply.</p>
<p>One hint here: if you’re going to do much embedding work and
            you run into external dependency issues, on some platforms you
            might want to build Python on your machine from its source with
            all unnecessary extensions <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>disabled</em></span> in its
            build configuration files (see the Python source package for
            details). This produces a Python library with minimal external
            requirements, which may links more easily.</p>
<p>Once you’ve gotten the makefile to work, run it to build all
            of this section’s C programs at once with Python libraries linked
            in:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e87798"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">.../PP4E/Integrate/Embed/Basics$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>make -f makefile.basics clean</code></strong>
rm -f *.o *.pyc embed-simple.exe embed-string.exe embed-object.exe
embed-dict.exe embed-bytecode.exe core

.../PP4E/Integrate/Embed/Basics$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>make -f makefile.basics</code></strong>
gcc embed-simple.c -c -g -I/usr/local/include/python3.1
gcc embed-simple.o -L/usr/local/bin -lpython3.1 -g -o embed-simple.exe
gcc embed-string.c -c -g -I/usr/local/include/python3.1
gcc embed-string.o -L/usr/local/bin -lpython3.1 -g -o embed-string.exe
gcc embed-object.c -c -g -I/usr/local/include/python3.1
gcc embed-object.o -L/usr/local/bin -lpython3.1 -g -o embed-object.exe
gcc embed-dict.c -c -g -I/usr/local/include/python3.1
gcc embed-dict.o -L/usr/local/bin -lpython3.1 -g -o embed-dict.exe
gcc embed-bytecode.c -c -g -I/usr/local/include/python3.1
gcc embed-bytecode.o -L/usr/local/bin -lpython3.1 -g -o embed-bytecode.exe
rm embed-dict.o embed-object.o embed-simple.o embed-bytecode.o embed-string.o</pre>
<p>After building with either makefile, you can run the
            resulting C program as usual:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e87808"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">.../PP4E/Integrate/Embed/Basics$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>./embed-simple</code></strong>
embed-simple
The meaning of life...
THE MEANING OF PYTHON...</pre>
<p>Most of this output is produced by Python <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statements sent from C to the
            linked-in Python library. It’s as if C has become an interactive
            Python programmer.</p>
<p>Naturally, strings of Python code run by C probably would
            not be hardcoded in a C program file like this. They might instead
            be loaded from a text file or GUI, extracted from HTML or XML
            files, fetched from a persistent database or socket, and so on.
            With such external sources, the Python code strings that are run
            from C could be changed arbitrarily without having to recompile
            the C program that runs them. They may even be changed on site,
            and by end users of a system. To make the most of code strings,
            though, we need to move on to more flexible API <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87820"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87825"></a>tools.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note"><h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Pragmatic details</em></span>: Under Python 3.1
              and Cygwin on Windows, I had to first set my <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code> to include the current
              directory in order to run the embedding examples, with the shell
              command <code class="epub__literal">export PYTHONPATH=.</code>.
              I also had to use the shell command <code class="epub__literal">./embed-simple</code> to execute the program
              because <code class="epub__literal">.</code> was also not on my
              system <code class="epub__literal">path</code> setting and isn’t
              initially when you install Cygwin.</p>
<p>Your mileage may vary; but if you have trouble, try
              running the embedded Python commands <code class="epub__literal">import sys</code> and <code class="epub__literal">print sys.path</code> from C to see what
              Python’s path looks like, and take a look at the
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Python/C API</em></span> manual for more on path
              configuration for embedded applications.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Running Code Strings with Results and Namespaces"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="running_code_strings_with_results_and_na"></a>Running Code Strings with Results and Namespaces</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Example 20-26 uses
          the <a id="name20.9.2"></a><a id="code20.9.2"></a>following API calls to run code strings that return
          expression results back to C:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">Py_Initialize</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Initializes <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87884"></a>linked-in Python libraries as before</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">PyImport_ImportModule</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Imports a Python <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87895"></a>module and returns a pointer to it</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">PyModule_GetDict</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Fetches a <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87906"></a>module’s attribute dictionary object</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">PyRun_String</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Runs a <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87917"></a>string of code in explicit namespaces</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">PyObject_SetAttrString</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Assigns <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87928"></a>an object attribute by <code class="epub__literal">namestring</code></p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">PyArg_Parse</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Converts a <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87941"></a>Python return value object to C form</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>The import calls are used to fetch the namespace of the
          <code class="epub__literal">usermod</code> module listed in Example 20-22 so that code
          strings can be run there directly and will have access to names
          defined in that module without qualifications. <code class="epub__literal">Py_Import_ImportModule</code> is like a Python
          <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statement, but the
          imported module object is returned to C; it is not assigned to a
          Python variable name. As a result, it’s probably more similar to the
          Python <code class="epub__literal">__import__</code> built-in
          function.</p>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">PyRun_String</code> call is
          the one that actually runs code here, though. It takes a code
          string, a parser mode flag, and dictionary object pointers to serve
          as the global and local namespaces for running the code string. The
          mode flag can be <code class="epub__literal">Py_eval_input</code> to
          run an expression or <code class="epub__literal">Py_file_input</code> to run a statement; when
          running an expression, the result of evaluating the expression is
          returned from this call (it comes back as a <code class="epub__literal">PyObject*</code> object pointer). The two
          namespace dictionary pointer arguments allow you to distinguish
          global and local scopes, but they are typically passed the same
          dictionary such that code runs in a single namespace.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_integrate-id25"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 20-26. PP4E\Integrate\Embed\Basics\embed-string.c</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">/* code-strings with results and namespaces */

#include &lt;Python.h&gt;

main() {
    char *cstr;
    PyObject *pstr, *pmod, *pdict;
    printf("embed-string\n");
    Py_Initialize();

    /* get usermod.message */
    pmod  = PyImport_ImportModule("usermod");
    pdict = PyModule_GetDict(pmod);
    pstr  = PyRun_String("message", Py_eval_input, pdict, pdict);

    /* convert to C */
    PyArg_Parse(pstr, "s", &amp;cstr);
    printf("%s\n", cstr);

    /* assign usermod.X */
    PyObject_SetAttrString(pmod, "X", pstr);

    /* print usermod.transform(X) */
    (void) PyRun_String("print(transform(X))", Py_file_input, pdict, pdict);
    Py_DECREF(pmod);
    Py_DECREF(pstr);
    Py_Finalize();
}</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>When compiled and run, this file produces the same result as
          its predecessor:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e87982"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">.../PP4E/Integrate/Embed/Basics$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>./embed-string</code></strong>
embed-string
The meaning of life...
THE MEANING OF PYTHON...</pre>
<p>However, very different work goes into producing this output.
          This time, C fetches, converts, and prints the value of the Python
          module’s <code class="epub__literal">message</code> attribute
          directly by running a string expression and assigning a global
          variable (<code class="epub__literal">X</code>) within the module’s
          namespace to serve as input for a Python <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statement string.</p>
<p>Because the string execution call in this version lets you
          specify namespaces, you can better partition the embedded code your
          system runs—each grouping can have a distinct namespace to avoid
          overwriting other groups’ variables. And because this call returns a
          result, you can better communicate with the embedded code;
          expression results are outputs, and assignments to globals in the
          namespace in which code runs can serve as inputs.</p>
<p>Before we move on, I need to explain three coding issues here.
          First, this program also decrements the reference count on objects
          passed to it from Python, using the <code class="epub__literal">Py_DECREF</code> call described in Python’s C API
          manuals. These calls are not strictly needed here (the objects’
          space is reclaimed when the programs exits anyhow), but they
          demonstrate how embedding interfaces must manage reference counts
          when Python passes object ownership to C. If this was a function
          called from a larger system, for instance, you would generally want
          to decrement the count to allow Python to reclaim the <span>objects</span>.</p>
<p>Second, in a realistic program, you should generally test the
          return values of <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>all</em></span> the API calls in this
          program immediately to detect errors (e.g., import failure). Error
          tests are omitted in this section’s example to keep the code simple,
          but they should be included in your programs to make them more
          robust.</p>
<p>And third, there is a related function that lets you run
          entire <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>files</em></span> of code, but it is not
          demonstrated in this chapter: <code class="epub__literal">PyRun_File</code>. Because you can always load a
          file’s text and run it as a single code string with <code class="epub__literal">PyRun_String</code>, the <code class="epub__literal">PyRun_File</code> call’s main advantage is to
          avoid allocating memory for file content. In such multiline code
          strings, the <code class="epub__literal">\n</code> character
          terminates lines and indentation group blocks as <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88032"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88034"></a>usual.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Calling Python Objects"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="calling_python_objects"></a>Calling Python Objects</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The last two <a id="call20.9.3"></a><a id="obj20.9.3"></a>sections dealt with running strings of code, but it’s
          easy for C programs to deal in terms of Python objects, too. Example 20-27 accomplishes the
          same task as Examples 20-23 and 20-26, but it uses other API tools to
          interact with objects in the Python module directly:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">PyImport_ImportModule</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Imports <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88067"></a>the module from C as before</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">PyObject_GetAttrString</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Fetches <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88078"></a>an object’s attribute value by name</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">PyEval_CallObject</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Calls a <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88089"></a>Python function (or class or method)</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">PyArg_Parse</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Converts <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88101"></a>Python objects to C values</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">Py_BuildValue</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Converts <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88112"></a>C values to Python objects</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>We used both of the data conversion functions earlier in this
          chapter in extension modules. The <code class="epub__literal">PyEval_CallObject</code> call in this version of
          the example is the key point here: it runs the imported function
          with a tuple of arguments, much like the Python <code class="epub__literal">func(*args)</code> call syntax. The Python
          function’s return value comes back to C as a <code class="epub__literal">PyObject*</code>, a generic Python object
          pointer.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_integrate-id26"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 20-27. PP4E\Integrate\Embed\Basics\embed-object.c</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">/* fetch and call objects in modules */

#include &lt;Python.h&gt;

main() {
    char *cstr;
    PyObject *pstr, *pmod, *pfunc, *pargs;
    printf("embed-object\n");
    Py_Initialize();

    /* get usermod.message */
    pmod = PyImport_ImportModule("usermod");
    pstr = PyObject_GetAttrString(pmod, "message");

    /* convert string to C */
    PyArg_Parse(pstr, "s", &amp;cstr);
    printf("%s\n", cstr);
    Py_DECREF(pstr);

    /* call usermod.transform(usermod.message) */
    pfunc = PyObject_GetAttrString(pmod, "transform");
    pargs = Py_BuildValue("(s)", cstr);
    pstr  = PyEval_CallObject(pfunc, pargs);
    PyArg_Parse(pstr, "s", &amp;cstr);
    printf("%s\n", cstr);

    /* free owned objects */
    Py_DECREF(pmod);
    Py_DECREF(pstr);
    Py_DECREF(pfunc);        /* not really needed in main() */
    Py_DECREF(pargs);        /* since all memory goes away  */
    Py_Finalize();
}</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>When compiled and run, the result is the same again:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e88134"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">.../PP4E/Integrate/Embed/Basics$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>./embed-object</code></strong>
embed-object
The meaning of life...
THE MEANING OF PYTHON...</pre>
<p>However, this output is generated by C this time—first, by
          fetching the Python module’s <code class="epub__literal">message</code> attribute value, and then by
          fetching and calling the module’s <code class="epub__literal">transform</code> function object directly and
          printing its return value that is sent back to C. Input to the
          <code class="epub__literal">transform</code> function is a function
          argument here, not a preset global variable. Notice that <code class="epub__literal">message</code> is fetched as a module attribute
          this time, instead of by running its name as a code string; as this
          shows, there is often more than one way to accomplish the same goals
          with different API calls.</p>
<p>Running functions in modules like this is a simple way to
          structure embedding; code in the module file can be changed
          arbitrarily without having to recompile the C program that runs it.
          It also provides a direct communication model: inputs and outputs to
          Python code can take the form of function arguments and return
          <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88155"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88157"></a>values.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Running Strings in Dictionaries"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="running_strings_in_dictionaries"></a>Running Strings in Dictionaries</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>When we <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88165"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88170"></a>used <code class="epub__literal">PyRun_String</code>
          earlier to run expressions with results, code was executed in the
          namespace of an existing Python module. Sometimes, though, it’s more
          convenient to <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88179"></a>create a brand-new namespace for running code strings
          that is independent of any existing module files. The C file in
          Example 20-28 shows how;
          the new namespace is created as a new Python dictionary object, and
          a handful of new API calls are employed in the process:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">PyDict_New</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Makes a <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88195"></a>new empty dictionary object</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">PyDict_SetItemString</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Assigns <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88206"></a>to a dictionary’s key</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">PyDict_GetItemString</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Fetches <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88217"></a>(indexes) a dictionary value by key</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">PyRun_String</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Runs a <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88228"></a>code string in namespaces, as before</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">PyEval_GetBuiltins</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Gets the <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88239"></a>built-in scope’s module</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>The main trick here is the new dictionary. Inputs and outputs
          for the embedded code strings are mapped to this dictionary by
          passing it as the code’s namespace dictionaries in the <code class="epub__literal">PyRun_String</code> call. The net effect is that
          the C program in Example 20-28 works just like
          this Python code:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e88250"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"> &gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>d = {}</code></strong>
 &gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>d['Y'] = 2</code></strong>
 &gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>exec('X = 99', d, d)</code></strong>
 &gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>exec('X = X + Y', d, d)</code></strong>
 &gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(d['X'])</code></strong>
 101</pre>
<p>But here, each Python operation is replaced by a C API
          call.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_integrate-id27"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 20-28. PP4E\Integrate\Embed\Basics\embed-dict.c</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">/* make a new dictionary for code string namespace */

#include &lt;Python.h&gt;

main() {
    int cval;
    PyObject *pdict, *pval;
    printf("embed-dict\n");
    Py_Initialize();

    /* make a new namespace */
    pdict = PyDict_New();
    PyDict_SetItemString(pdict, "__builtins__", PyEval_GetBuiltins());

    PyDict_SetItemString(pdict, "Y", PyLong_FromLong(2));  /* dict['Y'] = 2   */
    PyRun_String("X = 99",  Py_file_input, pdict, pdict);  /* run statements  */
    PyRun_String("X = X+Y", Py_file_input, pdict, pdict);  /* same X and Y    */
    pval = PyDict_GetItemString(pdict, "X");               /* fetch dict['X'] */

    PyArg_Parse(pval, "i", &amp;cval);                         /* convert to C */
    printf("%d\n", cval);                                  /* result=101 */
    Py_DECREF(pdict);
    Py_Finalize();
}</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>When compiled and run, this C program creates this sort of
          output, tailored for this use case:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e88276"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">.../PP4E/Integrate/Embed/Basics$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>./embed-dict</code></strong>
embed-dict
101</pre>
<p>The output is different this time: it reflects the value of
          the Python variable <code class="epub__literal">X</code> assigned by
          the embedded Python code strings and fetched by C. In general, C can
          fetch module attributes either by calling<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88286"></a> <code class="epub__literal">PyObject_GetAttrString</code> with the module or
          by using <code class="epub__literal">PyDict_GetItemString</code> to
          index the module’s attribute dictionary (expression strings work,
          too, but they are less direct). Here, there is no module at all, so
          dictionary indexing is used to access the code’s namespace in
          C.</p>
<p>Besides allowing you to partition code string namespaces
          independent of any Python module files on the underlying system,
          this scheme provides a natural communication mechanism. Values that
          are stored in the new dictionary before code is run serve as inputs,
          and names assigned by the embedded code can later be fetched out of
          the dictionary to serve as code outputs. For instance, the variable
          <code class="epub__literal">Y</code> in the second string run refers
          to a name set to 2 by C; <code class="epub__literal">X</code> is
          assigned by the Python code and fetched later by C code as the
          printed result.</p>
<p>There is one subtlety in this
          embedding mode: dictionaries that serve as namespaces for running
          code are generally required to have a <code class="epub__literal">__builtins__</code> link to the built-in scope
          searched last for name lookups, set with code of this form:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e88311"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">PyDict_SetItemString(pdict, "__builtins__", PyEval_GetBuiltins());</pre>
<p>This is esoteric, and it is normally handled by Python
          internally for modules and built-ins like the <code class="epub__literal">exec</code> function. For raw dictionaries used
          as namespaces, though, we are responsible for setting the link
          manually if we expect to reference built-in names. This still holds
          true in Python 3.X.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Precompiling Strings to Bytecode"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="precompiling_strings_to_bytecode"></a>Precompiling Strings to Bytecode</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Finally, when you <a id="code20.9.5"></a>call Python function objects from C, you are actually
          running the already compiled bytecode <a id="byte20.9.5"></a>associated with the object (e.g., a function body),
          normally created when the enclosing module is imported. When running
          strings, Python must compile the string before running it. Because
          compilation is a slow process, this can be a substantial overhead if
          you run a code string more than once. Instead, precompile the string
          to a bytecode object to be run later, using the API calls
          illustrated in <span>Example 20-29:</span></p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">Py_CompileString</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Compiles <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88346"></a>a string of code and returns a bytecode
                object</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">PyEval_EvalCode</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Runs a <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88357"></a>compiled bytecode object</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>The first of these takes the mode flag that is normally passed
          to <code class="epub__literal">PyRun_String</code>, as well as a
          second string argument that is used only in error messages. The
          second takes two namespace dictionaries. These two API calls are
          used in Example 20-29 to
          compile and execute three strings of Python code in turn.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_integrate-id28"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 20-29. PP4E\Integrate\Embed\Basics\embed-bytecode.c</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">/* precompile code strings to bytecode objects */

#include &lt;Python.h&gt;
#include &lt;compile.h&gt;
#include &lt;eval.h&gt;

main() {
    int i;
    char *cval;
    PyObject *pcode1, *pcode2, *pcode3, *presult, *pdict;
    char *codestr1, *codestr2, *codestr3;
    printf("embed-bytecode\n");

    Py_Initialize();
    codestr1 = "import usermod\nprint(usermod.message)";    /* statements */
    codestr2 = "usermod.transform(usermod.message)";        /* expression */
    codestr3 = "print('%d:%d' % (X, X ** 2), end=' ')";     /* use input X */

    /* make new namespace dictionary */
    pdict = PyDict_New();
    if (pdict == NULL) return −1;
    PyDict_SetItemString(pdict, "__builtins__", PyEval_GetBuiltins());

    /* precompile strings of code to bytecode objects */
    pcode1 = Py_CompileString(codestr1, "&lt;embed&gt;", Py_file_input);
    pcode2 = Py_CompileString(codestr2, "&lt;embed&gt;", Py_eval_input);
    pcode3 = Py_CompileString(codestr3, "&lt;embed&gt;", Py_file_input);

    /* run compiled bytecode in namespace dict */
    if (pcode1 &amp;&amp; pcode2 &amp;&amp; pcode3) {
        (void)    PyEval_EvalCode((PyCodeObject *)pcode1, pdict, pdict);
        presult = PyEval_EvalCode((PyCodeObject *)pcode2, pdict, pdict);
        PyArg_Parse(presult, "s", &amp;cval);
        printf("%s\n", cval);
        Py_DECREF(presult);

        /* rerun code object repeatedly */
        for (i = 0; i &lt;= 10; i++) {
            PyDict_SetItemString(pdict, "X", PyLong_FromLong(i));
            (void) PyEval_EvalCode((PyCodeObject *)pcode3, pdict, pdict);
        }
        printf("\n");
    }
    /* free referenced objects */
    Py_XDECREF(pdict);
    Py_XDECREF(pcode1);
    Py_XDECREF(pcode2);
    Py_XDECREF(pcode3);
    Py_Finalize();
}</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>This program combines a variety of techniques that we’ve
          already seen. The namespace in which the compiled code strings run,
          for instance, is a newly created dictionary (not an existing module
          object), and inputs for code strings are passed as preset variables
          in the namespace. When built and executed, the first part of the
          output is similar to previous examples in this section, but the last
          line represents running the same precompiled code string 11
          times:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e88375"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">.../PP4E/Integrate/Embed/Basics$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>embed-bytecode</code></strong>
embed-bytecode
The meaning of life...
THE MEANING OF PYTHON...

0:0 1:1 2:4 3:9 4:16 5:25 6:36 7:49 8:64 9:81 10:100</pre>
<p>If your system executes Python code strings multiple times, it
          is a major speedup to precompile to bytecode in this fashion. This
          step is not required in other contexts that invoke callable Python
          objects—including the common embedding use case presented in the
          <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88382"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88384"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88386"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88388"></a>next section.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
