<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Registering Callback Handler Objects</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Registering Callback Handler Objects"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="registering_callback_handler_objects"></a>Registering Callback Handler Objects</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In the embedding <a id="callb20.10"></a><a id="calla20.10"></a><a id="obj20.10"></a><a id="em20.10"></a>examples thus far, C has been running and calling Python
        code from a standard main program flow of control. Things are not
        always so simple, though; in some cases, programs are modeled on an
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>event-driven</em></span> architecture in which code is
        executed only in response to some sort of event. The event might be an
        end user clicking a button in a GUI, the operating system delivering a
        signal, or simply software running an action associated with an entry
        in a table.</p>
<p>In any event (pun accidental), program code in such an
        architecture is typically structured as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>callback
        handlers</em></span>—units of code invoked by event-processing dispatch
        logic. It’s easy to use embedded Python code to implement callback
        handlers in such a system; in fact, the event-processing layer can
        simply use the embedded-call API tools we saw earlier in this chapter
        to run Python handlers.</p>
<p>The only new trick in this model is how to make the C layer know
        what code should be run for each event. Handlers must somehow be
        registered to C to associate them with future events. In general,
        there is a wide variety of ways to achieve this code/event
        association. For instance, C programs can:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Fetch and call <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>functions</em></span> by event name
            from one or more <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>module</em></span> files</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Fetch and run code <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>strings</em></span> associated
            with event names in a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>database</em></span></p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Extract and run code associated with event
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>tags</em></span> in HTML or XML</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Run Python code that calls back to C to tell it what should
            be run</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>And so on. Really, any place you can associate objects or
        strings with identifiers is a potential callback registration
        mechanism. Some of these techniques have advantages all their own. For
        instance, callbacks fetched from module files support dynamic
        reloading (<code class="epub__literal">imp.reload</code> works on
        modules but does not update objects held directly). And none of the
        first three schemes require users to code special Python programs that
        do nothing but register handlers to be run later.</p>
<p>It is perhaps more common, though, to register callback handlers
        with the last <span>approach—</span>letting
        Python code register handlers with C by calling back to C through
        extension interfaces. Although this scheme is not without trade-offs,
        it can provide a natural and direct model in scenarios where callbacks
        are associated with a large number of objects.</p>
<p>For instance, consider a GUI constructed by building a tree of
        widget objects in Python scripts. If each widget object in the tree
        can have an associated event handler, it may be easier to register
        handlers by simply calling methods of widgets in the tree. Associating
        handlers with widget objects in a separate structure such as a module
        file or an XML file requires extra cross-reference work to keep the
        handlers in sync with the tree.</p>
<p>In fact, if you’re looking for a more realistic example of
        Python callback handlers, consider the tkinter GUI system we’ve used
        extensively in this book. tkinter uses both extending and embedding.
        Its <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>extending</em></span> interface (widget objects) is used
        to register Python callback handlers, which are later run with
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>embedding</em></span> interfaces in response to GUI events.
        You can study tkinter’s implementation in the Python source
        distribution for more details; its Tk library interface logic makes it
        a somewhat challenging read, but the basic model it employs is
        straightforward.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Registration Implementation"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="registration_implementation"></a>Registration Implementation</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>This section’s C and Python files demonstrate the coding
          techniques used to implement explicitly registered callback
          handlers. First, the C file in Example 20-30 implements
          interfaces for registering Python handlers, as well as code to run
          those handlers in response to later events:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Event router</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">Route_Event</code>
                function <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88492"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88497"></a>responds to an event by calling a Python
                function object previously passed from Python to C.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Callback registration</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">Register_Handler</code>
                function <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88511"></a>saves a passed-in Python function object pointer
                in a C global variable. Python scripts call <code class="epub__literal">Register_Handler</code> through a
                <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88518"></a>simple <code class="epub__literal">cregister</code> C extension module created
                by this file.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Event trigger</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>To <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88532"></a>simulate real-world events, the<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88538"></a> <code class="epub__literal">Trigger_Event</code> function can be called
                from <span>Python</span> through the
                generated C module to trigger an event.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>In other words, this example uses both the embedding and the
          extending interfaces we’ve already met to register and invoke Python
          event handler code. Study Example 20-30 for more on its
          operation.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_integrate-id29"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 20-30. PP4E\Integrate\Embed\Regist\cregister.c</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">#include &lt;Python.h&gt;
#include &lt;stdlib.h&gt;

/***********************************************/
/* 1) code to route events to Python object    */
/* note that we could run strings here instead */
/***********************************************/

static PyObject *Handler = NULL;     /* keep Python object in C */

void Route_Event(char *label, int count)
{
    char *cres;
    PyObject *args, *pres;

    /* call Python handler */
    args = Py_BuildValue("(si)", label, count);   /* make arg-list */
    pres = PyEval_CallObject(Handler, args);      /* apply: run a call */
    Py_DECREF(args);                              /* add error checks */

    if (pres != NULL) {
        /* use and decref handler result */
        PyArg_Parse(pres, "s", &amp;cres);
        printf("%s\n", cres);
        Py_DECREF(pres);
    }
}

/*****************************************************/
/* 2) python extension module to register handlers   */
/* python imports this module to set handler objects */
/*****************************************************/

static PyObject *
Register_Handler(PyObject *self, PyObject *args)
{
    /* save Python callable object */
    Py_XDECREF(Handler);                 /* called before? */
    PyArg_Parse(args, "(O)", &amp;Handler);  /* one argument */
    Py_XINCREF(Handler);                 /* add a reference */
    Py_INCREF(Py_None);                  /* return 'None': success */
    return Py_None;
}

static PyObject *
Trigger_Event(PyObject *self, PyObject *args)
{
    /* let Python simulate event caught by C */
    static count = 0;
    Route_Event("spam", count++);
    Py_INCREF(Py_None);
    return Py_None;
}

static PyMethodDef cregister_methods[] = {
    {"setHandler",    Register_Handler, METH_VARARGS, ""},  /* name, &amp;func,... */
    {"triggerEvent",  Trigger_Event,    METH_VARARGS, ""},
    {NULL, NULL, 0, NULL}                                   /* end of table */
};

static struct PyModuleDef cregistermodule = {
   PyModuleDef_HEAD_INIT,
   "cregister",       /* name of module */
   "cregister mod",   /* module documentation, may be NULL */
   −1,                /* size of per-interpreter module state, −1=in global vars */
   cregister_methods  /* link to methods table */
};

PyMODINIT_FUNC
PyInit_cregister()                      /* called on first import */
{
    return PyModule_Create(&amp;cregistermodule);
}</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Ultimately, this C file is an extension module for Python, not
          a standalone C program that embeds Python (though C could just as
          well be on top). To compile it into a dynamically loaded module
          file, run the makefile in Example 20-31 on Cygwin (and use
          something similar on other platforms). As we learned earlier in this
          chapter, the resulting <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>cregister.dll</em></span> file will
          be loaded when first imported by a Python script if it is placed in
          a directory on Python’s module search path (e.g., in <code class="epub__literal">.</code> or <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code> settings).</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_integrate-id30"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 20-31. PP4E\Integrate\Embed\Regist\makefile.regist</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">######################################################################
# Cygwin makefile that builds cregister.dll. a dynamically loaded
# C extension module (shareable), which is imported by register.py
######################################################################

PYLIB = /usr/local/bin
PYINC = /usr/local/include/python3.1

CMODS = cregister.dll

all: $(CMODS)

cregister.dll: cregister.c
        gcc cregister.c -g -I$(PYINC) -shared -L$(PYLIB) -lpython3.1 -o $@

clean:
        rm -f *.pyc $(CMODS)</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Now that we have a C extension module set to register and
          dispatch Python handlers, all we need are some Python handlers. The
          Python module shown in Example 20-32 defines two
          callback handler functions and imports the C extension module to
          register handlers and trigger events.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_integrate-id31"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 20-32. PP4E\Integrate\Embed\Regist\register.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
#########################################################################
in Python, register for and handle event callbacks from the C language;
compile and link the C code, and launch this with 'python register.py'
#########################################################################
"""

####################################
# C calls these Python functions;
# handle an event, return a result
####################################

def callback1(label, count):
    return 'callback1 =&gt; %s number %i' % (label, count)

def callback2(label, count):
    return 'callback2 =&gt; ' +  label * count

#######################################
# Python calls a C extension module
# to register handlers, trigger events
#######################################

import cregister

print('\nTest1:')
cregister.setHandler(callback1)      # register callback function
for i in range(3):
    cregister.triggerEvent()         # simulate events caught by C layer

print('\nTest2:')
cregister.setHandler(callback2)
for i in range(3):
    cregister.triggerEvent()         # routes these events to callback2</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>That’s it—the Python/C callback integration is set to go. To
          kick off the system, run the Python script; it registers one handler
          function, forces three events to be triggered, and then changes the
          event handler and does it again:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e88588"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">.../PP4E/Integrate/Embed/Regist$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>make -f makefile.regist</code></strong>
gcc cregister.c -g -I/usr/local/include/python3.1 -shared -L/usr/local/bin
-lpython3.1 -o cregister.dll

.../PP4E/Integrate/Embed/Regist$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python register.py</code></strong>

Test1:
callback1 =&gt; spam number 0
callback1 =&gt; spam number 1
callback1 =&gt; spam number 2

Test2:
callback2 =&gt; spamspamspam
callback2 =&gt; spamspamspamspam
callback2 =&gt; spamspamspamspamspam</pre>
<p>This output is printed by the C event router function, but its
          content is the return values of the handler functions in the Python
          module. Actually, something pretty wild is going on under the hood.
          When Python forces an event to trigger, control flows between
          languages like this:</p><div class="epub__orderedlist"><ol class="epub__orderedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>From Python to the C event router function</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>From the C event router function to the Python handler
              function</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Back to the C event router function (where the output is
              printed)</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>And finally back to the Python script</p></li></ol>
</div>
<p>That is, we jump from Python to C to Python and back again.
          Along the way, control passes through both extending and embedding
          interfaces. When the Python callback handler is running, two Python
          levels are active, and one C level in the middle. Luckily, this just
          works; Python’s API is reentrant, so you don’t need to be concerned
          about having multiple Python interpreter levels active at the same
          time. Each level runs different code and operates
          independently.</p>
<p>Trace through this example’s output and code for more
          illumination. Here, we’re moving on to the last quick example we
          have time and space to explore—in the name of symmetry, using Python
          classes <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88616"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88618"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88620"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88622"></a>from C.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
