<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Using Python Classes in C</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Using Python Classes in C"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="using_python_classes_in_c"></a>Using Python Classes in C</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Earlier in this chapter, <a id="c20.11"></a><a id="classes20.11"></a>we learned how to use C++ classes in Python by wrapping
        them with SWIG. But what about going the other way—using Python
        classes from other languages? It turns out that this is really just a
        matter of applying interfaces already shown.</p>
<p>Recall that Python scripts generate class instance objects by
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>calling</em></span> class objects as though they were
        functions. To do this from C (or C++), simply follow the same steps:
        import a class from a module, build an arguments tuple, and call it to
        generate an instance using the same C API tools you use to call Python
        functions. Once you’ve got an instance, you can fetch its attributes
        and methods with the same tools you use to fetch globals out of a
        module. Callables and attributes work the same everywhere they
        live.</p>
<p>To illustrate how this works in practice, Example 20-33 defines a simple
        Python class in a module that we can utilize from C.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_integrate-id32"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 20-33. PP4E\Integrate\Embed\Pyclasss\module.py</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting"># call this class from C to make objects

class klass:
    def method(self, x, y):
        return "brave %s %s" % (x, y)     # run me from C</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>This is nearly as simple as it gets, but it’s enough to
        illustrate the basics. As usual, make sure that this module is on your
        Python search path (e.g., in the current directory, or one listed on
        your <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code> setting), or else
        the import call to access it from C will fail, just as it would in a
        Python script. As you surely know if you’ve gotten this far in this
        book, you can make always use of this Python class from a Python
        program as follows:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e88661"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">...\PP4E\Integrate\Embed\Pyclass$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import module</code></strong>                                   # import the file
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>object = module.klass()</code></strong>                         # make class instance
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>result = object.method('sir', 'robin')</code></strong>          # call class method
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(result)</code></strong>
brave sir robin</pre>
<p>This is fairly easy stuff in Python. You can do all of these
        operations in C, too, but it takes a bit more code. The C file in
        Example 20-34 implements
        these steps by arranging calls to the appropriate Python API
        tools.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_integrate-id33"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 20-34. PP4E\Integrate\Embed\Pyclass\objects.c</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">#include &lt;Python.h&gt;
#include &lt;stdio.h&gt;

main() {
  /* run objects with low-level calls */
  char *arg1="sir", *arg2="robin", *cstr;
  PyObject *pmod, *pclass, *pargs, *pinst, *pmeth, *pres;

  /* instance = module.klass() */
  Py_Initialize();
  pmod   = PyImport_ImportModule("module");         /* fetch module */
  pclass = PyObject_GetAttrString(pmod, "klass");   /* fetch module.class */
  Py_DECREF(pmod);

  pargs  = Py_BuildValue("()");
  pinst  = PyEval_CallObject(pclass, pargs);        /* call class() */
  Py_DECREF(pclass);
  Py_DECREF(pargs);

  /* result = instance.method(x,y) */
  pmeth  = PyObject_GetAttrString(pinst, "method"); /* fetch bound method */
  Py_DECREF(pinst);
  pargs  = Py_BuildValue("(ss)", arg1, arg2);       /* convert to Python */
  pres   = PyEval_CallObject(pmeth, pargs);         /* call method(x,y) */
  Py_DECREF(pmeth);
  Py_DECREF(pargs);

  PyArg_Parse(pres, "s", &amp;cstr);                    /* convert to C */
  printf("%s\n", cstr);
  Py_DECREF(pres);
}</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>Step through this source file for more details; it’s mostly a
        matter of figuring out how you would accomplish the task in Python,
        and then calling equivalent C functions in the Python API. To build
        this source into a C executable program, run the makefile in this
        file’s directory in the book examples package (it’s analogous to
        makefiles we’ve already seen, so we’ll omit it here). After compiling,
        run it as you would any other C program:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e88689"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">.../PP4E/Integrate/Embed/Pyclass$ <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>./objects</code></strong>
brave sir robin</pre>
<p>This output might seem anticlimactic, but it actually reflects
        the return values sent back to C by the Python class method in file
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>module.py</em></span>. C did a lot of work to get this little
        string—it imported the module, fetched the class, made an instance,
        and fetched and called the instance method with a tuple of arguments,
        performing data conversions and reference count management every step
        of the way. In return for all the work, C gets to use the techniques
        shown in this file to reuse <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>any</em></span> Python
        class.</p>
<p>Of course, this example could be more complex in practice. As
        mentioned earlier, you generally need to check the return value of
        every Python API call to make sure it didn’t fail. The module import
        call in this C code, for instance, can fail easily if the module isn’t
        on the search path; if you don’t trap the <code class="epub__literal">NULL</code> pointer result, your program will
        almost certainly crash when it tries to use the pointer (at least
        eventually). Example 20-35 is
        a recoding of Example 20-34
        with full error-checking; it’s big, but it’s robust.</p><div class="epub__example"><a id="pp4e_reverse_solidus_integrate-id34"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Example 20-35. PP4E\Integrate\Embed\Pyclasss\objects-err.c</p><div class="epub__example-contents">
<pre class="epub__programlisting">#include &lt;Python.h&gt;
#include &lt;stdio.h&gt;
#define error(msg) do { printf("%s\n", msg); exit(1); } while (1)

main() {
  /* run objects with low-level calls and full error checking */
  char *arg1="sir", *arg2="robin", *cstr;
  PyObject *pmod, *pclass, *pargs, *pinst, *pmeth, *pres;

  /* instance = module.klass() */
  Py_Initialize();
  pmod = PyImport_ImportModule("module");           /* fetch module */
  if (pmod == NULL)
      error("Can't load module");

  pclass = PyObject_GetAttrString(pmod, "klass");   /* fetch module.class */
  Py_DECREF(pmod);
  if (pclass == NULL)
      error("Can't get module.klass");

  pargs = Py_BuildValue("()");
  if (pargs == NULL) {
      Py_DECREF(pclass);
      error("Can't build arguments list");
  }
  pinst = PyEval_CallObject(pclass, pargs);         /* call class() */
  Py_DECREF(pclass);
  Py_DECREF(pargs);
  if (pinst == NULL)
      error("Error calling module.klass()");

  /* result = instance.method(x,y) */
  pmeth  = PyObject_GetAttrString(pinst, "method"); /* fetch bound method */
  Py_DECREF(pinst);
  if (pmeth == NULL)
      error("Can't fetch klass.method");

  pargs = Py_BuildValue("(ss)", arg1, arg2);        /* convert to Python */
  if (pargs == NULL) {
      Py_DECREF(pmeth);
      error("Can't build arguments list");
  }
  pres = PyEval_CallObject(pmeth, pargs);           /* call method(x,y) */
  Py_DECREF(pmeth);
  Py_DECREF(pargs);
  if (pres == NULL)
      error("Error calling klass.method");

  if (!PyArg_Parse(pres, "s", &amp;cstr))               /* convert to C */
     error("Can't convert klass.method result");
  printf("%s\n", cstr);
  Py_DECREF(pres);
}</pre>
</div>
</div>
<p>These 53 lines of C code (not counting its makefile) achieve the
        same results as the <span>4 lines</span> of
        interactive Python we ran earlier—not exactly a stellar result from a
        developer productivity perspective! Nevertheless, the model it uses
        allows C and C++ to leverage Python in the same way that Python can
        employ C and C++. As I’ll discuss in this book’s conclusion in a
        moment, such combinations can often be more powerful than their
        <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88722"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88724"></a>individual parts.</p>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
