<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Other Integration Topics</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Other Integration Topics"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="other_integration_topics"></a>Other Integration Topics</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In this chapter, the term <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>integration</em></span> has
        largely meant mixing Python with components written in C or C++ (or
        other C-compatible languages) in extending and embedding modes. But
        from a broader perspective, integration also includes any other
        technology that lets us mix Python components into larger,
        heterogeneous systems. To wrap up this chapter, this last section
        briefly summarizes a handful of commonly used integration technologies
        beyond the C API tools we’ve explored.</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Jython: Java integration</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>We first <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88743"></a>met Jython in Chapter 12
              and it was discussed earlier in this chapter in the context of
              extending. Really, though, Jython is a broader integration
              platform. Jython compiles Python code to Java bytecode for
              execution on the JVM. The resulting Java-based system directly
              supports two kinds of integration:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist"><ul class="epub__itemizedlist"><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Extending</em></span>: Jython uses Java’s
                  <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>reflection API</em></span> to allow Python programs
                  to call out to Java class libraries automatically. The Java
                  reflection API provides Java type information at runtime and
                  serves the same purpose as the glue code we’ve generated to
                  plug C libraries into Python in this part of the book. In
                  Jython, however, this runtime type information allows
                  largely automated resolution of Java calls in Python
                  scripts—no glue code has to be written or generated.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Embedding</em></span>: Jython also provides a
                  Java <code class="epub__literal">PythonInterpreter</code>
<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88768"></a>class API that allows Java programs to run
                  Python code in a namespace, much like the C API tools we’ve
                  used to run Python code strings from C programs. In
                  addition, because Jython implements all Python objects as
                  instances of a Java <code class="epub__literal">PyObject</code> class, it is
                  straightforward for the Java layer that encloses embedded
                  Python code to process Python objects.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>In other words, Jython allows Python to be both extended
              and embedded in Java, much like the C integration strategies
              we’ve seen in this part of the book. By adding a simpler
              scripting language to Java applications, Jython serves many of
              the same roles as the C integration tools we’ve studied.</p>
<p>On the downside, Jython tends to lag behind CPython
              developments, and its reliance on Java class libraries and
              execution environments introduces Java dependencies that may be
              a factor in some Python-oriented development scenarios.
              Nevertheless, Jython provides a remarkably seamless integration
              model and serves as an ideal scripting language for Java
              applications. For more on Jython, check it out online at http://www.jython.org and search the Web at
              large.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>IronPython: C#/.NET integration</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Also <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88788"></a>mentioned earlier, IronPython does for C#/.NET
              what Jython does for Java (and in fact shares a common
              inventor)—it provides seamless integration between Python code
              and software components written for the .NET framework, as well
              as its Mono implementation on Linux. Like Jython, IronPython
              compiles Python source code to the .NET system’s bytecode format
              and runs programs on the system’s runtime engine. As a result,
              integration with external components is similarly seamless. Also
              like Jython, the net effect is to turn Python into an
              easy-to-use scripting language for C#/.NET-based applications
              and a general-purpose rapid development tool that complements
              C#. For more details on IronPython, visit http://www.ironpython.org or your friendly
              neighborhood search engine.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>COM integration on Windows</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>COM <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88803"></a>defines a standard and language-neutral object
              model with which components written in a variety of programming
              languages may integrate and communicate. Python’s PyWin32
              Windows extension package allows Python programs to implement
              both server and client in the COM interface model. As such, it
              provides an automated way to integrate Python programs with
              programs written in other COM-aware languages such as Visual
              Basic. Python scripts can also use COM calls to script Microsoft
              applications such as Word and Excel, because these systems
              register COM object interfaces. On the other hand, COM implies a
              level of dispatch indirection overhead and is not as platform
              agnostic as other approaches listed here. For more information
              on COM support and other Windows extensions, see the Web and
              refer to O’Reilly’s <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Python
              Programming on Win32</em></span>, by Mark Hammond and
              Andy Robinson.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>CORBA integration</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>There is <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88818"></a>also much open source support for using Python in
              the context of a CORBA-based application.
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>CORBA</em></span> stands for the Common Object Request
              Broker; it’s a language-neutral way to distribute systems among
              communicating components, which speak through an object model
              architecture. As such, it represents another way to integrate
              Python components into a larger system. Python’s CORBA support
              includes public domain systems such OmniORB. Like COM, CORBA is
              a large system—too large for us to even scratch the surface in
              this text. For more details, search the Web.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Other languages</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>As we discussed at the end of our extending coverage,
              you’ll also find direct support for mixing Python with other
              languages, including FORTRAN, Objective-C, and others. Many
              support both extending (calling out to the integrated languages)
              as well as embedding (handling calls from the integrated
              language). See the prior discussion and the Web for more
              details. Some observers might also include the emerging pyjamas
              system in this category—by compiling Python code to JavaScript
              code, it allows Python programs to access AJAX and web
              browser–based APIs in the context of the Rich Internet
              Applications discussed earlier in this book; see Chapters 7, 12,
              and 16.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Network-based integration
            protocols</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Finally, there is also support in the Python world for
              Internet-based data transport protocols, including<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88847"></a> SOAP, and <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e88853"></a>XML-RPC. By routing calls across networks such
              systems support distributed architectures, and give rise to the
              notion of web services. XML-RPC is supported by a standard
              library module in Python, but search the Web for more details on
              these protocols.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>As you can see, there are many options in the integration
        domain. Perhaps the best parting advice I can give you is simply that
        different tools are meant for different tasks. C extension modules and
        types are ideal at optimizing systems and integrating libraries, but
        frameworks offer other ways to integrate components—Jython and
        IronPython for using Java and .NETs, COM for reusing and publishing
        objects on Windows, XML-RPC for distributed services, and so on. As
        always, the best tools for your programs will almost certainly be the
        best tools for your programs.</p>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
