<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Part VI. The End</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__part" title="Part VI. The End"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="the_end"></a>Part VI. The End</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__partintro" id="id3797083" title="The End"><div>
</div>
<p>Like the first part of this book, this last part is a single
      chapter, this time a short one to provide some parting context:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Chapter 21</span></dt><dd>
<p>This chapter discusses Python’s roles and scope. It explores
            some of the broader ideas of Python’s common roles, with the added
            perspective afforded by the rest of the book. Much of this chapter
            is philosophical in nature, but it underscores some of the main
            reasons for using a tool like Python.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Note that there are no reference appendixes here. For additional
      reference resources, consult the Python standard manuals available
      online or commercially published reference books, such as O’Reilly’s
      <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Python Pocket
      Reference</em></span> and others you can find in the usual places
      on the Web.</p>
<p>For additional Python core language material, see O’Reilly’s
      <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Learning
      Python</em></span>. Among other things, the Fourth Edition of
      that book also explores more advanced API construction tools such as
      properties, descriptors, decorators, and metaclasses, which we skipped
      here because they fall into the core language category. That book also
      explores Unicode text in more depth than we did here, since it’s an
      inherent part of Python 3.</p>
<p>And for help on other Python-related topics, see the resources
      available at Python’s official website, http://www.python.org, or search the Web using your
      favorite search engine.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
