<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 21. Conclusion: Python and the Development Cycle</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 21. Conclusion: Python and the Development Cycle"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="conclusion_colon_python_and_the_developm"></a>Chapter 21. Conclusion: Python and the Development Cycle</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="foreword_for_the_4th_edition"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Foreword for the Fourth Edition</p>
<p>I wrote the following conclusion in 1995 for the first edition
        of this book, at a time when Python’s integration role as a front-end
        scripting language was viewed as more important than it often is
        today. Since then, Python has emerged as one of the top four or five
        most widely used programming languages in the world. As it has grown
        in popularity, its focus on code quality and readability, and their
        related impact on developer productivity, seems to have become the
        more dominant factor behind Python’s success.</p>
<p>In fact, most Python programmers today write pure Python code,
        without ever having to know or care about external libraries.
        Typically, a small handful of developers integrate external libraries
        for the majority to leverage in their Python code. While integration
        still matters, Python is largely about quality and productivity to
        most people today (see The Python “Secret Handshake” for more on
        Python contemporary philosophy).</p>
<p>Because of this shift, some of this conclusion may have grown a
        bit narrow. In deference, I’ve removed all the “postscript” updates
        that appeared here in prior editions. This edition retains the
        conclusion itself, though, partly because of its historical value,
        partly because it still reflects the ideals that propelled Python into
        the limelight in the first place, and partly because of its continued
        relevance to Python users who still integrate hybrid systems (well,
        that, plus the jokes).</p>
<p>At the end of the day, many of us have gotten off this chapter’s
        proverbial island by now, thanks to the rise of tools such as Python.
        Indeed, over the last 15 years Python has realized most of its
        original aspirations laid out here. The choice before us today seems
        to be between keeping the boat from growing too heavy or learning to
        swim well.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="“That’s the End of the Book, Now Here’s the Meaning of Life”"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="quotation_mark_that_apostrophy_s_the_end"></a>“That’s the End of the Book, Now Here’s the Meaning of
        Life”</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Well, the meaning of Python, anyway. In the Preface of this book, I promised that we’d return to the
        issue of Python’s roles after seeing how it is used in practice. So in
        closing, here are some subjective comments on the broader implications
        of the language. Most of this conclusion remains unchanged since the
        first edition of this book was penned in 1995, but so are the factors
        that pushed Python into the development spotlight.</p>
<p>As I mentioned in the Preface sidebar, Python’s focus is on
        concepts such as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>quality, productivity,
        portability</em></span>, and <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>integration</em></span>. I hope
        that this book has demonstrated some of the benefits of that focus in
        action. Along the way, we’ve seen Python applied to systems
        programming, GUI development, Internet scripting, database and text
        processing, and more. And we’ve witnessed firsthand the application of
        the language and its libraries to realistically scaled software
        development tasks, which go above and beyond what many classify as
        “scripting.” I hope you’ve also had some fun; that, too, is part of
        the Python story.</p>
<p>In this conclusion, I wish now to return to the forest after our
        long walk among the trees—to revisit Python’s roles in more concrete
        terms. In particular, Python’s role as a prototyping tool can
        profoundly affect the development cycle.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
