<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>The “Gilligan Factor”</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="The “Gilligan Factor”"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="the_quotation_mark_gilligan_factor_quota"></a>The “Gilligan Factor”</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>It has been <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e88935"></a>suggested, tongue in cheek, that if there were a patron
        saint of software engineers, the honor would fall on none other than
        Gilligan, the character in the pervasively popular American television
        show of the 1960s, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Gilligan’s Island</em></span>. Gilligan is
        the enigmatic, sneaker-clad first mate, widely held to be responsible
        for the shipwreck that stranded the now-residents of the
        island.</p>
<p>To be sure, Gilligan’s situation seems oddly familiar. Stranded
        on a desert island with only the most meager of modern technological
        comforts, Gilligan and his cohorts must resort to scratching out a
        living using the resources naturally available. In episode after
        episode, we observe the Professor developing exquisitely intricate
        tools for doing the business of life on their remote island, only to
        be foiled in the implementation phase by the ever-bungling
        Gilligan.</p>
<p>But clearly it was never poor Gilligan’s fault. How could one
        possibly be expected to implement designs for such sophisticated
        applications as home appliances and telecommunications devices, given
        the rudimentary technologies available in such an environment? He
        simply lacked the proper tools. For all we know, Gilligan may have had
        the capacity for engineering on the grandest level. But you can’t get
        there with bananas and coconuts.</p>
<p>And pathologically, time after time, Gilligan wound up
        inadvertently sabotaging the best of the Professor’s plans: misusing,
        abusing, and eventually destroying his inventions. If he could just
        pedal his makeshift stationary bicycle faster and faster (he was led
        to believe), all would be well. But in the end, inevitably, the
        coconuts were sent hurling into the air, the palm branches came
        crashing down around his head, and poor Gilligan was blamed once again
        for the failure of the technology.</p>
<p>Dramatic though this image may be, some observers would consider
        it a striking metaphor for the software industry. Like Gilligan, we
        software engineers are often asked to perform tasks with arguably
        inappropriate tools. Like Gilligan, our intentions are sound, but
        technology can hold us back. And like poor Gilligan, we inevitably
        must bear the brunt of management’s wrath when our systems are
        delivered behind schedule. You can’t get there with bananas and
        coconuts…</p>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
