<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Doing the Right Thing</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Doing the Right Thing"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="doing_the_right_thing"></a>Doing the Right Thing</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Of course, the Gilligan factor is an exaggeration, added for
        comic effect. But few would argue that the bottleneck between ideas
        and working systems has disappeared completely. Even today, the cost
        of developing software far exceeds the cost of computer hardware. And
        when software is finally delivered, it often comes with failure rates
        that would be laughable in other engineering domains. Why must
        programming be so <span>complex</span>?</p>
<p>Let’s consider the situation carefully. By and large, the root
        of the complexity in developing software isn’t related to the role
        it’s supposed to perform—usually this is a well-defined, real-world
        process. Rather, it stems from the mapping of real-world tasks onto
        computer-executable models. And this mapping is performed in the
        context of programming languages and tools.</p>
<p>The path toward easing the software bottleneck must therefore
        lie, at least partially, in optimizing the act of programming itself
        by deploying the right tools. Given this realistic scope, there’s much
        that can be done now—there are a number of purely artificial overheads
        inherent in our current tools.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The Static Language Build Cycle"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_static_language_build_cycle"></a>The Static Language Build Cycle</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Using traditional static languages, there is an unavoidable
          overhead in moving from coded programs to working systems: compile
          and link steps add a built-in delay to the development process. In
          some environments, it’s common to spend many hours each week just
          waiting for a static language application’s build cycle to finish.
          Given that modern development practice involves an iterative process
          of building, testing, and rebuilding, such delays can be expensive
          and demoralizing (if not physically painful).</p>
<p>Of course, this varies from shop to shop, and in some domains
          the demand for performance justifies build-cycle delays. But I’ve
          worked in C++ environments where programmers joked about having to
          go to lunch whenever they recompiled their systems. Except they
          weren’t really joking.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Artificial Complexities"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="artificial_complexities"></a>Artificial Complexities</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>With many traditional programming tools, you can easily lose
          focus: the very act of programming becomes so complex that the
          real-world goal of the program is obscured. Traditional languages
          divert valuable attention to syntactic issues and development of
          bookkeeping code. Obviously, complexity isn’t an end in itself; it
          must be clearly warranted. Yet some of our current tools are so
          complex that the language itself makes the task harder and lengthens
          the development process.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="One Language Does Not Fit All"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h2 class="epub__title"><a id="one_language_does_not_fit_all"></a>One Language Does Not Fit All</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Many traditional languages implicitly encourage homogeneous,
          single-language systems. By making integration complex, they impede
          the use of multiple-language tools. As a result, instead of being
          able to select the right tool for the task at hand, developers are
          often compelled to use the same language for every component of an
          application. Since no language is good at everything, this
          constraint inevitably sacrifices both product functionality and
          programmer productivity.</p>
<p>Until our machines are as clever at taking directions as we
          are (arguably, not the most rational of goals), the task of
          programming won’t go away. But for the time being, we can make
          substantial progress by making the mechanics of that task easier.
          This topic is what I want to talk about now.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
