<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Enter Python</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="Enter Python"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="enter_python"></a>Enter Python</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>If this book has <a id="py21.5"></a>achieved its goals, you should by now have a good
        understanding of why Python has been called a “next-generation
        scripting language.” Compared with similar tools, it has some critical
        distinctions that we’re finally in a position to <span>summarize</span>:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Tcl</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Like Tcl, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e89004"></a>Python can be used as an embedded extension
              language. Unlike Tcl, Python is also a full-featured programming
              language. For many, Python’s data structure tools and support
              for programming-in-the-large make it useful in more domains. Tcl
              demonstrated the utility of integrating interpreted languages
              with C modules. Python provides similar functionality plus a
              powerful, object-oriented language; it’s not just a command
              string processor.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Perl</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Like Perl, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e89015"></a>Python can be used for writing shell tools, making
              it easy to use for system services. Unlike Perl, Python has a
              simple, readable syntax and a remarkably coherent design. For
              some, this makes Python easier to use and a better choice for
              programs that must be reused or maintained by others. Without
              question, Perl is a powerful system administration tool. But
              once we move beyond processing text and files, Python’s features
              become attractive.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Scheme/Lisp</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Like Scheme (and Lisp), <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e89026"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e89029"></a>Python supports dynamic typing, incremental
              development, and metaprogramming; it exposes the interpreter’s
              state and supports runtime program construction. Unlike Lisp,
              Python has a procedural syntax that is familiar to users of
              mainstream languages such as C and Pascal. If extensions are to
              be coded by end users, this can be a major advantage.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Smalltalk</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Like Smalltalk, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e89040"></a>Python supports object-oriented programming (OOP)
              in the context of a highly dynamic language. Unlike Smalltalk,
              Python doesn’t extend the object system to include fundamental
              program control flow constructs. Users need not come to grips
              with the concept of <code class="epub__literal">if</code>
              statements as message-receiving objects to use Python—Python is
              more conventional.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Icon</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Like Icon, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e89054"></a>Python supports a variety of high-level datatypes
              and operations such as lists, dictionaries, and slicing. In more
              recent times, Python’s notions of iteration and generators
              approach Icon’s backtracking in utility. Unlike Icon, Python is
              fundamentally simple. Programmers (and end users) don’t need to
              master esoteric concepts such as full-blown backtracking just to
              get started.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>BASIC</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Like modern <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e89065"></a>structured BASIC dialects, Python has an
              interpretive/interactive nature. Unlike most BASICs, Python
              includes standard support for advanced programming features such
              as classes, modules, exceptions, high-level datatypes, and
              general C integration. And unlike Visual Basic, Python provides
              a cross-platform solution, which is not controlled by a
              commercially vested company.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Java</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Like Java, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e89076"></a>Python is a general-purpose language; supports
              OOP, exceptions, and modular design; and compiles to a portable
              bytecode format. Unlike Java, Python’s simple syntax and
              built-in datatypes make development much more rapid. Python
              programs are typically one-third to one-fifth the size of the
              equivalent Java <span>program</span>.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>C/C++</em></span></span></dt><dd>
<p>Like C <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e89090"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e89095"></a>and C++, Python is a general-purpose language and
              can be used for long-term strategic system development tasks.
              Unlike compiled languages in general, Python also works well in
              tactical mode, as a rapid development language. Python programs
              are smaller, simpler, and more flexible than those written in
              compiled languages. For instance, because Python code does not
              constrain datatypes or sizes, it both is more concise and can be
              applied in a broader range of contexts.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>All of these languages (and others) have merit and unique
        strengths of their own—in fact, Python borrowed most of its features
        from languages such as these. It’s not Python’s goal to replace every
        other language; different tasks require different tools, and
        mixed-language development is one of Python’s main ideas. But Python’s
        blend of advanced programming constructs and integration tools make it
        a natural choice for the problem domains we’ve talked about in this
        book, and many <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e89101"></a>more.</p>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
