<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>In the Final Analysis…</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__sect1" title="In the Final Analysis…"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="in_the_final_analysis"></a>In the Final Analysis…</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>I hope this book has taught you something about Python, both the
        language and its roles. Beyond this text, there is really no
        substitute for doing some original Python programming. Be sure to grab
        a reference source or two to help you along the way.</p>
<p>The task of programming computers will probably always be
        challenging. Perhaps happily, there will continue to be a need for
        intelligent software engineers, skilled at translating real-world
        tasks into computer-executable form, at least for the foreseeable
        future. After all, if it were too easy, none of us would get paid. No
        language or tool can obviate the hard work of full-scale programming
        entirely.</p>
<p>But current development practice and tools make our tasks
        unnecessarily difficult: many of the obstacles faced by software
        developers are purely artificial. We have come far in our quest to
        improve the speed of computers; the time has come to focus our
        attention on improving the speed of development. In an era of
        constantly shrinking schedules, productivity must be paramount.</p>
<p>Python, as a mixed-paradigm tool, has the potential to foster
        development modes that simultaneously leverage the benefits of rapid
        development and of traditional languages. While Python won’t solve all
        the problems of the software industry, it offers hope for making
        programming simpler, faster, and at least a little more
        enjoyable.</p>
<p>It may not get us off that island altogether, but it sure beats
        bananas and coconuts.</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="a_morality_tale_of_perl_versus_python"></a>
<p class="epub__title">A Morality Tale of Perl Versus Python</p>
<p>(The following was <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e89395"></a>posted to the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>rec.humor.funny</em></span>
          Usenet newsgroup by Larry <span>Hastings</span>, and it is reprinted here
          with the original author’s permission.)</p>
<p>This has been percolating in the back of my mind for a while.
          It’s a scene from <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>The Empire Strikes Back</em></span>,
          reinterpreted to serve a valuable moral lesson for aspiring <span>programmers</span>.</p>
<p>EXTERIOR: DAGOBAH—DAY</p>
<p>With Yoda strapped to his back, Luke climbs up one of the many
          thick vines that grow in the swamp until he reaches the Dagobah
          statistics lab. Panting heavily, he continues his
          exercises—grepping, installing new packages, logging in as root, and
          writing replacements for two-year-old shell scripts in
          Python.</p>
<p>YODA: Code! Yes. A programmer’s strength flows from code
          maintainability. But beware of Perl. Terse syntax…more than one way
          to do it…default variables. The dark side of code maintainability
          are they. Easily they flow, quick to join you when code you write.
          If once you start down the dark path, forever will it dominate your
          destiny, consume you it will.</p>
<p>LUKE: Is Perl better than Python?</p>
<p>YODA: No…no…no. Quicker, easier, more seductive.</p>
<p>LUKE: But how will I know why Python is better than
          Perl?</p>
<p>YODA: You will know. When your code you try to read six months
          from now.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
