<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title>Lua 5.1 Reference Manual</title>
  <link href="../Styles/lua.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
  <link href="../Styles/manual.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body style="">
  <p><!-- $Id: manual.of,v 1.48 2008/08/18 15:24:20 roberto Exp $ --></p>

  <h1 id="heading_id_2">1 - <a name="1">Introduction</a></h1>

  <p>Lua is an extension programming language designed to support general procedural programming with data description facilities. It also offers good support for object-oriented programming, functional programming, and data-driven programming. Lua is intended to be used as a powerful, light-weight scripting language for any program that needs one. Lua is implemented as a library, written in <em>clean</em> C (that is, in the common subset of ANSI&nbsp;C and C++).</p>

  <p>Being an extension language, Lua has no notion of a "main" program: it only works <em>embedded</em> in a host client, called the <em>embedding program</em> or simply the <em>host</em>. This host program can invoke functions to execute a piece of Lua code, can write and read Lua variables, and can register C&nbsp;functions to be called by Lua code. Through the use of C&nbsp;functions, Lua can be augmented to cope with a wide range of different domains, thus creating customized programming languages sharing a syntactical framework. The Lua distribution includes a sample host program called <code>lua</code>, which uses the Lua library to offer a complete, stand-alone Lua interpreter.</p>

  <p>Lua is free software, and is provided as usual with no guarantees, as stated in its license. The implementation described in this manual is available at Lua's official web site, <code>www.lua.org</code>.</p>

  <p>Like any other reference manual, this document is dry in places. For a discussion of the decisions behind the design of Lua, see the technical papers available at Lua's web site. For a detailed introduction to programming in Lua, see Roberto's book, <em>Programming in Lua (Second Edition)</em>.</p>

  <h1 id="heading_id_3"><br /></h1>
</body>
</html>
