<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
  <title>Lua 5.1 Reference Manual</title>
  <link href="../Styles/lua.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
  <link href="../Styles/manual.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body style="">
  <h1 id="heading_id_315">7 - <a name="7">Incompatibilities with the Previous Version</a></h1>

  <p>Here we list the incompatibilities that you may find when moving a program from Lua&nbsp;5.0 to Lua&nbsp;5.1. You can avoid most of the incompatibilities compiling Lua with appropriate options (see file <code>luaconf.h</code>). However, all these compatibility options will be removed in the next version of Lua.</p>

  <h2 id="heading_id_316">7.1 - <a name="7.1">Changes in the Language</a></h2>

  <ul>
    <li>The vararg system changed from the pseudo-argument <code>arg</code> with a table with the extra arguments to the vararg expression. (See compile-time option <code>LUA_COMPAT_VARARG</code> in <code>luaconf.h</code>.)</li>

    <li>There was a subtle change in the scope of the implicit variables of the <b>for</b> statement and for the <b>repeat</b> statement.</li>

    <li>The long string/long comment syntax (<code>[[<em>string</em>]]</code>) does not allow nesting. You can use the new syntax (<code>[=[<em>string</em>]=]</code>) in these cases. (See compile-time option <code>LUA_COMPAT_LSTR</code> in <code>luaconf.h</code>.)</li>
  </ul>

  <h2 id="heading_id_317">7.2 - <a name="7.2">Changes in the Libraries</a></h2>

  <ul>
    <li>Function <code>string.gfind</code> was renamed <a href="../Text/Chapter%205%20-%20Standard%20Libraries.xhtml#pdf-string.gmatch"><code>string.gmatch</code></a>. (See compile-time option <code>LUA_COMPAT_GFIND</code> in <code>luaconf.h</code>.)</li>

    <li>When <a href="../Text/Chapter%205%20-%20Standard%20Libraries.xhtml#pdf-string.gsub"><code>string.gsub</code></a> is called with a function as its third argument, whenever this function returns <b>nil</b> or <b>false</b> the replacement string is the whole match, instead of the empty string.</li>

    <li>Function <code>table.setn</code> was deprecated. Function <code>table.getn</code> corresponds to the new length operator (<code>#</code>); use the operator instead of the function. (See compile-time option <code>LUA_COMPAT_GETN</code> in <code>luaconf.h</code>.)</li>

    <li>Function <code>loadlib</code> was renamed <a href="../Text/Chapter%205%20-%20Standard%20Libraries.xhtml#pdf-package.loadlib"><code>package.loadlib</code></a>. (See compile-time option <code>LUA_COMPAT_LOADLIB</code> in <code>luaconf.h</code>.)</li>

    <li>Function <code>math.mod</code> was renamed <a href="../Text/Chapter%205%20-%20Standard%20Libraries.xhtml#pdf-math.fmod"><code>math.fmod</code></a>. (See compile-time option <code>LUA_COMPAT_MOD</code> in <code>luaconf.h</code>.)</li>

    <li>Functions <code>table.foreach</code> and <code>table.foreachi</code> are deprecated. You can use a for loop with <code>pairs</code> or <code>ipairs</code> instead.</li>

    <li>There were substantial changes in function <a href="../Text/Chapter%205%20-%20Standard%20Libraries.xhtml#pdf-require"><code>require</code></a> due to the new module system. However, the new behavior is mostly compatible with the old, but <code>require</code> gets the path from <a href="../Text/Chapter%205%20-%20Standard%20Libraries.xhtml#pdf-package.path"><code>package.path</code></a> instead of from <code>LUA_PATH</code>.</li>

    <li>Function <a href="../Text/Chapter%205%20-%20Standard%20Libraries.xhtml#pdf-collectgarbage"><code>collectgarbage</code></a> has different arguments. Function <code>gcinfo</code> is deprecated; use <code>collectgarbage("count")</code> instead.</li>
  </ul>

  <h2 id="heading_id_318">7.3 - <a name="7.3">Changes in the API</a></h2>

  <ul>
    <li>The <code>luaopen_*</code> functions (to open libraries) cannot be called directly, like a regular C function. They must be called through Lua, like a Lua function.</li>

    <li>Function <code>lua_open</code> was replaced by <a href="../Text/Chapter%203%20-%20API.xhtml#lua_newstate"><code>lua_newstate</code></a> to allow the user to set a memory-allocation function. You can use <a href="../Text/Chapter%204%20-%20The%20Auxiliary%20Library.xhtml#luaL_newstate"><code>luaL_newstate</code></a> from the standard library to create a state with a standard allocation function (based on <code>realloc</code>).</li>

    <li>Functions <code>luaL_getn</code> and <code>luaL_setn</code> (from the auxiliary library) are deprecated. Use <a href="../Text/Chapter%203%20-%20API.xhtml#lua_objlen"><code>lua_objlen</code></a> instead of <code>luaL_getn</code> and nothing instead of <code>luaL_setn</code>.</li>

    <li>Function <code>luaL_openlib</code> was replaced by <a href="../Text/Chapter%204%20-%20The%20Auxiliary%20Library.xhtml#luaL_register"><code>luaL_register</code></a>.</li>

    <li>Function <code>luaL_checkudata</code> now throws an error when the given value is not a userdata of the expected type. (In Lua&nbsp;5.0 it returned <code>NULL</code>.)</li>
  </ul>
</body>
</html>
