<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Why Do People Use Python?</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="why_do_people_use_python_question"></a>Why Do People Use Python?</h1>
<p>Because <a id="ch01pythprogramlanguage"></a>there are many programming languages available today,
        this is the usual first question of newcomers. Given that there are
        roughly 1 million Python users out there at the moment, there really
        is no way to answer this question with complete accuracy; the choice
        of development tools is sometimes based on unique constraints or
        personal preference.</p>
<p>But after teaching Python to roughly 225 groups and over 3,000
        students during the last 12 years, some common themes have emerged.
        The primary factors cited by Python users seem to be these:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Software quality</span></dt><dd>
<p>For many, Python’s focus on readability, coherence, and
              software quality in general sets it apart from other tools in
              the scripting world. Python code is designed to be readable, and
              hence reusable and maintainable—much more so than traditional
              scripting languages. The uniformity of Python code makes it easy
              to understand, even if you did not write it. In addition, Python
              has deep support for more advanced software reuse mechanisms,
              such as object-oriented programming (OOP).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Developer productivity</span></dt><dd>
<p>Python boosts developer productivity many times beyond
              compiled or statically typed languages such as C, C++, and Java.
              Python code is typically one-third to one-fifth the size of
              equivalent C++ or Java code. That means there is less to type,
              less to debug, and less to maintain after the fact. Python
              programs also run immediately, without the lengthy compile and
              link steps required by some other tools, further boosting
              programmer speed.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Program portability</span></dt><dd>
<p>Most Python <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2305"></a>programs run unchanged on all major computer
              platforms. Porting Python code between Linux and Windows, for
              example, is usually just a matter of copying a script’s code
              between machines. Moreover, Python offers multiple options for
              coding portable graphical user interfaces, database access
              programs, web-based systems, and more. Even operating system
              interfaces, including program launches and directory processing,
              are as portable in Python as they can possibly be.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Support libraries</span></dt><dd>
<p>Python comes with a large collection of prebuilt and
              portable functionality, known as the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2316"></a>standard library</em></span>. This library supports
              an array of application-level programming tasks, from text
              pattern matching to network scripting. In addition, Python can
              be extended with both homegrown libraries and a vast collection
              of third-party application support software. Python’s
              third-party domain offers tools for website construction,
              numeric programming, serial port access, game development, and
              much more. The NumPy extension, for instance, has been described
              as a free and more powerful equivalent to the Matlab numeric
              programming system.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Component integration</span></dt><dd>
<p>Python scripts can easily communicate with other parts of
              an application, using a variety of integration mechanisms. Such
              integrations allow Python to be used as a product customization
              and extension tool. Today, Python code can invoke C and C++
              libraries, can be called from C and C++ programs, can integrate
              with Java and .NET components, can communicate over frameworks
              such as COM, can interface with devices over serial ports, and
              can interact over networks with interfaces like SOAP, XML-RPC,
              and CORBA. It is not a standalone tool.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Enjoyment</span></dt><dd>
<p>Because of Python’s ease of use and built-in toolset, it
              can make the act of programming more pleasure than chore.
              Although this may be an intangible benefit, its effect on
              productivity is an important asset.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Of these factors, the first two (quality and productivity) are
        probably the most compelling benefits to most Python users.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Software Quality"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="software_quality"></a>Software Quality</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>By design, Python implements a deliberately simple and
          readable syntax and a highly coherent programming model. As a slogan
          at a recent Python conference attests, the net result is that Python
          seems to “fit your brain”—that is, features of the language interact
          in consistent and limited ways and follow naturally from a small set
          of core concepts. This makes the language easier to learn,
          understand, and remember. In practice, Python programmers do not
          need to constantly refer to manuals when reading or writing code;
          it’s a consistently designed system that many find yields
          surprisingly regular-looking
          code.</p>
<p>By philosophy, Python adopts a somewhat minimalist approach.
          This means that although there are usually multiple ways to
          accomplish a coding task, there is usually just one obvious way, a
          few less obvious alternatives, and a small set of coherent
          interactions everywhere in the language. Moreover, Python doesn’t
          make arbitrary decisions for you; when interactions are ambiguous,
          explicit intervention is preferred over “magic.” In the Python way
          of thinking, explicit is better than implicit, and simple is better
          than complex.<sup>[2]</sup></p>
<p>Beyond such design themes, Python includes tools such as
          modules and OOP that naturally promote code reusability. And because
          Python is focused on quality, so too, naturally, are Python
          programmers.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Developer Productivity"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="developer_productivity"></a>Developer Productivity</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>During <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2367"></a>the great Internet boom of the mid-to-late 1990s, it
          was difficult to find enough programmers to implement software
          projects; developers were asked to implement systems as fast as the
          Internet evolved. Today, in an era of layoffs and economic
          recession, the picture has shifted. Programming staffs are often now
          asked to accomplish the same tasks with even fewer people.</p>
<p>In both of these scenarios, Python has shined as a tool that
          allows programmers to get more done with less effort. It is
          deliberately optimized for <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>speed of
          development</em></span>—its simple syntax, dynamic typing, lack of
          compile steps, and built-in toolset allow programmers to develop
          programs in a fraction of the time needed when using some other
          tools. The net effect is that Python typically boosts developer
          productivity many times beyond the levels supported by traditional
          languages. That’s good news in both boom and bust times, and
          everywhere the software industry goes in <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2378"></a>between.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Is Python a “Scripting Language”?"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
