<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Is Python a “Scripting Language”?</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="is_python_a_quotation_mark_scripting"></a>Is Python a “Scripting Language”?</h1>
<p>Python is a general-purpose programming language that is often
        applied in scripting roles. It is commonly defined as an
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2387"></a>object-oriented scripting language</em></span>—a
        definition that blends support for OOP with an overall orientation
        toward scripting roles. In fact, people often use the word “script”
        instead of “program” to describe a Python code file. In this book, the
        terms “<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2392"></a>script” and “<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2396"></a>program” are used interchangeably, with a slight
        preference for “script” to describe a simpler top-level file and
        “program” to refer to a more sophisticated multifile
        application.</p>
<p>Because the term “scripting language” has so many different
        meanings to different observers, some would prefer that it not be
        applied to Python at all. In fact, people tend to make three very
        different associations, some of which are more useful than others,
        when they hear Python labeled as such:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Shell tools</span></dt><dd>
<p>Sometimes when people hear Python described as a scripting
              language, they think it means that Python is a tool for coding
              operating-system-oriented scripts. Such programs are often
              launched from console command lines and perform tasks such as
              processing text files and launching other programs.</p>
<p>Python programs can and do serve such roles, but this is
              just one of dozens of common Python application domains. It is
              not just a better shell-script language.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Control language</span></dt><dd>
<p>To others, scripting refers to a “glue” layer used to
              control and direct (i.e., script) other application components.
              Python programs are indeed often deployed in the context of
              larger applications. For instance, to test hardware devices,
              Python programs may call out to components that give low-level
              access to a device. Similarly, programs may run bits of Python
              code at strategic points to support end-user product
              customization without the need to ship and recompile the entire
              system’s source code.</p>
<p>Python’s simplicity makes it a naturally flexible control
              tool. Technically, though, this is also just a common Python
              role; many (perhaps most) Python programmers code standalone
              scripts without ever using or knowing about any integrated
              components. It is not just a control language.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Ease of use</span></dt><dd>
<p>Probably the best way to think of the term “scripting
              language” is that it refers to a simple language used for
              quickly coding tasks. This is especially true when the term is
              applied to Python, which allows much faster program development
              than compiled languages like C++. Its rapid development cycle
              fosters an exploratory, incremental mode of programming that has
              to be experienced to be appreciated.</p>
<p>Don’t be fooled, though—Python is not just for simple
              tasks. Rather, it makes tasks simple by its ease of use and
              flexibility. Python has a simple feature set, but it allows
              programs to scale up in sophistication as needed. Because of
              that, it is commonly used for quick tactical tasks and
              longer-term strategic development.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>So, is Python a scripting language or not? It depends on whom
        you ask. In general, the term “scripting” is probably best used to
        describe the rapid and flexible mode of development that Python
        supports, rather than a particular application domain.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="OK, but What’s the Downside?"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
