<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>OK, but What’s the Downside?</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="ok_comma_but_what_apostrophy_s_the_down"></a>OK, but What’s the Downside?</h1>
<p>After <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2434"></a>using it for 17 years and teaching it for 12, the only
        downside to Python I’ve found is that, as currently implemented, its
        execution speed may not always be as fast as that of compiled
        languages such as C and C++.</p>
<p>We’ll talk about implementation concepts in detail later in this
        book. In short, the standard implementations of Python today compile
        (i.e., translate) source code statements to an intermediate format
        known as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2443"></a>byte code</em></span> and then interpret the byte code.
        Byte code provides portability, as it is a platform-independent
        format. However, because Python is not compiled all the way down to
        binary machine code (e.g., instructions for an Intel chip), some
        programs will run more slowly in Python than in a fully compiled
        language like C.</p>
<p>Whether you will ever <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>care</em></span> about the
        execution speed difference depends on what kinds of programs you
        write. Python has been optimized numerous times, and Python code runs
        fast enough by itself in most application domains. Furthermore,
        whenever you do something “real” in a Python script, like processing a
        file or constructing a graphical user interface (GUI), your program
        will actually run at C speed, since such tasks are immediately
        dispatched to compiled C code inside the Python interpreter. More
        fundamentally, Python’s speed-of-development gain is often far more
        important than any speed-of-execution loss, especially given modern
        computer speeds.</p>
<p>Even at today’s CPU speeds, though, there still are some domains
        that do require optimal execution speeds. Numeric programming and
        animation, for example, often need at least their core
        number-crunching components to run at C speed (or better). If you work
        in such a domain, you can still use Python—simply split off the parts
        of the application that require optimal speed into
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2456"></a>compiled extensions</em></span>, and link those into your
        system for use in Python scripts.</p>
<p>We won’t talk about extensions much in this text, but this is
        really just an instance of the Python-as-control-language role we
        discussed earlier. A prime example of this dual language strategy is
        the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2464"></a>NumPy</em></span> numeric programming extension for
        Python; by combining compiled and optimized numeric extension
        libraries with the Python language, NumPy turns Python into a numeric
        programming tool that is efficient and easy to use. You may never need
        to code such extensions in your own Python work, but they provide a
        powerful optimization mechanism if you ever do.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Who Uses Python Today?"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
