<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Who Uses Python Today?</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="who_uses_python_today_question"></a>Who Uses Python Today?</h1>
<p>At this writing, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2474"></a>the best estimate anyone can seem to make of the size of
        the <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2480"></a>Python user base is that there are roughly 1 million
        Python users around the world today (plus or minus a few). This
        estimate is based on various statistics, like download rates and
        developer surveys. Because Python is open source, a more exact count
        is difficult—there are no license registrations to tally. Moreover,
        Python is automatically included with Linux distributions, Macintosh
        computers, and some products and hardware, further clouding the
        user-base picture.</p>
<p>In general, though, Python enjoys a large user base and a very
        active developer community. Because Python has been around for some 19
        years and has been widely used, it is also very stable and robust.
        Besides being employed by individual users, Python is also being
        applied in real revenue-generating products by real <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2486"></a>companies. For instance:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Google makes extensive use of Python in its web search
            systems, and employs Python’s creator.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The YouTube video sharing service is largely written in
            Python.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The popular BitTorrent peer-to-peer file sharing system is a
            Python program.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Google’s popular App Engine web development framework uses
            Python as its application language.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>EVE Online, a Massively Multiplayer Online Game (MMOG),
            makes extensive use of Python.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Maya, a powerful integrated 3D modeling and animation
            system, provides a Python
            scripting API.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Intel, Cisco, Hewlett-Packard, Seagate, Qualcomm, and IBM
            use Python for hardware testing.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Industrial Light &amp; Magic, Pixar, and others use Python
            in the production of animated movies.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>JPMorgan Chase, UBS, Getco, and Citadel apply Python for
            financial market forecasting.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>NASA, Los Alamos, Fermilab, JPL, and others use Python for
            scientific programming tasks.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>iRobot uses Python to develop commercial robotic
            devices.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>ESRI uses Python as an end-user customization tool for its
            popular GIS mapping products.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The NSA uses Python for cryptography and intelligence
            analysis.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The IronPort email server product uses more than 1 million
            lines of Python code to do its job.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The One Laptop Per Child (OLPC) project builds its user
            interface and activity model in Python.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>And so on. Probably the only common thread amongst the companies
        using Python today is that Python is used all over the map, in terms
        of application domains. Its general-purpose nature makes it applicable
        to almost all fields, not just one. In fact, it’s safe to say that
        virtually every substantial organization writing software is using
        Python, whether for short-term tactical tasks, such as testing and
        administration, or for long-term strategic product development. Python
        has proven to work well in both modes.</p>
<p>For more details on companies using Python today, see Python’s
        website at http://www.python.org.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="What Can I Do with Python?"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
