<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>What Can I Do with Python?</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="what_can_i_do_with_python_question"></a>What Can I Do with Python?</h1>
<p>In <a id="ch01Pythproglangusesfor"></a>addition to being a well-designed programming language,
        Python is useful for accomplishing real-world tasks—the sorts of
        things developers do day in and day out. It’s commonly used in a
        variety of domains, as a tool for scripting other components and
        implementing standalone programs. In fact, as a general-purpose
        language, Python’s roles are
        virtually unlimited: you can use it for everything from website
        development and gaming to robotics and spacecraft control.</p>
<p>However, the most common Python roles currently seem to fall
        into a few broad categories. The next few sections describe some of
        Python’s most common applications today, as well as tools used in each
        domain. We won’t be able to explore the tools mentioned here in any
        depth—if you are interested in any of these topics, see the Python
        website or other resources for more details.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Systems Programming"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="systems_programming"></a>Systems Programming</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Python’s <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2570"></a>built-in interfaces to operating-system services make
          it ideal for writing portable, maintainable system-administration
          tools and utilities (sometimes called <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>shell
          tools</em></span>). Python programs can search files and directory
          trees, launch other programs, do parallel processing with processes
          and threads, and so on.</p>
<p>Python’s standard library comes with POSIX bindings and
          support for all the usual OS tools: environment variables, files,
          sockets, pipes, processes, multiple threads, regular expression
          pattern matching, command-line arguments, standard stream
          interfaces, shell-command launchers, filename expansion, and more.
          In addition, the bulk of Python’s system interfaces are designed to
          be portable; for example, a script that copies directory trees
          typically runs unchanged on all major Python platforms. The
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Stackless Python</em></span> system, used by EVE Online,
          also offers advanced solutions to multiprocessing
          requirements.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="GUIs"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="guis"></a>GUIs</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Python’s <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2587"></a>simplicity and rapid turnaround also make it a good
          match for graphical user interface programming. Python comes with a
          standard object-oriented interface to the Tk GUI API called
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>tkinter</em></span> (<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Tkinter</em></span> in 2.6)
          that allows Python programs to implement portable GUIs with a native
          look and feel. Python/tkinter GUIs run unchanged on Microsoft
          Windows, X Windows (on Unix and Linux), and the Mac OS (both Classic
          and OS X). A free extension package, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>PMW</em></span>, adds
          advanced widgets to the tkinter toolkit. In addition, the
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>wxPython</em></span> GUI API, based on a C++ library,
          offers an alternative toolkit for constructing portable GUIs in
          Python.</p>
<p>Higher-level toolkits such as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>PythonCard</em></span>
          and <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Dabo</em></span> are built on top of base APIs such as
          wxPython and tkinter. With the proper library, you can also use GUI
          support in other toolkits in Python, such as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Qt</em></span>
          with PyQt, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>GTK</em></span> with PyGTK,
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>MFC</em></span> with PyWin32, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>.NET</em></span>
          with IronPython, and <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Swing</em></span> with Jython (the
          Java version of Python, described in Chapter 2) or JPype. For applications
          that run in web browsers or have simple interface requirements, both
          Jython and Python web frameworks and server-side CGI scripts,
          described in the next section, provide additional user interface
          options.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Internet Scripting"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="internet_scripting"></a>Internet Scripting</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Python <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2640"></a>comes with standard Internet modules that allow Python
          programs to perform a wide variety of networking tasks, in client
          and server modes. Scripts can communicate over sockets; extract form
          information sent to server-side CGI scripts; transfer files by FTP;
          parse, generate, and analyze XML files; send, receive, compose, and
          parse email; fetch web pages by URLs; parse the HTML and XML of
          fetched web pages; communicate over XML-RPC, SOAP, and Telnet; and
          more. Python’s libraries make these tasks remarkably simple.</p>
<p>In addition, a large collection of third-party tools are
          available on the Web for doing Internet programming in Python. For
          instance, the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>HTMLGen</em></span> system generates HTML
          files from Python class-based descriptions, the
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>mod_python</em></span> package runs Python efficiently
          within the Apache web server and supports server-side templating
          with its Python Server Pages, and the Jython system provides for
          seamless Python/Java integration and supports coding of server-side
          applets that run on clients.</p>
<p>In addition, full-blown web development framework packages for
          Python, such as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Django</em></span>,
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>TurboGears</em></span>, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>web2py</em></span>,
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Pylons</em></span>, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Zope</em></span>, and
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>WebWare</em></span>, support quick construction of
          full-featured and production-quality websites with Python. Many of
          these include features such as object-relational mappers, a
          Model/View/Controller architecture, server-side scripting and
          templating, and AJAX support, to provide complete and enterprise-level web development
          solutions.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Component Integration"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="component_integration"></a>Component Integration</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>We discussed the <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2681"></a>component integration role earlier when describing
          Python as a control language. Python’s ability to be extended by and
          embedded in C and C++ systems makes it useful as a flexible glue
          language for scripting the behavior of other systems and components.
          For instance, integrating a C library into Python enables Python to
          test and launch the library’s components, and embedding Python in a
          product enables onsite customizations to be coded without having to
          recompile the entire product (or ship its source code at
          all).</p>
<p>Tools such as the
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>SWIG</em></span> and <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>SIP</em></span> code
          generators can automate much of the work needed to link compiled
          components into Python for use in scripts, and the
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Cython</em></span> system allows coders to mix Python and
          C-like code. Larger frameworks, such as Python’s COM support on
          Windows, the Jython Java-based implementation, the IronPython
          .NET-based implementation, and various CORBA toolkits for Python,
          provide alternative ways to script components. On Windows, for
          example, Python scripts can use frameworks to script Word and
          Excel.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Database Programming"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="database_programming"></a>Database Programming</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>For traditional <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2702"></a>database demands, there are Python interfaces to all
          commonly used relational database systems—Sybase, Oracle, Informix,
          ODBC, MySQL, PostgreSQL, SQLite, and more. The Python world has also
          defined a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>portable database API</em></span> for accessing
          SQL database systems from Python scripts, which looks the same on a
          variety of underlying database systems. For instance, because the
          vendor interfaces implement the portable API, a script written to
          work with the free MySQL system will work largely unchanged on other
          systems (such as Oracle); all you have to do is replace the
          underlying vendor interface.</p>
<p>Python’s standard <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code>
          module provides a simple <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>object persistence</em></span>
          system—it allows programs to easily save and restore entire Python
          objects to files and file-like objects. On the Web, you’ll also find
          a third-party open source system named <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>ZODB</em></span>
          that provides a complete object-oriented database system for Python
          scripts, and others (such as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>SQLObject</em></span> and
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>SQLAlchemy</em></span>) that map relational tables onto
          Python’s class model. Furthermore, as of Python 2.5, the in-process
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>SQLite</em></span> embedded SQL database engine is a
          standard part of Python itself.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Rapid Prototyping"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="rapid_prototyping"></a>Rapid Prototyping</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To Python programs, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2735"></a>components written in Python and C look the same.
          Because of this, it’s possible to prototype systems in Python
          initially, and then move selected components to a compiled language
          such as C or C++ for delivery. Unlike some prototyping tools, Python
          doesn’t require a complete rewrite once the prototype has
          solidified. Parts of the system that don’t require the efficiency of
          a language such as C++ can remain coded in Python for ease of
          maintenance and use.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Numeric and Scientific Programming"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="numeric_and_scientific_programming"></a>Numeric and Scientific Programming</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2745"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2748"></a>NumPy</em></span>
<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2752"></a> numeric programming extension for Python mentioned
          earlier includes such advanced tools as an array object, interfaces
          to standard mathematical libraries, and much more. By integrating
          Python with numeric routines coded in a compiled language for speed,
          NumPy turns Python into a sophisticated yet easy-to-use numeric
          programming tool that can often replace existing code written in
          traditional compiled languages such as FORTRAN or C++. Additional
          numeric tools for Python support animation, 3D visualization,
          parallel processing, and so on. The popular <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2757"></a>SciPy</em></span> and <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2763"></a>ScientificPython</em></span> extensions, for example,
          provide additional libraries of scientific programming tools and use
          NumPy code.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Gaming, Images, Serial Ports, XML, Robots, and More"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="gaming_comma_images_comma_serial_ports"></a>Gaming, Images, Serial Ports, XML, Robots, and More</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Python is commonly applied in more domains than can be
          mentioned here. For example, you can do:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Game programming and multimedia in Python with the
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>pygame</em></span> system</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Serial port communication on Windows, Linux, and more with
              the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>PySerial</em></span> extension</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Image processing with <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>PIL</em></span>,
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>PyOpenGL</em></span>, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Blender</em></span>,
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Maya</em></span>, and others</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Robot control programming with the
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>PyRo</em></span> toolkit</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>XML parsing with the <code class="epub__literal">xml</code> library package, the <code class="epub__literal">xmlrpclib</code> module, and third-party
              extensions</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Artificial intelligence programming with neural network
              simulators and expert system shells</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Natural language analysis with the
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>NLTK</em></span> package</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>You can even play solitaire with the
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>PySol</em></span> program. You’ll find support for many
          such fields at the PyPI websites, and via web searches (search
          Google or http://www.python.org for
          links).</p>
<p>Many of these specific domains are largely just instances of
          Python’s component integration role in action again. Adding it as a
          frontend to libraries of components written in a compiled language
          such as C makes Python useful for scripting in a wide variety of
          domains. As a general-purpose language that supports integration,
          Python is widely <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2836"></a>applicable.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="How Is Python Supported?"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
