<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How Is Python Supported?</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="how_is_python_supported_question"></a>How Is Python Supported?</h1>
<p>As a popular open source system, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2844"></a>Python enjoys a large and active <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2850"></a>development community that responds to issues and
        develops enhancements with a speed that many commercial software
        developers would find remarkable (if not downright shocking). Python
        developers coordinate work online with a source-control system.
        Changes follow a formal <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2855"></a>PEP</em></span> (Python Enhancement Proposal) protocol
        and must be accompanied by extensions to Python’s extensive regression
        testing system. In fact, modifying Python today is roughly as involved as
        changing commercial software—a far cry from Python’s early days, when
        an email to its creator would suffice, but a good thing given its
        current large user base.</p>
<p>The <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2867"></a>PSF</em></span> (Python Software Foundation), a formal
        nonprofit group, organizes conferences and deals with intellectual
        property issues. Numerous Python conferences are held around the
        world; O’Reilly’s OSCON and the PSF’s PyCon are the largest. The
        former of these addresses multiple open source projects, and the
        latter is a Python-only event that has experienced strong growth in
        recent years. Attendance at PyCon 2008 nearly
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>doubled</em></span> from the prior year, growing from 586
        attendees in 2007 to over 1,000 in 2008. This was on the heels of a
        40% attendance increase in 2007, from 410 in 2006. PyCon 2009 had 943
        attendees, a slight decrease from 2008, but a still very strong
        showing during a global recession.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="What Are Python’s Technical Strengths?"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
