<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>What Are Python’s Technical Strengths?</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="what_are_python_apostrophy_s_technical"></a>What Are Python’s Technical Strengths?</h1>
<p><a id="ch01Pythproglangtechstrengths"></a>Naturally, this is a developer’s question. If you don’t
        already have a programming background, the language in the next few
        sections may be a bit baffling—don’t worry, we’ll explore all of these
        terms in more detail as we proceed through this book. For developers,
        though, here is a quick introduction to some of Python’s top technical
        features.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="It’s Object-Oriented"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="it_apostrophy_s_object-oriented"></a>It’s Object-Oriented</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Python is an <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2890"></a>object-oriented language, from the ground up. Its
          class model supports advanced notions such as polymorphism, operator
          overloading, and multiple inheritance; yet, in the context of
          Python’s simple syntax and typing, OOP is remarkably easy to apply.
          In fact, if you don’t understand these terms, you’ll find they are
          much easier to learn with Python than with just about any other OOP
          language available.</p>
<p>Besides serving as a powerful code structuring and reuse
          device, Python’s OOP nature makes it ideal as a scripting tool for
          object-oriented systems languages such as C++ and Java. For example,
          with the appropriate glue code, Python programs can subclass
          (specialize) classes implemented in C++, Java, and C#.</p>
<p>Of equal significance, OOP is an <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>option</em></span>
          in Python; you can go far without having to become an object guru
          all at once. Much like C++, Python supports both procedural and
          object-oriented programming modes. Its object-oriented tools can be
          applied if and when constraints allow. This is especially useful in
          tactical development modes, which preclude design phases.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="It’s Free"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="it_apostrophy_s_free"></a>It’s Free</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Python is completely free to use and distribute. As with other
          open source software, such as Tcl, Perl, Linux, and Apache, you can
          fetch the entire Python system’s source code for free on the
          Internet. There are no restrictions on copying it, embedding it in
          your systems, or shipping it with your products. In fact, you can
          even sell Python’s source code, if you are so inclined.</p>
<p>But don’t get the wrong idea: “free” doesn’t mean
          “unsupported.” On the contrary, the Python online community responds
          to user queries with a speed that most commercial software help
          desks would do well to try to emulate. Moreover, because Python
          comes with complete source code, it empowers developers, leading to
          the creation of a large team of implementation experts. Although
          studying or changing a programming language’s implementation isn’t
          everyone’s idea of fun, it’s comforting to know that you can do so
          if you need to. You’re not dependent on the whims of a commercial
          vendor; the ultimate documentation source is at your
          disposal.</p>
<p>As mentioned earlier, Python development is performed by a
          community that largely coordinates its efforts over the Internet. It
          consists of Python’s creator—<span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2911"></a>Guido van Rossum</em></span>, the officially anointed
          Benevolent Dictator for Life (BDFL) of Python—plus a supporting cast
          of thousands. Language changes must follow a formal enhancement
          procedure and be scrutinized by both other developers and the BDFL.
          Happily, this tends to make Python more conservative with changes
          than some other languages.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="It’s Portable"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="it_apostrophy_s_portable"></a>It’s Portable</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The standard <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2921"></a>implementation of <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2925"></a>Python is written in portable ANSI C, and it compiles
          and runs on virtually every major platform currently in use. For
          example, Python programs run today on everything from PDAs to
          supercomputers. As a partial list, Python is available on:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Linux and Unix systems</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Microsoft Windows and DOS (all modern flavors)</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Mac OS (both OS X and Classic)</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>BeOS, OS/2, VMS, and QNX</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Real-time systems such as VxWorks</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Cray supercomputers and IBM mainframes</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>PDAs running Palm OS, PocketPC, and Linux</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Cell phones running Symbian OS and Windows Mobile</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Gaming consoles and iPods</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>And more</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Like the language interpreter itself, the standard library
          modules that ship with Python are implemented to be as portable
          across platform boundaries as possible. Further, Python programs are
          automatically compiled to portable byte code, which runs the same on
          any platform with a compatible version of Python installed (more on
          this in the next chapter).</p>
<p>What that means is that Python
          programs using the core language and standard libraries run the same
          on Linux, Windows, and most other systems with a Python interpreter.
          Most Python ports also contain platform-specific extensions (e.g.,
          COM support on Windows), but the core Python language and libraries
          work the same everywhere. As mentioned earlier, Python also includes
          an interface to the Tk GUI toolkit called tkinter (Tkinter in 2.6),
          which allows Python programs to implement full-featured graphical
          user interfaces that run on all major GUI platforms without program
          changes.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="It’s Powerful"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="it_apostrophy_s_powerful"></a>It’s Powerful</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>From a features perspective, Python is something of a hybrid.
          Its toolset places it between traditional scripting languages (such
          as Tcl, Scheme, and Perl) and systems development languages (such as
          C, C++, and Java). Python provides all the simplicity and ease of
          use of a scripting language, along with more advanced
          software-engineering tools typically found in compiled languages.
          Unlike some scripting languages, this combination makes Python
          useful for large-scale development projects. As a preview, here are
          some of the main things you’ll find in Python’s toolbox:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Dynamic typing</span></dt><dd>
<p>Python <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2979"></a>keeps track of the kinds of objects your program
                uses when it runs; it doesn’t require complicated type and
                size declarations in your code. In fact, as you’ll see in
                Chapter 6, there is no
                such thing as a type or variable declaration anywhere in
                Python. Because Python code does not constrain data types, it
                is also usually automatically applicable to a whole range of
                objects.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Automatic memory management</span></dt><dd>
<p>Python a<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2991"></a>utomatically allocates objects and reclaims
                (“garbage collects”) them when they are no longer used, and
                most can grow and shrink on demand. As you’ll learn, Python
                keeps track of low-level memory details so you don’t have
                to.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Programming-in-the-large support</span></dt><dd>
<p>For building larger systems, Python includes tools such
                as modules, classes, and exceptions. These tools allow you to
                organize systems into components, use OOP to reuse and
                customize code, and handle events and errors
                gracefully.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Built-in object types</span></dt><dd>
<p>Python <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e3007"></a>provides commonly used data structures such as
                lists, dictionaries, and strings as intrinsic parts of the
                language; as you’ll see, they’re both flexible and easy to
                use. For instance, built-in objects can grow and shrink on
                demand, can be arbitrarily nested to represent
                complex information, and more.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Built-in tools</span></dt><dd>
<p>To process all those object types, Python comes with
                powerful and standard operations, including concatenation
                (joining collections), slicing (extracting sections), sorting,
                mapping, and more.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Library utilities</span></dt><dd>
<p>For more specific tasks, Python also comes with a large
                collection of precoded library tools that support everything
                from regular expression matching to networking. Once you learn
                the language itself, Python’s library tools are where much of
                the application-level action occurs.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Third-party utilities</span></dt><dd>
<p>Because Python is open source, developers are encouraged
                to contribute precoded tools that support tasks beyond those
                supported by its built-ins; on the Web, you’ll find free
                support for COM, imaging, CORBA ORBs, XML, database access,
                and much more.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Despite the array of tools in Python, it retains a remarkably
          simple syntax and design. The result is a powerful programming tool
          with all the usability of a scripting language.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="It’s Mixable"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="it_apostrophy_s_mixable"></a>It’s Mixable</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Python programs can easily be “glued” to components written in
          other languages in a variety of ways. For example, Python’s C API
          lets C programs call and be called by Python programs flexibly. That
          means you can add functionality to the Python system as needed, and
          use Python programs within other environments or systems.</p>
<p>Mixing Python with libraries coded in languages such as C or
          C++, for instance, makes it an easy-to-use frontend language and
          customization tool. As mentioned earlier, this also makes Python
          good at rapid prototyping; systems may be implemented in Python
          first, to leverage its speed of development, and later moved to C
          for delivery, one piece at a time, according to performance
          demands.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="It’s Easy to Use"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="it_apostrophy_s_easy_to_use"></a>It’s Easy to Use</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To run a Python program, you simply type it and run it. There
          are no intermediate compile and link steps, like there are for
          languages such as C or C++. Python executes programs immediately,
          which makes for an interactive programming experience and rapid
          turnaround after program changes—in many cases, you can witness the
          effect of a program change as fast as you can type it.</p>
<p>Of course, development cycle turnaround is only one aspect of
          Python’s ease of use. It also provides a deliberately simple syntax
          and powerful built-in tools. In fact, some have gone so far as to
          call Python “executable pseudocode.” Because it eliminates much of
          the complexity in other tools, Python programs are simpler, smaller,
          and more flexible than equivalent programs in languages like C, C++,
          and Java.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="It’s Easy to Learn"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="it_apostrophy_s_easy_to_learn"></a>It’s Easy to Learn</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>This brings us to a key point of this book: compared to other
          programming languages, the core Python language is remarkably easy
          to learn. In fact, you can expect to be coding significant Python
          programs in a matter of days (or perhaps in just hours, if you’re
          already an experienced programmer). That’s good news for
          professional developers seeking to learn the language to use on the
          job, as well as for end users of systems that expose a Python layer
          for customization or control.</p>
<p>Today, many systems rely on the fact that end users can
          quickly learn enough Python to tailor their Python customizations’
          code onsite, with little or no support. Although Python does have
          advanced programming tools, its core language will still seem simple
          to beginners and gurus alike.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="It’s Named After Monty Python"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="it_apostrophy_s_named_after_monty_pytho"></a>It’s Named After Monty Python</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>OK, this isn’t quite a technical strength, but it does seem to
          be a surprisingly well-kept secret that I wish to expose up front.
          Despite all the reptile icons in the Python world, the truth is that
          Python creator Guido van Rossum named it after the BBC comedy series
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e3062"></a>Monty Python’s Flying Circus</em></span>. He is a big
          fan of Monty Python, as are many software developers (indeed, there
          seems to almost be a symmetry between the two fields).</p>
<p>This legacy inevitably adds a humorous quality to Python code
          examples. For instance, the traditional “foo” and “bar” for generic
          variable names become “spam” and “eggs” in the Python world. The
          occasional “Brian,” “ni,” and “shrubbery” likewise owe their
          appearances to this namesake. It even impacts the Python community
          at large: talks at Python conferences are regularly billed as “The
          Spanish Inquisition.”</p>
<p>All of this is, of course, very funny if you are familiar with
          the show, but less so otherwise. You don’t need to be familiar with
          the series to make sense of examples that borrow references to Monty
          Python (including many you will see in this book), but at least you
          now know their <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e3071"></a>root.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="How Does Python Stack Up to Language X?"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
