<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How Does Python Stack Up to Language X?</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="how_does_python_stack_up_to_language_x"></a>How Does Python Stack Up to Language X?</h1>
<p>Finally, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e3079"></a>to place it in the context of what you may already know,
        people sometimes compare Python to languages such as Perl, Tcl, and
        Java. We talked about performance earlier, so here we’ll focus on
        functionality. While other languages are also useful tools to know and
        use, many people find that Python:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Is more powerful than Tcl. Python’s support for “programming
            in the large” makes it applicable to the development of larger
            systems.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e3548"></a>Has a cleaner syntax and simpler design than Perl,
            which makes it more readable and maintainable and helps reduce
            program bugs.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Is simpler and easier to use than Java. Python is a
            scripting language, but Java inherits much of the complexity and
            syntax of systems languages such as C++.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Is simpler and easier to use than C++, but it doesn’t often
            compete with C++; as a scripting language, Python typically serves
            different roles.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Is both more powerful and more cross-platform than Visual
            Basic. Its open source nature also means it is not controlled by a
            single company.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Is more readable and general-purpose than PHP. Python is
            sometimes used to construct websites, but it’s also widely used in
            nearly every other computer domain, from robotics to movie
            animation.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Is more mature and has a more readable syntax than Ruby.
            Unlike Ruby and Java, OOP is an option in Python—Python does not
            impose OOP on users or projects to which it may not apply.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Has the dynamic flavor of languages like SmallTalk and Lisp,
            but also has a simple, traditional syntax accessible to developers
            as well as end users of customizable systems.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Especially for programs that do more than scan text files, and
        that might have to be read in the future by others (or by you!), many
        people find that Python fits the bill better than any other scripting
        or programming language available today. Furthermore, unless your
        application requires peak performance, Python is often a viable
        alternative to systems development languages such as C, C++, and Java:
        Python code will be much less difficult to write, debug, and
        maintain.</p>
<p>Of course, your author has been a card-carrying Python
        evangelist since 1992, so take these comments as you may. They do,
        however, reflect the common experience of many developers who have
        taken time to explore what Python has to offer.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Chapter Summary"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
