<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_answers"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</h1>
<p>How did you do? Here are the answers I came up with, though
        there may be multiple solutions to some quiz questions. Again, even if
        you’re sure you got a question right, I encourage you to look at these
        answers for additional context. See the chapter’s text for more
        details if any of these responses don’t make sense to you.</p><div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Software quality, developer productivity, program
            portability, support libraries, component integration, and simple
            enjoyment. Of these, the quality and productivity themes seem to
            be the main reasons that people choose to use Python.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Google, Industrial Light &amp; Magic, EVE Online, Jet
            Propulsion Labs, Maya, ESRI, and many more. Almost every
            organization doing software development uses Python in some
            fashion, whether for long-term strategic product development or
            for short-term tactical tasks such as testing and system
            administration.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Python’s downside is performance: it won’t run as quickly as
            fully compiled languages
            like C and C++. On the other hand, it’s quick enough for most
            applications, and typical Python code runs at close to C speed
            anyhow because it invokes linked-in C code in the interpreter.
            If speed is critical, compiled extensions are available for
            number-crunching parts of an application.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>You can use Python for nearly anything you can do with a
            computer, from website development and gaming to robotics and
            spacecraft control.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">import this</code> triggers an
            Easter egg inside Python that displays some of the design
            philosophies underlying the language. You’ll learn how to run this
            statement in the next chapter.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>“Spam” is a reference from a famous Monty Python skit in
            which people trying to order food in a cafeteria are drowned out
            by a chorus of Vikings singing about spam. Oh, and it’s also a
            common variable name in Python scripts....</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Blue. No, yellow!</p></li></ol>
</div><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="python_is_engineering_comma_not_art"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Python Is Engineering, Not Art</p>
<p>When <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e3204"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e3668"></a>Python first emerged on the software scene in the
          early 1990s, it spawned what is now something of a classic conflict
          between its proponents and those of another popular scripting
          language, Perl. Personally, I think the debate is tired and
          unwarranted today—developers are smart enough to draw their own
          conclusions. Still, this is one of the most common topics I’m asked
          about on the training road, so it seems fitting to say a few words
          about it here.</p>
<p>The short story is this: <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>you can do everything in
          Python that you can in Perl, but you can read your code after you do
          it</em></span>. That’s it—their domains largely overlap, but Python
          is more focused on producing readable code. For many, the enhanced
          readability of Python translates to better code reusability and
          maintainability, making Python a better choice for programs that
          will not be written once and thrown away. Perl code is easy to
          write, but difficult to read. Given that most software has a
          lifespan much longer than its initial creation, many see Python as a
          more effective tool.</p>
<p>The somewhat longer story reflects the backgrounds of the
          designers of the two languages and underscores some of the main
          reasons people choose to use Python. Python’s creator is a
          mathematician by training; as such, he produced a language with a
          high degree of uniformity—its syntax and toolset are remarkably
          coherent. Moreover, like math, Python’s design is orthogonal—most of
          the language follows from a small set of core concepts. For
          instance, once one grasps Python’s flavor of polymorphism, the rest
          is largely just details.</p>
<p>By contrast, the creator of the Perl language is a linguist,
          and its design reflects this heritage. There are many ways to
          accomplish the same tasks in Perl, and language constructs interact
          in context-sensitive and sometimes quite subtle ways—much like
          natural language. As the well-known Perl motto states, “There’s more
          than one way to do it.” Given this design, both the Perl language
          and its user community have historically encouraged freedom of
          expression when writing code. One person’s Perl code can be
          radically different from another’s. In fact, writing unique, tricky
          code is often a source of pride among Perl users.</p>
<p>But as anyone who has done any substantial code maintenance
          should be able to attest, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>freedom of expression is great
          for art, but lousy for engineering</em></span>. In engineering, we
          need a minimal feature set and predictability. In engineering,
          freedom of expression can lead to maintenance nightmares. As more
          than one Perl user has confided to me, the result of too much
          freedom is often code that is much easier to rewrite from scratch
          than to modify.</p>
<p>Consider this: when people create a painting or a sculpture,
          they do so for themselves for purely aesthetic purposes. The
          possibility of someone else having to change that painting or
          sculpture later does not enter into it. This is a critical
          difference between art and engineering. When people write software,
          they are not writing it for themselves. In fact, they are not even
          writing primarily for the computer. Rather, good programmers know
          that code is written for the next human being who has to read it in
          order to maintain or reuse it. If that person cannot understand the
          code, it’s all but useless in a realistic development
          scenario.</p>
<p>This is where many people find that Python most clearly
          differentiates itself from scripting languages like Perl. Because
          Python’s syntax model almost forces users to write readable code,
          Python programs lend themselves more directly to the full software
          development cycle. And because Python emphasizes ideas such as
          limited interactions, code uniformity and regularity, and feature
          consistency, it more directly fosters code that can be used long
          after it is first written.</p>
<p>In the long run, Python’s focus on code quality in itself
          boosts programmer productivity, as well as programmer satisfaction.
          Python programmers can be creative, too, of course, and as we’ll
          see, the language does offer multiple solutions for some tasks. At
          its core, though, Python encourages good engineering in ways that
          other scripting languages often do not.</p>
<p>At least, that’s the common consensus among many people who
          have adopted Python. You should always judge such claims for
          yourself, of course, by learning what Python has to offer. To help
          you get started, let’s move on to the next chapter.</p>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[2] </sup>For a more complete look at the Python philosophy, type
              the command <code class="epub__literal">import this</code> at
              any Python interactive prompt (you’ll see how in Chapter 2). This invokes an
              “<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e2356"></a>Easter egg” hidden in Python—a collection of
              design principles underlying Python. The acronym EIBTI is now
              fashionable jargon for the “explicit is better than implicit”
              rule.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
