<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Execution Model Variations</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="execution_model_variations"></a>Execution Model Variations</h1>
<p>Before moving on, I should point out that the internal execution
        flow described in the prior section reflects the standard
        implementation of Python today but is not really a requirement of the
        Python language itself. Because of that, the execution model is prone
        to changing with time. In fact, there are already a few systems that
        modify the picture in Figure 2-2 somewhat. Let’s
        take a few moments to explore the most prominent of these
        variations.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Python Implementation Alternatives"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="python_implementation_alternatives"></a>Python Implementation Alternatives</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Really, as this book is being written, there are <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e3528"></a>three primary implementations of the Python
          language—<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>CPython</em></span>, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Jython</em></span>,
          and <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>IronPython</em></span>—along with a handful of
          secondary implementations such as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Stackless
          Python</em></span>. In brief, CPython is the standard implementation;
          all the others have very specific purposes and roles. All implement
          the same Python language but execute programs in different
          ways.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="CPython"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="cpython"></a>CPython</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e3551"></a>original, and standard, implementation of Python is
            usually called CPython, when you want to contrast it with the
            other two. Its name comes from the fact that it is coded in
            portable ANSI C language code. This is the Python that you fetch
            from http://www.python.org, get with the
            ActivePython distribution, and have automatically on most Linux
            and Mac OS X machines. If you’ve found a preinstalled version of
            Python on your machine, it’s probably CPython, unless your company
            is using Python in very specialized ways.</p>
<p>Unless you want to script Java or .NET applications with
            Python, you probably want to use the standard CPython system.
            Because it is the reference implementation of the language, it
            tends to run the fastest, be the most complete, and be more robust
            than the alternative systems. Figure 2-2 reflects
            CPython’s runtime architecture.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Jython"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="jython"></a>Jython</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e3566"></a>Jython system (originally known as JPython) is an
            alternative implementation of the Python language, targeted for
            integration with the Java programming language. Jython consists of
            Java classes that compile Python source code to Java byte code and
            then route the resulting byte code to the Java Virtual Machine
            (JVM). Programmers still code Python statements in <em class="epub__filename">.py</em> text files as usual; the Jython
            system essentially just replaces the rightmost two bubbles in
            Figure 2-2 with
            Java-based equivalents.</p>
<p>Jython’s goal is to allow Python code to script Java
            applications, much as CPython allows Python to script C and C++
            components. Its integration with Java is remarkably seamless.
            Because Python code is translated to Java byte code, it looks and
            feels like a true Java program at runtime. Jython scripts can
            serve as web applets and servlets, build Java-based GUIs, and so
            on. Moreover, Jython includes integration support that allows
            Python code to import and use Java classes as though they were
            coded in Python. Because Jython is slower and less robust than
            CPython, though, it is usually seen as a tool of interest
            primarily to Java developers looking for a scripting language to
            be a frontend to Java code.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="IronPython"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="ironpython"></a>IronPython</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>A <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e3582"></a>third implementation of Python, and newer than both
            CPython and Jython, IronPython is designed to allow
            Python programs to integrate with applications coded to work with
            Microsoft’s <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e3589"></a>.NET Framework for Windows, as well as the Mono open
            source equivalent for Linux. .NET and its C# programming language
            runtime system are designed to be a language-neutral object
            communication layer, in the spirit of Microsoft’s earlier COM
            model. IronPython allows Python programs to act as both client and
            server components, accessible from other .NET languages.</p>
<p>By implementation, IronPython is very much like Jython (and,
            in fact, was developed by the same creator)—it replaces the last
            two bubbles in Figure 2-2 with
            equivalents for execution in the .NET environment. Also, like
            Jython, IronPython has a special focus—it is primarily of interest
            to developers integrating Python with .NET components. Because it
            is being developed by Microsoft, though, IronPython might also be
            able to leverage some important optimization tools for better
            performance. IronPython’s
            scope is still evolving as I write this; for more details, consult
            the Python online resources or search the Web.<sup>[4]</sup></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Execution Optimization Tools"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="execution_optimization_tools"></a>Execution Optimization Tools</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>CPython, <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e3608"></a>Jython, and IronPython all implement the Python
          language in similar ways: by compiling source code to byte code and
          executing the byte code on an appropriate virtual machine. Still
          other systems, including the Psyco just-in-time compiler and the
          Shedskin C++ translator, instead attempt to optimize the basic
          execution model. These systems are not required knowledge at this
          point in your Python career, but a quick look at their place in the
          execution model might help demystify the model in general.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="The Psyco just-in-time compiler"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="the_psyco_just-in-time_compiler"></a>The Psyco just-in-time compiler</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e3617"></a>Psyco system is not another Python implementation,
            but rather a component that extends the byte code execution model
            to make programs run faster. In terms of Figure 2-2,
            Psyco is an enhancement to the PVM that collects and uses type
            information while the program runs to translate portions of the
            program’s byte code all the way down to real binary machine code
            for faster execution. Psyco accomplishes this translation without requiring
            changes to the code or a separate compilation step during
            development.</p>
<p>Roughly, while your program runs, Psyco collects information
            about the kinds of objects being passed around; that information
            can be used to generate highly efficient machine code tailored for
            those object types. Once generated, the machine code then replaces
            the corresponding part of the original byte code to speed your
            program’s overall execution. The net effect is that, with Psyco,
            your program becomes much quicker over time and as it is running.
            In ideal cases, some Python code may become as fast as compiled C
            code under Psyco.</p>
<p>Because this translation from byte code happens at program
            runtime, Psyco is generally known as a <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e3632"></a><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>just-in-time</em></span> (JIT) compiler.
            Psyco is actually a bit different from the JIT compilers some
            readers may have seen for the Java language, though. Really, Psyco
            is a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>specializing JIT compiler</em></span>—it generates
            machine code tailored to the data types that your program actually
            uses. For example, if a part of your program uses different data
            types at different times, Psyco may generate a different version
            of machine code to support each different type combination.</p>
<p>Psyco has been shown to speed Python code dramatically.
            According to its web page, Psyco provides “2x to 100x speed-ups,
            typically 4x, with an unmodified Python interpreter and unmodified
            source code, just a dynamically loadable C extension module.” Of
            equal significance, the largest speedups are realized for
            algorithmic code written in pure Python—exactly the sort of code
            you might normally migrate to C to optimize. With Psyco, such
            migrations become even less important.</p>
<p>Psyco is not yet a standard part of Python; you will have to
            fetch and install it separately. It is also still something of a
            research project, so you’ll have to track its evolution online. In
            fact, at this writing, although Psyco can still be fetched and
            installed by itself, it appears that much of the system may
            eventually be absorbed into the newer “PyPy” project—an attempt to
            reimplement Python’s PVM in Python code, to better support
            optimizations like Psyco.</p>
<p>Perhaps the largest downside of Psyco is that it currently
            only generates machine code for Intel x86 architecture chips,
            though this includes Windows and Linux boxes and recent Macs. For
            more details on the Psyco extension, and other JIT efforts that
            may arise, consult http://www.python.org;
            you can also check out Psyco’s home page, which currently resides
            at http://psyco.sourceforge.net.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="The Shedskin C++ translator"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="the_shedskin_c_plus_plus_translator"></a>The Shedskin C++ translator</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Shedskin <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e3656"></a>is an emerging system that takes a different
            approach to Python program execution—it attempts to translate
            Python source code to C++ code, which your computer’s C++ compiler
            then compiles to machine code. As such, it represents a
            platform-neutral approach to running Python code. Shedskin is
            still somewhat experimental as I write these words, and it limits
            Python programs to an implicit statically typed constraint that is
            technically not normal Python, so we won’t go into further detail
            here. Initial results, though, show that it has the potential to
            outperform both standard Python and the Psyco extension in terms
            of execution speed, and it is a promising project. Search the Web
            for details on the project’s current status.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Frozen Binaries"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="frozen_binaries"></a>Frozen Binaries</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Sometimes when people ask for a “real” Python compiler, what
          they’re really seeking is simply a way to generate standalone binary
          <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e3665"></a>executables from their Python programs. This is more a
          packaging and shipping idea than an execution-flow concept, but it’s
          somewhat related. With the help of third-party tools that you can
          fetch off the Web, it is possible to turn your Python programs into
          true executables, known as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e3672"></a>frozen binaries</em></span> in the Python world.</p>
<p>Frozen binaries bundle together the byte code of your program
          files, along with the PVM (interpreter) and any Python support files
          your program needs, into a single package. There are some variations
          on this theme, but the end result can be a single binary executable
          program (e.g., an <em class="epub__filename">.exe</em> file on
          Windows) that can easily be shipped to customers. In Figure 2-2, it is as
          though the byte code and PVM are merged into a single component—a
          frozen binary file.</p>
<p>Today, three primary systems are capable of generating frozen
          binaries: <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e3687"></a>py2exe</em></span> (for Windows), <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e3693"></a>PyInstaller</em></span> (which is similar to py2exe but
          also works on Linux and Unix and is capable of generating
          self-installing binaries), and <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e3699"></a>freeze</em></span> (the original). You may have to
          fetch these tools separately from Python itself, but they are
          available free of charge. They are also constantly evolving, so
          consult http://www.python.org or your favorite
          web search engine for more on these tools. To give you an idea of
          the scope of these systems, py2exe can freeze standalone programs
          that use the tkinter, PMW, wxPython, and PyGTK GUI libraries;
          programs that use the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>pygame</em></span> game programming
          toolkit; win32com client programs; and more.</p>
<p>Frozen binaries are not the same as the output of a true
          compiler—they run byte code through a virtual machine. Hence, apart
          from a possible startup improvement, frozen binaries run at the same
          speed as the original source files. Frozen binaries are not small
          (they contain a PVM), but by current standards they are not
          unusually large either. Because Python is embedded in the frozen
          binary, though, it does not have to be installed on the receiving
          end to run your program. Moreover, because your code is embedded in
          the frozen binary, it is more effectively hidden from
          recipients.</p>
<p>This single file-packaging scheme is especially appealing to
          developers of commercial software. For instance, a Python-coded user
          interface program based on the tkinter toolkit can be frozen into an
          executable file and shipped as a self-contained program on a CD or
          on the Web. End users do not need to install (or even have to know
          about) Python to run the shipped program.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Other Execution Options"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="other_execution_options"></a>Other Execution Options</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Still other schemes for running Python programs have more
          focused goals:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e3723"></a>Stackless Python</em></span> system is a standard
              CPython implementation variant that does not save state on the C
              language call stack. This makes Python more easy to port to
              small stack architectures, provides efficient multiprocessing
              options, and fosters novel programming structures such as
              coroutines.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e3732"></a>Cython</em></span> system (based on work done by
              the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Pyrex</em></span> project) is a hybrid language
              that combines Python code with the ability to call C functions
              and use C type declarations for variables, parameters, and class
              attributes. Cython code can be compiled to C code that uses the
              Python/C API, which may then be compiled completely. Though not
              completely compatible with standard Python, Cython can be useful
              both for wrapping external C libraries and for coding efficient
              C extensions for Python.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>For more details on these systems, search the Web for recent
          links.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Future Possibilities?"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="future_possibilities_question"></a>Future Possibilities?</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Finally, note that the runtime execution model sketched here
          is really an artifact of the current implementation of Python, not
          of the language itself. For instance, it’s not impossible that a
          full, traditional compiler for translating Python source code to
          machine code may appear during the shelf life of this book (although
          one has not in nearly two decades!). New byte code formats and
          implementation variants may also be adopted in the future. For
          instance:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e3752"></a>Parrot</em></span> project aims to provide a common
              byte code format, virtual machine, and optimization techniques
              for a variety of programming languages (see http://www.python.org). Python’s own PVM runs
              Python code more efficiently than Parrot, but it’s unclear how
              Parrot will evolve.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e3763"></a>PyPy</em></span> project is an attempt to
              reimplement the PVM in Python itself to enable new
              implementation techniques. Its goal is to produce a fast and
              flexible implementation of Python.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e3771"></a>Google-sponsored <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e3776"></a>Unladen Swallow</em></span> project aims to make
              standard Python faster by a factor of at least 5, and fast
              enough to replace the C language in many contexts. It is an
              optimization branch of CPython, intended to be fully compatible
              and significantly faster. This project also hopes to remove the
              Python multithreading Global Interpreter Lock (GIL), which
              prevents pure Python threads from truly overlapping in time.
              This is currently an emerging project being developed as open
              source by Google engineers; it is initially targeting Python
              2.6, though 3.0 may acquire its changes too. Search Google for
              up-to-date details.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Although such future implementation schemes may alter the
          runtime structure of Python somewhat, it seems likely that the byte
          code compiler will still be the standard for some time to come. The
          portability and runtime flexibility of byte code are important
          features of many Python systems. Moreover, adding type constraint
          declarations to support static compilation would break the
          flexibility, conciseness, simplicity, and overall spirit of Python
          coding. Due to Python’s highly dynamic nature, any future
          implementation will likely retain many artifacts of the current
          PVM.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Chapter Summary"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
