<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_answers-id1"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</h1>
<div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The Python interpreter is a program that runs the Python
            programs you write.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Source code is the statements you write for your program—it
            consists of text in text files that normally end with a <em class="epub__filename">.py</em> extension.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Byte code is the lower-level form of your program after
            Python compiles it. Python automatically stores byte code in files
            with a <em class="epub__filename">.pyc</em> extension.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The PVM is the Python Virtual Machine—the runtime engine of
            Python that interprets your compiled byte code.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Psyco, Shedskin, and frozen binaries are all variations on
            the execution model.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>CPython is the standard implementation of the language.
            Jython and IronPython implement Python programs for use in Java
            and .NET environments, respectively; they are alternative
            compilers for Python.</p></li></ol>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[3] </sup>And, strictly speaking, byte code is saved only for
                files that are imported, not for the top-level file of a
                program. We’ll explore imports in Chapter 3, and again in Part V. Byte code is also never saved for code
                typed at the interactive prompt, which is described in Chapter 3.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[4] </sup>Jython and IronPython are completely independent
                implementations of Python that compile Python source for
                different runtime architectures. It is also possible to access
                Java and .NET software from standard CPython programs: JPype
                and Python for .NET systems, for example, allow CPython code
                to call out to Java and .NET components.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
