<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 3. How You Run Programs</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 3. How You Run Programs"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h1 class="epub__title"><a id="how_you_run_programs"></a>Chapter 3. How You Run Programs</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>OK, it’s time to start running some code. Now that you have a
      handle on program execution, you’re finally ready to start some real
      Python programming. At this point, I’ll assume that you have Python
      installed on your computer; if not, see the prior chapter and Appendix A for installation and
      configuration hints.</p>
<p>There <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e3853"></a>are a variety of ways to tell Python to execute the code
      you type. This chapter discusses all the program launching techniques in
      common use today. Along the way, you’ll learn how to type code
      <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>interactively</em></span> and how to save it in
      <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>files</em></span> to be run with system command lines, icon
      clicks, module imports and reloads, <code class="epub__literal">exec</code> calls, menu options in GUIs such as IDLE,
      and more.</p>
<p>If you just want to find out how to run a Python program quickly,
      you may be tempted to read the parts of this chapter that pertain only
      to your platform and move on to Chapter 4. But don’t skip the
      material on module imports, as that’s essential to understanding
      Python’s program architecture. I also encourage you to at least skim the
      sections on IDLE and other IDEs, so you’ll know what tools are available
      for when you start developing more sophisticated Python programs.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="The Interactive Prompt"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
