<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>The Interactive Prompt</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="the_interactive_prompt"></a>The Interactive Prompt</h1>
<p>Perhaps <a id="ch03programsruninteractively"></a>the simplest way to run Python programs is to type them
        at Python’s interactive <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e3883"></a>command line, sometimes called the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="ch03interactiveprompt"></a>interactive prompt</em></span>. There are a variety of
        ways to start this command line: in an IDE, from a system console, and
        so on. Assuming the interpreter is installed as an executable program
        on your system, the most platform-neutral way to start an interactive
        interpreter session is usually just to type <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong> at your operating system’s prompt,
        without any arguments. For example:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e3899"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
Python 3.0.1 (r301:69561, Feb 13 2009, 20:04:18) [MSC v.1500 32 bit (Intel)] ...
Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
&gt;&gt;&gt;</pre>
<p>Typing the word “python” at your system shell prompt like this
        begins an interactive Python session; the “%” character at the start
        of this listing stands for a generic system prompt in this book—it’s
        not input that you type yourself. The notion of a system shell prompt
        is generic, but exactly how you access it varies by platform:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>On <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e3910"></a>Windows, you can type <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong> in a DOS console window (a.k.a.
            the Command Prompt, usually found in the Accessories section of
            the Start→Programs menu) or in the Start→Run... dialog box.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>On <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e3922"></a>Unix, <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e3928"></a>Linux, and <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e3932"></a>Mac OS X, you might type this command in a shell or
            terminal window (e.g., in an <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>xterm</em></span> or console
            running a shell such as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>ksh</em></span> or
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>csh</em></span>).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Other systems may use similar or platform-specific devices.
            On handheld devices, for example, you generally click the Python
            icon in the home or application window to launch an interactive
            session.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>If you have not set your shell’s <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e3952"></a>PATH</code> environment variable to include Python’s
        install directory, you may need to replace the word “python” with the
        full path to the Python executable on your machine. On Unix, Linux,
        and similar, <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>/usr/local/bin/python</code></strong> or <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>/usr/bin/python</code></strong> will often suffice. On
        Windows, try typing <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>C:\Python30\python</code></strong> (for version
        3.0):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e3966"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python30\python</code></strong>
Python 3.0.1 (r301:69561, Feb 13 2009, 20:04:18) [MSC v.1500 32 bit (Intel)] ...
Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
&gt;&gt;&gt;</pre>
<p>Alternatively, you can run a change-directory command to go to
        Python’s install directory before typing “python”—try the <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>cd c:\python30</code></strong> command on Windows, for
        example:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e3976"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>cd C:\Python30</code></strong>
C:\Python30&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
Python 3.0.1 (r301:69561, Feb 13 2009, 20:04:18) [MSC v.1500 32 bit (Intel)] ...
Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
&gt;&gt;&gt;</pre>
<p>On Windows, besides typing <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong> in a shell window, you can also
        begin similar interactive sessions by starting IDLE’s main window
        (discussed later) or by selecting the “Python (command line)” menu
        option from the Start button menu for Python, as shown in Figure 2-1 back in Chapter 2. Both spawn a Python interactive
        prompt with equivalent functionality; typing a shell command isn’t
        necessary.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Running Code Interactively"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="running_code_interactively"></a>Running Code Interactively</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>However it’s started, the Python interactive session begins by
          printing two lines of informational text (which I’ll omit from most
          of this book’s examples to save space), then prompts for input with
          <code class="epub__literal">&gt;&gt;&gt;</code> when it’s waiting
          for you to type a new Python statement or expression. When working
          interactively, the results of your code are displayed after the
          <code class="epub__literal">&gt;&gt;&gt;</code> lines after you
          press the Enter key.</p>
<p>For instance, here are the results of two Python <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statements (<code class="epub__literal">print</code> is really a function call in Python
          3.0, but not in 2.6, so the parentheses here are required in 3.0
          only):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e4012"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('Hello world!')</code></strong>
Hello world!
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(2 ** 8)</code></strong>
256</pre>
<p>Again, you don’t need to worry about the details of the
          <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statements shown here yet;
          we’ll start digging into syntax in the next chapter. In short, they
          print a Python string and an integer, as shown by the output lines
          that appear after each <code class="epub__literal">&gt;&gt;&gt;</code> input line (<code class="epub__literal">2 ** 8</code> means 2 raised to the power 8 in
          Python).</p>
<p>When coding interactively like this, you can type as many
          Python commands as you like; each is run immediately after it’s
          entered. Moreover, because the interactive session automatically
          prints the results of expressions you type, you don’t usually need
          to say “print” explicitly at this prompt:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e4036"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>lumberjack = 'okay'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>lumberjack</code></strong>
'okay'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>2 ** 8</code></strong>
256
&gt;&gt;&gt;                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">&lt;== Use Ctrl-D (on Unix) or Ctrl-Z (on Windows) to exit</span></em>
%</pre>
<p>Here, the first line saves a value by assigning it to a
          variable, and the last two lines typed are expressions (<code class="epub__literal">lumberjack</code> and <code class="epub__literal">2
          ** 8</code>)—their results are displayed automatically. To exit
          an interactive session like this one and return to your system shell
          prompt, type Ctrl-D on Unix-like machines; on MS-DOS and Windows
          systems, type Ctrl-Z to exit. In the IDLE GUI discussed later,
          either type Ctrl-D or simply close the window<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e4058"></a>.</p>
<p>Now, we didn’t do much in this session’s code—just typed some
          Python <code class="epub__literal">print</code> and assignment
          statements, along with a few expressions, which we’ll study in
          detail later. The main thing to notice is that the interpreter
          executes the code entered on each line immediately, when the Enter
          key is pressed.</p>
<p>For example, when we typed the first
          <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statement at the <code class="epub__literal">&gt;&gt;&gt;</code> prompt, the output (a Python
          string) was echoed back right away. There was no need to create a
          source-code file, and no need to run the code through a compiler and
          linker first, as you’d normally do when using a language such as C
          or C++. As you’ll see in later chapters, you can also run multiline
          statements at the interactive prompt; such a statement runs
          immediately after you’ve entered all of its lines and pressed Enter
          twice to add a blank line.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Why the Interactive Prompt?"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="why_the_interactive_prompt_question"></a>Why the Interactive Prompt?</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The interactive prompt runs code and echoes results as you go,
          but it doesn’t save your code in a file. Although this means you
          won’t do the bulk of your coding in interactive sessions, the
          interactive prompt turns out to be a great place to both
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>experiment</em></span> with the language and
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>test</em></span> program files on the fly.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Experimenting"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="experimenting"></a>Experimenting</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Because <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e4095"></a>code is executed immediately, <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e4101"></a>the interactive prompt is a perfect place to
            experiment with the language and will be used often in this book
            to demonstrate smaller examples. In fact, this is the first rule
            of thumb to remember: if you’re ever in doubt about how a piece of
            Python code works, fire up the interactive command line and try it
            out to see what happens.</p>
<p>For instance, suppose you’re reading a Python program’s code
            and you come across an expression like <code class="epub__literal">'Spam!' * 8</code> whose meaning you don’t
            understand. At this point, you can spend 10 minutes wading through
            manuals and books to try to figure out what the code does, or you
            can simply run it interactively:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e4114"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'Spam!' * 8</code></strong>                                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">&lt;== Learning by trying</span></em>
'Spam!Spam!Spam!Spam!Spam!Spam!Spam!Spam!'</pre>
<p>The immediate feedback you receive at the interactive prompt
            is often the quickest way to deduce what a piece of code does.
            Here, it’s clear that it does string repetition: in Python
            <code class="epub__literal">*</code> means multiply for numbers,
            but repeat for strings—it’s like concatenating a string to itself
            repeatedly (more on strings in Chapter 4).</p>
<p>Chances are good that you won’t break anything by
            experimenting this way—at least, not yet. To do real damage, like
            deleting files and running shell commands, you must really try, by
            importing modules explicitly (you also need to know more about
            Python’s system interfaces in general before you will become that
            dangerous!). Straight Python code is almost always safe to
            run.</p>
<p>For instance, watch what happens when you make a mistake at
            the interactive prompt:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e4134"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X</code></strong>                                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">&lt;== Making mistakes</span></em>
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "&lt;stdin&gt;", line 1, in &lt;module&gt;
NameError: name 'X' is not defined</pre>
<p>In Python, using a variable before it has been assigned a
            value is always an error (otherwise, if names were filled in with
            defaults, some errors might go undetected). We’ll learn more about
            that later; the important point here is that you don’t crash
            Python or your computer when you make a mistake this way. Instead,
            you get a meaningful error message pointing out the mistake and
            the line of code that made it, and you can continue on in your
            session or script. In fact, once you get comfortable with Python,
            its error messages may often provide as much debugging support as
            you’ll need (you’ll read more on debugging in the sidebar Debugging Python Code).</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Testing"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="testing"></a>Testing</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Besides <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e4151"></a>serving <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e4157"></a>as a tool for experimenting while you’re learning
            the language, the interactive interpreter is also an ideal place
            to test code you’ve written in files. You can import your module
            files interactively and run tests on the tools they define by
            typing calls at the interactive prompt.</p>
<p>For instance, the following tests a function in a precoded
            module that ships with Python in its standard library (it prints
            the name of the directory you’re currently working in), but you
            can do the same once you start writing module files of your
            own:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e4167"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import os</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>os.getcwd()</code></strong>                                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">&lt;== Testing on the fly</span></em>
'c:\\Python30'</pre>
<p>More generally, the interactive prompt is a place to test
            program components, regardless of their source—you can import and
            test functions and classes in your Python files, type calls to
            linked-in C functions, exercise Java classes under Jython, and
            more. Partly because of its interactive nature, Python supports an
            experimental and exploratory programming style you’ll find
            convenient when getting started.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Using the Interactive Prompt"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="using_the_interactive_prompt"></a>Using the Interactive Prompt</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Although <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e4185"></a>the interactive prompt is simple to use, there are a
          few tips that beginners should keep in mind. I’m including lists of
          common mistakes like this in this chapter for reference, but they
          might also spare you from a few headaches if you read them up
          front:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Type Python commands
              only</strong></span>. First of all, remember that you can only type
              Python code at the Python prompt, not system commands. There are
              ways to run system commands from within Python code (e.g., with
              <code class="epub__literal">os.system</code>), but they are not
              as direct as simply typing the commands themselves.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print</code></strong> <span class="epub__strong"><strong>statements are required only in files</strong></span>.
              Because the interactive interpreter automatically prints the
              results of expressions, you do not need to type complete
              <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statements
              interactively. This is a nice feature, but it tends to confuse
              users when they move on to writing code in files: within a code
              file, you must use <code class="epub__literal">print</code>
              statements to see your output because expression results are not
              automatically echoed. Remember, you must say <code class="epub__literal">print</code> in files, but not
              interactively.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Don’t indent at the interactive
              prompt (yet)</strong></span>. When typing Python programs, either
              interactively or into a text file, be sure to start all your
              unnested statements in column 1 (that is, all the way to the
              left). If you don’t, Python may print a “SyntaxError” message,
              because blank space to the left of your code is taken to be
              indentation that groups nested statements. Until Chapter 10, all statements you
              write will be unnested, so this includes everything for now.
              This seems to be a recurring confusion in introductory Python
              classes. Remember, a leading space generates an error
              message.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Watch out for prompt changes for
              compound statements</strong></span>. We won’t meet
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>compound</em></span> (multiline) statements until Chapter 4, and not in earnest
              until Chapter 10, but as a
              preview, you should know that when typing lines 2 and beyond of
              a compound statement interactively, the prompt may change. In
              the simple shell window interface, the interactive prompt
              changes to <code class="epub__literal">...</code> instead of
              <code class="epub__literal">&gt;&gt;&gt;</code> for lines 2 and
              beyond; in the IDLE interface, lines after the first are
              automatically indented.</p>
<p>You’ll see why this matters in Chapter 10. For now, if you
              happen to come across a <code class="epub__literal">...</code>
              prompt or a blank line when entering your code, it probably
              means that you’ve somehow confused interactive Python into
              thinking you’re typing a multiline statement. Try hitting the
              Enter key or a Ctrl-C combination to get back to the main
              prompt. The <code class="epub__literal">&gt;&gt;&gt;</code> and
              <code class="epub__literal">...</code> prompt strings can also
              be changed (they are available in the built-in module <code class="epub__literal">sys</code>), but I’ll assume they have not
              been in the book’s example listings.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Terminate compound statements at
              the interactive prompt with a blank line</strong></span>. At the
              interactive prompt, inserting a blank line (by hitting the Enter
              key at the start of a line) is necessary to tell interactive
              Python that you’re done typing the multiline statement. That is,
              you must press Enter twice to make a compound statement run. By
              contrast, blank lines are not required in files and are simply
              ignored if present. If you don’t press Enter twice at the end of
              a compound statement when working interactively, you’ll appear
              to be stuck in a limbo state, because the interactive
              interpreter will do nothing at all—it’s waiting for you to press
              Enter again!</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>The interactive prompt runs one
              statement at a time</strong></span>. At the interactive prompt, you
              must run one statement to completion before typing another. This
              is natural for simple statements, because pressing the Enter key
              runs the statement entered. For compound statements, though,
              remember that you must submit a blank line to terminate the
              statement and make it run before you can type the next
              statement.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Entering multiline statements"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="entering_multiline_statements"></a>Entering multiline statements</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>At the <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e4274"></a>risk of repeating myself, I received emails from
            readers who’d gotten burned by the last two points as I was
            updating this chapter, so it probably merits emphasis. I’ll
            introduce multiline (a.k.a. compound) statements in the next
            chapter, and we’ll explore their syntax more formally later in
            this book. Because their behavior differs slightly in files and at
            the interactive prompt, though, two cautions are in order
            here.</p>
<p>First, be sure to terminate multiline compound statements
            like <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops and <code class="epub__literal">if</code> tests at the interactive prompt with
            a blank line. <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>You must press the Enter key
            twice</em></span>, to terminate the whole multiline statement and
            then make it run. For example (pun not intended...):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e4291"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for x in 'spam':</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(x)</code></strong>              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">&lt;== Press Enter twice here to make this loop run</span></em>
...</pre>
<p>You don’t need the blank line after compound statements in a
            script file, though; this is required <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>only</em></span> at
            the interactive prompt. In a file, blank lines are not required
            and are simply ignored when present; at the interactive prompt,
            they terminate multiline statements.</p>
<p>Also bear in mind that the interactive prompt runs just
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>one statement at a time</em></span>: you must press Enter
            twice to run a loop or other multiline statement before you can
            type the next statement:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e4315"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for x in 'spam':</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(x)</code></strong>              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">&lt;== Need to press Enter twice before a new statement</span></em>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('done')</code></strong>
  File "&lt;stdin&gt;", line 3
    print('done')
        ^
SyntaxError: invalid syntax</pre>
<p>This means you can’t cut and paste multiple lines of code
            into the interactive prompt, unless the code includes blank lines
            after each compound statement. Such code is better run in a
            file—the next section’s <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e4331"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e4333"></a>topic.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="System Command Lines and Files"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
