<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>System Command Lines and Files</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="system_command_lines_and_files"></a>System Command Lines and Files</h1>
<p>Although <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e4341"></a>the interactive prompt is great for experimenting and
        testing, it has one big disadvantage: programs you type there go away
        as soon as the Python interpreter executes them. Because the code you
        type interactively is never stored in a file, you can’t run it again
        without retyping it from scratch. Cut-and-paste and command recall can
        help some here, but not much, especially when you start writing larger
        programs. To cut and paste code from an interactive session, you would
        have to edit out Python prompts, program outputs, and so on—not
        exactly a modern software development methodology!</p>
<p>To save programs permanently, you need to write your code in
        files, which are usually known as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e4350"></a>modules</em></span>. Modules are simply text files
        containing Python statements. Once coded, you can ask the Python
        interpreter to execute the statements in such a file any number of
        times, and in a variety of ways—by system command lines, by file icon
        clicks, by options in the IDLE user interface, and more. Regardless of
        how it is run, Python executes all the code in a module file from top
        to bottom each time you run the file.</p>
<p>Terminology in this domain can vary somewhat. For instance,
        module files are often referred to as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e4358"></a>programs</em></span> in Python—that is, a program is
        considered to be a series of precoded statements stored in a file for
        repeated execution. Module files that are run directly are also
        sometimes called <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e4364"></a>scripts</em></span>—an informal term usually meaning a
        top-level program file. Some reserve the term “module” for a file
        imported from another file. (More on the meaning of “top-level” and
        imports in a few moments.)</p>
<p><a name="sections explore"></a>Whatever you call them, the next few sections explore ways to
        run code typed into module files. In this section, you’ll learn how to
        run files in the most basic way: by listing their names in a <code class="epub__literal">python</code> command line entered at your
        computer’s system prompt. Though it might seem primitive to some, for
        many programmers a system shell command-line window, together with a
        text editor window, constitutes as much of an integrated development
        environment as they will ever need.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="A First Script"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="a_first_script"></a>A First Script</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Let’s get started. Open your favorite text editor (e.g.,
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>vi</em></span>, Notepad, or the IDLE editor), and type the
          following statements into a new text file named <em class="epub__filename"><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e4383"></a>script1.py</em>:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e4388"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># A first Python script</span></em>
import sys                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Load a library module</span></em>
print(sys.platform)
print(2 ** 100)             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Raise 2 to a power</span></em>
x = 'Spam!'
print(x * 8)                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># String repetition</span></em></pre>
<p>This file is our first official Python script (not counting
          the two-liner in Chapter 2). You
          shouldn’t worry too much about this file’s code, but as a brief
          description, this file:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Imports a Python module (libraries of additional tools),
              to fetch the name of the platform</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Runs three <code class="epub__literal">print</code>
              function calls, to display the script’s results</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Uses a variable named <code class="epub__literal">x</code>, created when it’s assigned, to hold
              onto a string object</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Applies various object operations that we’ll begin
              studying in the next chapter</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">sys.platform</code> here is
          just a string that identifies the kind of computer you’re working
          on; it lives in a standard Python module called <code class="epub__literal">sys</code>, which you must import to load (again,
          more on imports later).</p>
<p>For color, I’ve also added some
          formal Python <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e4435"></a>comments</em></span> here—the text after the <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e4440"></a><code class="epub__literal">#</code> characters.
          <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e4446"></a>Comments can show up on lines by themselves, or to the
          right of code on a line. The text after a <code class="epub__literal">#</code> is simply ignored as a human-readable
          comment and is not considered part of the statement’s syntax. If
          you’re copying this code, you can ignore the comments as well. In
          this book, we usually use a different formatting style to make
          comments more visually distinctive, but they’ll appear as normal
          text in your code.</p>
<p>Again, don’t focus on the syntax of the code in this file for
          now; we’ll learn about all of it later. The main point to notice is
          that you’ve typed this code into a file, rather than at the
          interactive prompt. In the process, you’ve coded a fully functional
          Python script.</p>
<p>Notice that the module file is called <em class="epub__filename">script1.py</em>. As for all top-level files,
          it could also be called simply <em class="epub__filename">script</em>, but files of code you want to
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>import</em></span> into a client have to end with a
          <em class="epub__filename"><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e4467"></a>.py</em> suffix. We’ll study imports later in
          this chapter. Because you may want to import them in the future,
          it’s a good idea to use <em class="epub__filename">.py</em>
          suffixes for most Python files that you code. Also, some text
          editors detect Python files by their <em class="epub__filename">.py</em> suffix; if the suffix is not present,
          you may not get features like syntax colorization and automatic
          indentation.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Running Files with Command Lines"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="running_files_with_command_lines"></a>Running Files with Command Lines</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Once you’ve <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e4484"></a>saved this text file, <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e4492"></a>you can ask Python to run it by listing its full
          filename as the first argument to a <code class="epub__literal">python</code> command, typed at the system shell
          prompt:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e4501"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python script1.py</code></strong>
win32
1267650600228229401496703205376
Spam!Spam!Spam!Spam!Spam!Spam!Spam!Spam!</pre>
<p>Again, you can type such a system shell command in whatever
          your system provides for command-line entry—a Windows Command Prompt
          window, an xterm window, or similar. Remember to replace “python”
          with a full directory path, as before, if your <code class="epub__literal">PATH</code> setting is not configured.</p>
<p>If all works as planned, this shell command makes Python run
          the code in this file line by line, and you will see the output of
          the script’s three <code class="epub__literal">print</code>
          statements—the name of the underlying platform, 2 raised to the
          power 100, and the result of the same string repetition expression
          we saw earlier (again, more on the last two of these in Chapter 4).</p>
<p>If all didn’t work as planned, you’ll get an error
          message—make sure you’ve entered the code in your file exactly as
          shown, and try again. We’ll talk about debugging options in the
          sidebar Debugging Python Code, but at this point
          in the book your best bet is probably rote imitation.</p>
<p>Because this scheme uses shell command lines to start Python
          programs, all the usual shell syntax applies. For instance, you can
          route the output of a Python script to a file to save it for later
          use or inspection by using special shell syntax:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e4524"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python script1.py &gt; saveit.txt</code></strong></pre>
<p>In this case, the three output lines shown in the prior run
          are stored in the file <em class="epub__filename">saveit.txt</em> instead of being
          printed. This is generally known as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e4535"></a>stream redirection</em></span>; it works for input and
          output text and is available on Windows and Unix-like systems. It
          also has little to do with Python (Python simply supports it), so we
          will skip further details on shell redirection syntax here.</p>
<p>If you are working on a Windows
          platform, this example works the same, but the system prompt is
          normally different:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e4543"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\Python30&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python script1.py</code></strong>
win32
1267650600228229401496703205376
Spam!Spam!Spam!Spam!Spam!Spam!Spam!Spam!</pre>
<p>As usual, be sure to type the full path to Python if you
          haven’t set your <code class="epub__literal">PATH</code> environment
          variable to include this path or run a change-directory command to
          go to the path:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e4554"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">D:\temp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>C:\python30\python script1.py</code></strong>
win32
1267650600228229401496703205376
Spam!Spam!Spam!Spam!Spam!Spam!Spam!Spam!</pre>
<p>On all recent versions of <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e4561"></a>Windows, you can also type just the name of your
          script, and omit the name of Python itself. Because newer Windows
          systems use the Windows Registry to find a program with which to run
          a file, you don’t need to name “python” on the command line
          explicitly to run a <em class="epub__filename">.py</em> file.
          The prior command, for example, could be simplified to this on most
          Windows machines:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e4570"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">D:\temp&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>script1.py</code></strong></pre>
<p>Finally, remember to give the full path to your script file if
          it lives in a different directory from the one in which you are
          working. For example, the following system command line, run from
          <em class="epub__filename">D:\other</em>, assumes Python is in
          your system path but runs a file located elsewhere:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e4579"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">D:\other&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python c:\code\otherscript.py</code></strong></pre>
<p>If your <code class="epub__literal">PATH</code> doesn’t
          include Python’s directory, and neither Python nor your script file
          is in the directory you’re working in, use full paths for
          both:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e4588"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">D:\other&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>C:\Python30\python c:\code\otherscript.py</code></strong></pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Using Command Lines and Files"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="using_command_lines_and_files"></a>Using Command Lines and Files</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Running <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e4597"></a>program files from system command lines is also a
          fairly straightforward launch option, especially if you are familiar
          with command lines in general from prior work. For newcomers,
          though, here are a few pointers about common beginner traps that
          might help you avoid some frustration:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Beware of automatic extensions on
              Windows</strong></span>. <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e4612"></a>If you use the <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e4618"></a>Notepad program to code program files on Windows,
              be careful to pick the type All Files when it comes time to save
              your file, and give the file a <em class="epub__filename">.py</em> suffix explicitly. Otherwise,
              Notepad will save your file with a <em class="epub__filename">.txt</em> extension (e.g., as <em class="epub__filename">script1.py.txt</em>), making it difficult
              to run in some launching schemes.</p>
<p>Worse, Windows hides file extensions by default, so unless
              you have changed your view options you may not even notice that
              you’ve coded a text file and not a Python file. The file’s icon
              may give this away—if it doesn’t have a snake on it, you may
              have trouble. Uncolored code in IDLE and files that open to edit
              instead of run when clicked are other symptoms of this
              problem.</p>
<p>Microsoft Word similarly adds a <em class="epub__filename">.doc</em> extension by default; much
              worse, it adds formatting characters that are not legal Python
              syntax. As a rule of thumb, always pick All Files when saving
              under Windows, or use a more programmer-friendly text editor
              such as IDLE. IDLE does not even add a <em class="epub__filename">.py</em> suffix automatically—a feature
              programmers tend to like, but users do not.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Use file extensions and directory
              paths at system prompts, but not for imports</strong></span>. Don’t
              forget to type the full name of your file in system command
              lines—that is, use <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python
              script1.py</code></strong> rather than <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python script1</code></strong>. By contrast,
              Python’s <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e4655"></a>import</code> statements, which we’ll meet
              later in this chapter, omit both the <em class="epub__filename">.py</em> file suffix and the directory
              path (e.g., <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import
              script1</code></strong>). This may seem trivial, but confusing these
              two is a common mistake.</p>
<p>At the system prompt, you are in a system shell, not
              Python, so Python’s module file search rules do not apply.
              Because of that, you must include both the <em class="epub__filename">.py</em> extension and, if necessary, the
              full directory path leading to the file you wish to run. For
              instance, to run a file that resides in a different directory
              from the one in which you
              are working, you would typically list its full path (e.g.,
              <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python d:\tests\spam.py</code></strong>).
              Within Python code, however, you can just say <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import spam</code></strong> and rely on the Python
              module search path to locate your file, as described
              later.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Use</strong></span> <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print</code></strong> <span class="epub__strong"><strong>statements in files</strong></span>. Yes, we’ve already
              been over this, but it is such a common mistake that it’s worth
              repeating at least once here. Unlike in interactive coding, you
              generally must use <code class="epub__literal">print</code>
              statements to see output from program files. If you don’t see
              any output, make sure you’ve said “print” in your file. Again,
              though, <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statements are
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>not</em></span> required in an interactive session,
              since Python automatically echoes expression results; <code class="epub__literal">print</code>s don’t hurt here, but are
              superfluous extra typing.</p></li></ul>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Unix Executable Scripts (#!)"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="unix_executable_scripts_open_parenthesi"></a>Unix Executable Scripts (#!)</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>If you <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e4712"></a>are going to use Python on a Unix, Linux, or
          <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e4720"></a>Unix-like system, you can also turn files of Python
          code into executable programs, much as you would for programs coded
          in a shell language such as <em class="epub__filename">csh</em>
          or <em class="epub__filename">ksh</em>. Such files are usually
          called <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e4733"></a>executable scripts</em></span>. In simple terms, Unix-style executable
          scripts are just normal text files containing Python statements, but
          with two special properties:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Their first line is
              special</strong></span>. Scripts usually start with a line that
              begins with the characters <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e4749"></a>#!</code> (often called “<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e4754"></a>hash bang”), followed by the path to the Python
              interpreter on your machine.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>They usually have executable
              privileges</strong></span>. Script files are usually marked as
              executable to tell the operating system that they may be run as
              top-level programs. On Unix systems, a command such as <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e4764"></a>chmod +x</code>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>file.py</code></em> usually does the
              trick.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Let’s look at an example for Unix-like systems. Use your text
          editor again to create a file of Python code called <em class="epub__filename">brian</em>:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e4777"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">#!/usr/local/bin/python
print('The Bright Side ' + 'of Life...')        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># + means concatenate for strings</span></em></pre>
<p>The special line at the top of the file tells the system where
          the Python interpreter lives. Technically, the first line is a
          Python comment. As mentioned earlier, all comments in Python
          programs start with a <code class="epub__literal">#</code> and span
          to the end of the line; they are a place to insert extra information
          for human readers of your code. But when a comment such as the first
          line in this file appears, it’s special because the operating system
          uses it to find an interpreter for running the program code in the
          rest of the file.</p>
<p>Also, note that this file is called simply <em class="epub__filename">brian</em>, without the <em class="epub__filename">.py</em> suffix used for the module file
          earlier. Adding a <em class="epub__filename">.py</em> to the
          name wouldn’t hurt (and might help you remember that this is a
          Python program file), but because you don’t plan on letting other
          modules import the code in this file, the name of the file is
          irrelevant. If you give the file executable privileges with a
          <code class="epub__literal">chmod +x brian</code> shell command, you
          can run it from the operating system shell as though it were a
          binary program:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e4800"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>brian</code></strong>
The Bright Side of Life...</pre>
<p>A note for Windows users: the method described here is a Unix
          trick, and it may not work on your platform. Not to worry; just use
          the basic command-line technique explored earlier. List the file’s
          name on an explicit <code class="epub__literal">python</code>
          command line:<sup>[5]</sup></p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e4832"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python brian</code></strong>
The Bright Side of Life...</pre>
<p>In this case, you don’t need the special <code class="epub__literal">#!</code> comment at the top (although Python
          just ignores it if it’s present), and the file doesn’t need to be
          given executable privileges. In fact, if you want to run files
          portably between Unix and Microsoft Windows, your life will probably
          be simpler if you always use the basic command-line approach, not
          Unix-style scripts, to launch programs.</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="the_unix_env_lookup_trick"></a>
<p class="epub__title">The Unix env Lookup Trick</p>
<p>On some Unix systems, you can avoid hardcoding the
            <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e4848"></a>path<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e4854"></a> to the Python interpreter by writing the special
            first-line comment like this:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e4860"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">#!/usr/bin/env python
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...script goes here...</code></em></pre>
<p>When coded this way, the <em class="epub__filename"><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e4867"></a>env</em> program locates the Python
            interpreter according to your system search path settings (i.e.,
            in most Unix shells, by looking in all the directories listed in
            the <code class="epub__literal">PATH</code> environment variable).
            This scheme can be more portable, as you don’t need to hardcode a
            Python install path in the first line of all your scripts.</p>
<p>Provided you have access to <em class="epub__filename">env</em> everywhere, your scripts will run
            no matter where Python lives on your system—you need only change
            the <code class="epub__literal">PATH</code> environment variable
            settings across platforms,
            not in the first line in all your scripts. Of course, this assumes
            that <em class="epub__filename">env</em> lives in the same
            place everywhere (on some machines, it may be in <em class="epub__filename">/sbin</em>, <em class="epub__filename">/bin</em>, or elsewhere); if not,
            all portability bets are off!</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Clicking File Icons"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
