<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Module Imports and Reloads</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="module_imports_and_reloads"></a>Module Imports and Reloads</h1>
<p>So <a id="ch03modulesimportsreloads"></a>far, I’ve been talking about “importing modules” without
        really explaining what this term means. <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e5200"></a>We’ll study modules and larger program architecture in
        depth in Part V, but because <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e5210"></a>imports are also a way to launch programs, this section
        will introduce enough module basics to get you started.</p>
<p>In simple terms, every file of Python source code whose name
        ends in a <em class="epub__filename">.py</em> extension is a
        <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e5219"></a>module. Other files can access the items a module
        defines by <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>importing</em></span> that module; <code class="epub__literal">import</code> operations essentially load another
        file and grant access to that file’s contents. The contents of a
        module are made available to the outside world through its attributes
        (a term I’ll define in the next section).</p>
<p>This module-based services model turns out to be the core idea
        behind program architecture in Python. Larger programs usually take
        the form of multiple module files, which import tools from other
        module files. One of the modules is designated as the main or
        <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e5231"></a><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>top-level</em></span> file, and this is the one
        launched to start the entire program.</p>
<p>We’ll delve into such architectural issues in more detail later
        in this book. This chapter is mostly interested in the fact that
        import operations <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>run</em></span> the code in a file that is
        being loaded as a final step. Because of this, importing a file is yet
        another way to launch it.</p>
<p>For instance, if you start an interactive session (from a system
        command line, from the Start menu, from IDLE, or otherwise), you can
        run the <em class="epub__filename"><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e5245"></a>script1.py</em> file you created earlier with a
        simple import (be sure to delete the <code class="epub__literal">input</code> line you added in the prior section
        first, or you’ll need to press Enter for no reason):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e5255"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python30\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import script1</code></strong>
win32
1267650600228229401496703205376
Spam!Spam!Spam!Spam!Spam!Spam!Spam!Spam!</pre>
<p>This works, but only once per session
        (really, process) by default. After the first import, later imports do
        nothing, even if you change and save the module’s source file again in
        another window:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e5266"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import script1</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import script1</code></strong></pre>
<p>This is by design; imports are too expensive an operation to
        repeat more than once per file, per program run. As you’ll learn in
        Chapter 21, imports must find
        files, compile them to byte code, and run the code.</p>
<p>If you really want to force Python to run the file again in the
        same session without stopping and restarting the session, you need to
        instead call the <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e5280"></a>reload</code> function available in the <code class="epub__literal">imp</code> standard library module (this function
        is also a simple built-in in Python 2.6, but not in 3.0):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e5289"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from imp import reload</code></strong>           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Must load from module in 3.0</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>reload(script1)</code></strong>
win32
65536
Spam!Spam!Spam!Spam!Spam!Spam!Spam!Spam!
&lt;module 'script1' from 'script1.py'&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt;</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e5303"></a>from</code> statement here simply copies a name out
        of a module (more on this soon). The <code class="epub__literal">reload</code> function itself loads and runs the
        current version of your file’s code, picking up changes if you’ve
        changed and saved it in another window.</p>
<p>This allows you to edit and pick up new code on the fly within
        the current Python interactive session. In this session, for example,
        the second <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statement in
        <em class="epub__filename">script1.py</em> was changed in another
        window to print <code class="epub__literal">2 ** 16</code> between the
        time of the first <code class="epub__literal">import</code> and the
        <code class="epub__literal">reload</code> call.</p>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">reload</code> function expects
        the name of an already loaded module object, so you have to have
        successfully imported a module once before you reload it. Notice that
        <code class="epub__literal">reload</code> also expects parentheses
        around the module object name, whereas <code class="epub__literal">import</code> does not. <code class="epub__literal">reload</code> is a function that is
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>called</em></span>, and <code class="epub__literal">import</code> is a statement.</p>
<p>That’s why you must pass the module name to <code class="epub__literal">reload</code> as an argument in parentheses, and
        that’s why you get back an extra output line when reloading. The last
        output line is just the display representation of the <code class="epub__literal">reload</code> call’s return value, a Python module
        object. We’ll learn more about using functions in general in Chapter 16.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Version skew note</em></span>: Python 3.0 moved the
          <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e5365"></a>reload</code> built-in function to the <code class="epub__literal">imp</code> standard library module. It still
          reloads files as before, but you must import it in order to use it.
          In 3.0, run an <code class="epub__literal">import imp</code> and use
          <code class="epub__literal">imp.reload(M)</code>, or run a <code class="epub__literal">from imp import reload</code> and use <code class="epub__literal">reload(M)</code>, as shown here. We’ll discuss
          <code class="epub__literal">import</code> and <code class="epub__literal">from</code> statements in the next section, and
          more formally later in this book.</p>
<p>If you are working in <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e5396"></a>Python 2.6 (or 2.X in general), <code class="epub__literal">reload</code> is available as a built-in
          function, so no import is required. In Python 2.6, <code class="epub__literal">reload</code> is available in
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>both</em></span> forms—built-in and module function—to aid
          the transition to 3.0. In other words, reloading is still available
          in 3.0, but an extra line of code is required to fetch the <code class="epub__literal">reload</code> call.</p>
<p>The move in 3.0 was likely motivated in part by some
          well-known issues involving <code class="epub__literal">reload</code> and <code class="epub__literal">from</code> statements that we’ll encounter in
          the next section. In short, names loaded with a <code class="epub__literal">from</code> are not directly updated by a
          <code class="epub__literal">reload</code>, but names accessed with
          an <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statement are. If your
          names don’t seem to change after a <code class="epub__literal">reload</code>, try using <code class="epub__literal">import</code> and <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>module</code></em><code class="epub__literal">.</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>attribute</code></em>
          name references instead.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The Grander Module Story: Attributes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_grander_module_story_colon_attribut"></a>The Grander Module Story: Attributes</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Imports and reloads <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e5451"></a>provide a natural program launch option because import
          operations execute files as a last step. In the broader scheme of
          things, though, modules serve the role of
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>libraries</em></span> of tools, as you’ll learn in Part V. More generally, a module is mostly just a
          package of variable names, known as a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e5463"></a>namespace</em></span>. The names within that package
          are called <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e5469"></a>attributes</em></span>—an attribute is simply a
          variable name that is attached to a specific object (like a
          module).</p>
<p>In typical use, importers gain access to all the names
          assigned at the top level of a module’s file. These names are
          usually assigned to tools exported by the module—functions, classes,
          variables, and so on—that are intended to be used in other files and
          other programs. Externally, a module file’s names can be fetched
          with two Python statements, <code class="epub__literal">import</code> and <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e5480"></a>from</code>, as well as the <code class="epub__literal">reload</code> call.</p>
<p>To illustrate, use a text editor to create a one-line Python
          module file called <em class="epub__filename">myfile.py</em>
<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e5493"></a>with the following contents:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e5497"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">title = "The Meaning of Life"</pre>
<p>This may be one of the world’s simplest Python modules (it
          contains a single assignment statement), but it’s enough to
          illustrate the point. When this file is imported, its code is run to
          generate the module’s attribute. The assignment statement creates a
          module attribute named <code class="epub__literal">title</code>.</p>
<p>You can access this module’s
          <code class="epub__literal">title</code> attribute in other
          components in two different ways. First, you can load the module as
          a whole with an <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statement,
          and then <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>qualify</em></span> the module name with the
          attribute name to fetch it:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e5516"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Start Python</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import myfile</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Run file; load module as a whole</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(myfile.title)</code></strong>            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Use its attribute names: '.' to qualify</span></em>
The Meaning of Life</pre>
<p>In general, the dot expression syntax
          <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>object</code></em><code class="epub__literal">.</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>attribute</code></em> lets
          you fetch any attribute attached to any object, and this is a very
          common operation in Python code. Here, we’ve used it to access the
          string variable <code class="epub__literal">title</code> inside the
          module <code class="epub__literal">myfile</code>—in other words,
          <code class="epub__literal">myfile.title</code>.</p>
<p>Alternatively, you can fetch (really, copy) names out of a
          module with <code class="epub__literal">from</code>
          statements:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e5560"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Start Python</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from myfile import title</code></strong>       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Run file; copy its names</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(title)</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Use name directly: no need to qualify</span></em>
The Meaning of Life</pre>
<p>As you’ll see in more detail later, <code class="epub__literal">from</code> is just like an <code class="epub__literal">import</code>, with an extra assignment to names
          in the importing component. Technically, <code class="epub__literal">from</code> copies a module’s
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>attributes</em></span>, such that they become simple
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>variables</em></span> in the recipient—thus, you can simply
          refer to the imported string this time as <code class="epub__literal">title</code> (a variable) instead of <code class="epub__literal">myfile.title</code> (an attribute
          reference).<sup>[7]</sup></p>
<p>Whether you use <code class="epub__literal">import</code> or
          <code class="epub__literal">from</code> to invoke an import
          operation, the statements in the module file <em class="epub__filename">myfile.py</em> are executed, and the importing
          component (here, the interactive prompt) gains access to names
          assigned at the top level of the file. There’s only one such name in
          this simple example—the variable <code class="epub__literal">title</code>, assigned to a string—but the
          concept will be more useful when you start defining objects such as
          functions and classes in your modules: such objects become reusable
          software components that can be accessed by name from one or more
          client modules.</p>
<p>In practice, module files usually define more than one name to
          be used in and outside the files. Here’s an example that defines
          three:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e5646"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">a = 'dead'                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Define three attributes</span></em>
b = 'parrot'                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Exported to other files</span></em>
c = 'sketch'
print(a, b, c)                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Also used in this file</span></em></pre>
<p>This file, <em class="epub__filename">threenames.py</em>,
          <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e5661"></a>assigns three variables, and so generates three
          attributes for the outside world. It also uses its own three
          variables in a <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statement,
          as we see when we run this as a top-level file:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e5668"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python threenames.py</code></strong>
dead parrot sketch</pre>
<p>All of this file’s code runs as usual the first time it is
          imported elsewhere (by either an <code class="epub__literal">import</code> or <code class="epub__literal">from</code>). Clients of this file that use
          <code class="epub__literal">import</code> get a module with
          attributes, while clients that use <code class="epub__literal">from</code> get copies of the file’s
          names:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e5687"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import threenames</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Grab the whole module</span></em>
dead parrot sketch
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>threenames.b, threenames.c</code></strong>
('parrot', 'sketch')
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from threenames import a, b, c</code></strong>       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Copy multiple names</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>b, c</code></strong>
('parrot', 'sketch')</pre>
<p>The results here are printed in parentheses because they are
          really <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>tuples</em></span> (a kind of object covered in the
          next part of this book); you can safely ignore them for now.</p>
<p>Once you start coding modules with multiple names like this,
          the built-in <code class="epub__literal">dir</code> function starts
          to come in handy—you can use it to fetch a list of the names
          available inside a module. The following returns a Python list of
          strings (we’ll start studying lists in the next chapter):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e5721"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dir(threenames)</code></strong>
['__builtins__', '__doc__', '__file__', '__name__', '__package__', 'a', 'b', 'c']</pre>
<p>I ran this on Python 3.0 and 2.6; older Pythons may return
          fewer names. When the <code class="epub__literal">dir</code>
          function is called with the name of an imported module passed in
          parentheses like this, it returns all the attributes inside that
          module. Some of the names it returns are names you get “for free”:
          names with leading and trailing double underscores are built-in
          names that are always predefined by Python and that have special
          meaning to the interpreter. The variables our code defined by
          assignment—<code class="epub__literal">a</code>, <code class="epub__literal">b</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">c</code>—show up last in the <code class="epub__literal">dir</code> result.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Modules and namespaces"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="modules_and_namespaces"></a>Modules and namespaces</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Module imports <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e5749"></a>are <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e5755"></a>a way to run files of code, but, as we’ll discuss
            later in the book, modules are also the largest program structure
            in Python programs.</p>
<p>In general, Python programs are composed of multiple module
            files, linked together by <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statements. Each module file is a
            self-contained package of variables—that is, a namespace. One
            module file cannot see the names defined in another file unless it
            explicitly imports that other file, so modules serve to minimize
            name collisions in your code—because each file is a self-contained
            namespace, the names in one file cannot clash with those in
            another, even if they are spelled the same way.</p>
<p>In fact, as you’ll see, modules
            are one of a handful of ways that Python goes to great lengths to
            package your variables into compartments to avoid name clashes.
            We’ll discuss modules and other namespace constructs (including
            classes and function scopes) further later in the book. For now,
            modules will come in handy as a way to run your code many times
            without having to retype it.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e5770"></a>import <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e5776"></a>versus from</em></span>: I should point out that
              the <code class="epub__literal">from</code> statement in a sense
              defeats the namespace partitioning purpose of modules—because
              the <code class="epub__literal">from</code> copies variables
              from one file to another, it can cause same-named variables in
              the importing file to be overwritten (and won’t warn you if it
              does). This essentially collapses namespaces together, at least
              in terms of the copied variables.</p>
<p>Because of this, some recommend using <code class="epub__literal">import</code> instead of <code class="epub__literal">from</code>. I won’t go that far, though; not
              only does <code class="epub__literal">from</code> involve less
              typing, but its purported problem is rarely an issue in
              practice. Besides, this is something <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>you</em></span>
              control by listing the variables you want in the <code class="epub__literal">from</code>; as long as you understand that
              they’ll be assigned values, this is no more dangerous than
              coding assignment statements—another feature you’ll probably
              want to use!</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="import and reload Usage Notes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="import_and_reload_usage_notes"></a>import and reload Usage Notes</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>For <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e5811"></a>some <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e5817"></a>reason, <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e5823"></a>once people find out about running files using
          <code class="epub__literal">import</code> and <code class="epub__literal">reload</code>, many tend to focus on this alone
          and forget about other launch options that always run the current
          version of the code (e.g., icon clicks, IDLE menu options, and
          system command lines). This approach can quickly lead to confusion,
          though—you need to remember when you’ve imported to know if you can
          reload, you need to remember to use parentheses when you call
          <code class="epub__literal">reload</code> (only), and you need to
          remember to use <code class="epub__literal">reload</code> in the
          first place to get the current version of your code to run.
          Moreover, reloads aren’t transitive—reloading a module reloads that
          module only, not any modules it may import—so you sometimes have to
          reload multiple files.</p>
<p>Because of these complications (and others we’ll explore
          later, including the <code class="epub__literal">reload</code>/<code class="epub__literal">from</code> issue mentioned in a prior note in
          this chapter), it’s generally a good idea to avoid the temptation to
          launch by imports and reloads for now. The IDLE Run→Run Module menu
          option described in the next section, for example, provides a
          simpler and less error-prone way to run your files, and always runs
          the current version of your code. System shell command lines offer
          similar benefits. You don’t need to use <code class="epub__literal">reload</code> if you use these techniques.</p>
<p>In addition, you may run into trouble if you use modules in
          unusual ways at this point in the book. For instance, if you want to
          import a module file that is stored in a directory other than the
          one you’re working in, you’ll have to skip ahead to Chapter 21 and learn about the
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e5860"></a>module search path</em></span>.</p>
<p>For now, if you must import, try to keep all your files in the
          directory you are working in to avoid complications.<sup>[8]</sup></p>
<p>That said, imports and reloads have proven to be a popular
          testing technique in Python classes, and you may prefer using this
          approach too. As usual, though, if you find yourself running into a
          wall, stop running into a <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e5888"></a>wall!</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Using exec to Run Module Files"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
