<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Using exec to Run Module Files</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="using_exec_to_run_module_files"></a>Using exec to Run Module Files</h1>
<p>In fact, <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e5896"></a>there are more ways to run code stored in module files
        than have yet been exposed here. <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e5902"></a>For instance, <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e5906"></a>the <code class="epub__literal">exec(open('module.py').read())</code> built-in
        function call is another way to launch files from the interactive
        prompt without having to import and later reload. Each <code class="epub__literal">exec</code> runs the current version of the file,
        without requiring later reloads (<em class="epub__filename">script1.py</em> is as we left it after a reload
        in the prior section):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e5924"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python30\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>exec(open('script1.py').read())</code></strong>
win32
65536
Spam!Spam!Spam!Spam!Spam!Spam!Spam!Spam!

<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...change script1.py in a text edit window...</code></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>exec(open('script1.py').read())</code></strong>
win32
4294967296
Spam!Spam!Spam!Spam!Spam!Spam!Spam!Spam!</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">exec</code> call has an effect
        similar to an import, but it doesn’t technically import the module—by
        default, each time you call <code class="epub__literal">exec</code>
        this way it runs the file anew, as though you had pasted it in at the
        place where <code class="epub__literal">exec</code> is called. Because
        of that, <code class="epub__literal">exec</code> does not require
        module reloads after file changes—it skips the normal module import
        logic.</p>
<p>On the downside, because it works as if pasting code into the
        place where it is called, <code class="epub__literal">exec</code>,
        like the <code class="epub__literal">from</code> statement mentioned
        earlier, has the potential to silently overwrite variables you may
        currently be using. For example, our <em class="epub__filename">script1.py</em> assigns to a variable named
        <code class="epub__literal">x</code>. If that name is also being used
        in the place where <code class="epub__literal">exec</code> is called,
        the name’s value is replaced:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e5969"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = 999</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>exec(open('script1.py').read())</code></strong>     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Code run in this namespace by default</span></em>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...same output...</code></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x</code></strong>                                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Its assignments can overwrite names here</span></em>
'Spam!'</pre>
<p>By contrast, the basic <code class="epub__literal">import</code>
        statement runs the file only once per process, and it makes the file a
        separate module namespace so that its assignments will not change
        variables in your scope. The price you pay for the namespace
        partitioning of modules is the need to reload after changes.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Version skew note</em></span>: Python 2.6 also
          includes an <code class="epub__literal">execfile('module.py')</code>
          built-in function, in addition to allowing the form <code class="epub__literal">exec(open('module.py'))</code>, which
          both automatically read the file’s content. Both of these are equivalent
          to the <code class="epub__literal">exec(open('module.py').read())</code> form,
          which is more complex but runs
          in both 2.6 and 3.0.</p>
<p>Unfortunately, neither of these two simpler 2.6 forms is
          available in 3.0, which means you must understand both files and
          their read methods to fully understand this technique today (alas,
          this seems to be a case of aesthetics trouncing practicality in
          3.0). In fact, the <code class="epub__literal">exec</code> form in
          3.0 involves so much typing that the best advice may simply be not
          to do it—it’s usually best to
          launch files by typing system shell command lines or by using the
          IDLE menu options described in the next section. For more on the
          file interfaces used by the 3.0 <code class="epub__literal">exec</code> form, see Chapter 9.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="The IDLE User Interface"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
