<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Other IDEs</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="other_ides"></a>Other IDEs</h1>
<p>Because <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e6269"></a>IDLE is free, portable, and a <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e6273"></a>standard part of Python, it’s a nice first development
        tool to become familiar with if you want to use an <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e6281"></a>IDE at all. Again, I recommend that you use IDLE for
        this book’s exercises if you’re just starting out, unless you are
        already familiar with and prefer a command-line-based development
        mode. There are, however, a handful of alternative IDEs for Python
        developers, some of which are substantially more powerful and robust
        than IDLE. Here are some of the most commonly used IDEs:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Eclipse and PyDev</span></dt><dd>
<p><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e6293"></a>Eclipse is an advanced open source IDE GUI.
              Originally developed as a Java IDE, Eclipse also supports Python
              development when you install the <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e6297"></a>PyDev (or a similar) plug-in. Eclipse is a popular
              and powerful option for Python development, and it goes well
              beyond IDLE’s feature set. It includes support for code
              completion, syntax highlighting, syntax analysis, refactoring,
              debugging, and more. Its downsides are that it is a large system
              to install and may require shareware extensions for some
              features (this may vary over time). Still, when you are ready to
              graduate from IDLE, the Eclipse/PyDev combination is worth your
              attention.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Komodo</span></dt><dd>
<p>A <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e6307"></a>full-featured development environment GUI for
              Python (and other languages), Komodo includes standard
              syntax-coloring, text-editing, debugging, and other features. In
              addition, Komodo offers many advanced features that IDLE does
              not, including project files, source-control integration,
              regular-expression debugging, and a drag-and-drop GUI builder
              that generates Python/tkinter code to implement the GUIs you
              design interactively. At this writing, Komodo is not free; it is
              available at http://www.activestate.com.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">NetBeans IDE for Python</span></dt><dd>
<p>NetBeans <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e6319"></a>is a powerful open-source development environment
              GUI with support for many advanced features for Python
              developers: code completion, automatic indentation and code
              colorization, editor hints, code folding, refactoring,
              debugging, code coverage and testing, projects, and more. It may
              be used to develop both CPython and Jython code. Like Eclipse,
              NetBeans requires installation steps beyond those of the
              included IDLE GUI, but it is seen by many as more than worth the
              effort. Search the Web for the latest information and
              links.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">PythonWin</span></dt><dd>
<p>PythonWin <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e6329"></a>is a free Windows-only IDE for Python that ships
              as part of ActiveState’s ActivePython distribution (and may also
              be fetched separately from http://www.python.org resources). It is roughly
              like IDLE, with a handful of useful Windows-specific extensions added;
              for example, PythonWin has support for COM objects. Today, IDLE
              is probably more advanced than PythonWin (for instance, IDLE’s
              dual-process architecture often prevents it from hanging).
              However, PythonWin still
              offers tools for Windows developers that IDLE does not. See
              http://www.activestate.com for more
              information.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Others</span></dt><dd>
<p>There are roughly half a dozen other widely used IDEs that
              I’m aware of (including the commercial <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Wing
              IDE</em></span> and <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>PythonCard</em></span>) but do not
              have space to do justice to here, and more will probably appear
              over time. In fact, almost every programmer-friendly text editor
              has some sort of support for Python development these days,
              whether it be preinstalled or fetched separately. <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e6817"></a>Emacs and Vim, for instance, have substantial
              Python support.</p>
<p>I won’t try to document all such options here; for more
              information, see the resources available at http://www.python.org or search the Web for
              “Python IDE.” You might also try running a web search for
              “Python editors”—today, this leads you to a wiki page that
              maintains information about many IDE and text-editor options for
              Python programming.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Other Launch Options"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
