<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Other Launch Options</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="other_launch_options"></a>Other Launch Options</h1>
<p>At this <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e6365"></a>point, we’ve seen how to run code typed interactively,
        and how to launch code saved in files in a variety of ways—system
        command lines, imports and execs, GUIs like IDLE, and more. That
        covers most of the cases you’ll see in this book. There are additional
        ways to run Python code, though, most of which have special or narrow
        roles. The next few sections take a quick look at some of
        these.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Embedding Calls"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="embedding_calls"></a>Embedding Calls</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e6378"></a>some specialized domains, Python code may be run
          automatically by an enclosing system. In such cases, we say that the
          Python programs are <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>embedded</em></span> in (i.e., run by)
          another program. The Python code itself may be entered into a text
          file, stored in a database, fetched from an HTML page, parsed from
          an XML document, and so on. But from an operational perspective,
          another system—not you—may tell Python to run the code you’ve
          created.</p>
<p>Such an embedded execution mode is commonly used to support
          end-user customization—a game program, for instance, might allow for
          play modifications by running user-accessible embedded Python code
          at strategic points in time. Users can modify this type of system by
          providing or changing Python code. Because Python code is
          interpreted, there is no need to recompile the entire system to
          incorporate the change (see Chapter 2 for more on how Python code is
          run).</p>
<p>In this mode, the enclosing system
          that runs your code might be written in C, C++, or even Java when
          the Jython system is used. As an example, it’s possible to create
          and run strings of Python code from a C program by calling functions
          in the Python runtime API (a set of services exported by the
          libraries created when Python is compiled on your machine):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e6392"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">#include &lt;Python.h&gt;
...
Py_Initialize();                                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">// This is C, not Python</span></em>
PyRun_SimpleString("x = 'brave ' + 'sir robin'");    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">// But it runs Python code</span></em></pre>
<p>In this C code snippet, a program coded in the C language
          embeds the Python interpreter by linking in its libraries, and
          passes it a Python assignment statement string to run. C programs
          may also gain access to Python modules and objects and process or
          execute them using other Python API tools.</p>
<p>This book isn’t about Python/C integration, but you should be
          aware that, depending on how your organization plans to use Python,
          you may or may not be the one who actually starts the Python
          programs you create. Regardless, you can usually still use the
          interactive and file-based launching techniques described here to
          test code in isolation from those enclosing systems that may
          eventually use it.<sup>[11]</sup></p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Frozen Binary Executables"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="frozen_binary_executables"></a>Frozen Binary Executables</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Frozen binary executables<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e6415"></a>, described in Chapter 2, are packages that combine
          your program’s byte code and the Python interpreter into a single
          executable program. This approach enables Python programs to be
          launched in the same ways that you would launch any other executable
          program (icon clicks, command lines, etc.). While this option works
          well for delivery of products, it is not really intended for use
          during program development; you normally freeze just before shipping
          (after development is finished). See the prior chapter for
          more on this option.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Text Editor Launch Options"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="text_editor_launch_options"></a>Text Editor Launch Options</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As mentioned previously, although they’re not full-blown IDE
          GUIs, most programmer-friendly text editors have support for
          editing, and possibly running, Python programs. Such support may be built in
          or fetchable on the Web. For instance, if you are familiar with the
          <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e6432"></a>Emacs text editor, you can do all your Python editing
          and launching from inside that text editor. See the text editor
          resources page at http://www.python.org/editors for more details, or
          search the Web for the phrase “Python editors.”</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Still Other Launch Options"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="still_other_launch_options"></a>Still Other Launch Options</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Depending on your platform, there may be additional ways that
          you can start Python programs. For instance, on some Macintosh
          systems you may be able to drag Python program file icons onto the
          Python interpreter icon to make them execute, and on Windows you can
          always start Python scripts with the Run... option in the Start
          menu. Additionally, the Python standard library has utilities that
          allow Python programs to be started by other Python programs in
          separate processes (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code>, <code class="epub__literal">os.system</code>), and Python scripts might also
          be spawned in larger contexts like the Web (for instance, a web page
          might invoke a script on a server); however, these are beyond the
          scope of the present chapter.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Future Possibilities?"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="future_possibilities_question-id1"></a>Future Possibilities?</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>This chapter reflects current practice, but much of the
          material is both platform- and time-specific. Indeed, many of the
          execution and launch details presented arose during the shelf life
          of this book’s various editions. As with program execution options,
          it’s not impossible that new program launch options may arise over
          time.</p>
<p>New operating systems, and new versions of existing systems,
          may also provide execution techniques beyond those outlined here. In
          general, because Python keeps pace with such changes, you should be
          able to launch Python programs in whatever way makes sense for the
          machines you use, both now and in the future—be that by drawing on
          tablet PCs or PDAs, grabbing icons in a virtual reality, or shouting
          a script’s name over your coworkers’ conversations.</p>
<p>Implementation changes may also impact launch schemes somewhat
          (e.g., a full compiler could produce normal executables that are
          launched much like frozen binaries today). If I knew what the future
          truly held, though, I would probably be talking to a stockbroker
          instead of writing these words!</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Which Option Should I Use?"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
