<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Which Option Should I Use?</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="which_option_should_i_use_question"></a>Which Option Should I Use?</h1>
<p>With <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e6463"></a>all these options, one question naturally arises: which
        one is best for me? In general, you should give the IDLE interface a
        try if you are just getting started with Python. It provides a
        user-friendly GUI environment and hides some of the underlying
        configuration details. It also comes with a platform-neutral text
        editor for coding your scripts, and it’s a standard and free part of
        the Python system.</p>
<p>If, on the other hand, you are an experienced programmer, you
        might be more comfortable with simply the text editor of your choice
        in one window, and another window for launching the programs you edit
        via system command lines and icon clicks (in fact, this is how I
        develop Python programs, but I have a Unix-biased past). Because the
        choice of development environments is very subjective, I can’t offer
        much more in the way of universal guidelines; in general, whatever
        environment you like to use will be the best for you to use.</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="debugging_python_code"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Debugging Python Code</p>
<p>Naturally, <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e6478"></a>none of my readers or students ever have bugs in their
          code (<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>insert smiley here</em></span>), but for less
          fortunate friends of yours who may, here’s a quick look at the
          strategies commonly used by real-world Python programmers to debug
          code:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Do nothing</strong></span>. By this, I
              don’t mean that Python programmers don’t debug their code—but
              when you make a mistake in a Python program, you get a very
              useful and readable error message (you’ll get to see some soon,
              if you haven’t already). If you already know Python, and
              especially for your own code, this is often enough—read the error message, and
              go fix the tagged line and file. For many, this
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>is</em></span> debugging in Python. It may not always
              be ideal for larger system you didn’t write, though.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Insert</strong></span> <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print</code></strong> <span class="epub__strong"><strong>statements</strong></span>. Probably the main way that
              Python programmers debug their code (and the way that I debug
              Python code) is to insert <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statements and run again.
              Because Python runs immediately after changes, this is usually
              the quickest way to get more information than error messages
              provide. The <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statements
              don’t have to be sophisticated—a simple “I am here” or display
              of variable values is usually enough to provide the context you
              need. Just remember to delete or comment out (i.e., add a
              <code class="epub__literal">#</code> before) the debugging
              <code class="epub__literal">print</code>s before you ship your
              code!</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Use IDE GUI debuggers</strong></span>.
              For larger systems you didn’t write, and for beginners who want
              to trace code in more detail, most Python development GUIs have
              some sort of point-and-click debugging support. IDLE has a
              debugger too, but it doesn’t appear to be used very often in
              practice—perhaps because it has no command line, or perhaps
              because adding <code class="epub__literal">print</code>
              statements is usually quicker than setting up a GUI debugging
              session. To learn more, see IDLE’s Help, or simply try it on
              your own; its basic interface is described in the section Advanced IDLE Tools. Other IDEs, such as Eclipse,
              NetBeans, Komodo, and Wing IDE, offer advanced point-and-click
              debuggers as well; see their documentation if you use
              them.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Use the pdb command-line
              debugger</strong></span>. For ultimate control, Python comes with a
              source-code debugger named <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>pdb</em></span>, available
              as a module in Python’s standard library. In pdb, you type
              commands to step line by line, display variables, set and clear
              breakpoints, continue to a breakpoint or error, and so on. pdb
              can be launched interactively by importing it, or as a top-level
              script. Either way, because you can type commands to control the
              session, it provides a powerful debugging tool. pdb also
              includes a postmortem function you can run after an exception
              occurs, to get information from the time of the error. See the
              Python library manual and Chapter 35 for more details on
              pdb.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Other options</strong></span>. For more
              specific debugging requirements, you can find additional tools
              in the open source domain, including support for multithreaded
              programs, embedded code, and process attachment. The
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Winpdb</em></span> system, for example, is a standalone
              debugger with advanced debugging support and cross-platform GUI
              and console interfaces.</p>
<p>These options will become more important as we start
              writing larger scripts. Probably the best news on the debugging
              front, though, is that errors are detected and reported in
              Python, rather than passing silently or crashing the system
              altogether. In fact, errors themselves are a well-defined
              mechanism known as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>exceptions</em></span>, which you
              can catch and process (more on exceptions in Part VII). Making mistakes is never
              fun, of course, but speaking as someone who recalls when
              debugging meant getting out a hex calculator and poring over
              piles of memory dump printouts, Python’s debugging support makes
              errors much less painful than they might otherwise be.</p></li></ul>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Chapter Summary"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
