<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_answers-id2"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</h1>
<div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>You can start an interactive session on Windows by clicking
            your Start button, picking the All Programs option, clicking the
            Python entry, and selecting the “Python (command line)” menu
            option. You can also achieve the same effect on Windows and other
            platforms by typing <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
            as a system command line in your system’s console window (a
            Command Prompt window on Windows). Another alternative is to
            launch IDLE, as its main Python shell window is an interactive
            session. If you have not set your system’s <code class="epub__literal">PATH</code> variable to find Python, you may
            need to <code class="epub__literal">cd</code> to where Python is
            installed, or type its full directory path instead of just
            <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong> (e.g., <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>C:\Python30\python</code></strong> on Windows).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>You type system command lines in whatever your platform
            provides as a system console: a Command Prompt window on Windows;
            an xterm or terminal window on Unix, Linux, and Mac OS X; and so
            on.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Code in a script (really, module) file can be run with
            system command lines, file icon clicks, imports and reloads, the
            <code class="epub__literal">exec</code> built-in function, and IDE
            GUI selections such as IDLE’s Run→Run Module menu option. On Unix,
            they can also be run as executables with the <code class="epub__literal">#!</code> trick, and some platforms support
            more specialized launching techniques (e.g., drag-and-drop). In
            addition, some text editors have unique ways to run Python code,
            some Python programs are provided as standalone “frozen binary”
            executables, and some systems use Python code in embedded mode,
            where it is run automatically by an enclosing program written in a
            language like C, C++, or Java. The latter technique is usually
            done to provide a user customization layer.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Scripts that print and then exit cause the output file to
            disappear immediately, before you can view the output (which is
            why the <code class="epub__literal">input</code> trick comes in
            handy); error messages generated by your script also appear in an
            output window that closes before you can examine its contents
            (which is one reason that system command lines and IDEs such as
            IDLE are better for most development).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Python only imports (loads) a module once per process, by
            default, so if you’ve changed its source code and want to run the
            new version without stopping and restarting Python, you’ll have to
            reload it. You must import a module at least once before you can
            reload it. Running files of code from a system shell command line,
            via an icon click, or via an IDE such as IDLE generally makes this
            a nonissue, as those launch schemes usually run the current
            version of the source code file each time.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Within the text edit window of the file you wish to run,
            select the window’s Run→Run Module menu option. This runs the
            window’s source code as a top-level script file and displays its
            output back in the interactive Python shell window.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>IDLE can still be hung by some types of programs—especially
            GUI programs that perform multithreading (an advanced technique
            beyond this book’s scope). Also, IDLE has some usability features
            that can burn you once you leave the IDLE GUI: a script’s
            variables are automatically imported to the interactive scope in
            IDLE, for instance, but not by Python in general.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>A namespace is just a package of variables (i.e., names). It
            takes the form of an object with attributes in Python. Each module
            file is automatically a namespace—that is, a package of variables
            reflecting the assignments made at the top level of the file.
            Namespaces help avoid name collisions in Python programs: because
            each module file is a self-contained namespace, files must
            explicitly import other files in order to use their names.</p></li></ol>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Test Your Knowledge: Part I Exercises"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
