<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Test Your Knowledge: Part I Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_part_i_exerci"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Part I Exercises</h1>
<p>It’s <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e6659"></a>time to start doing a little coding on your own. This
        first exercise session is fairly simple, but a few of these questions
        hint at topics to come in later chapters. Be sure to check Part I, Getting Started in the solutions appendix
        (Appendix B) for the
        answers; the exercises and their solutions sometimes contain
        supplemental information not discussed in the main text, so you should
        take a peek at the solutions even if you manage to answer all the
        questions on your own.</p><div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Interaction</em></span>. Using a system command
            line, IDLE, or another method, start the Python interactive
            command line (<code class="epub__literal">&gt;&gt;&gt;</code>
            prompt), and type the expression <code class="epub__literal">"Hello
            World!"</code> (including the quotes). The string should be
            echoed back to you. The purpose of this exercise is to get your
            environment configured to run Python. In some scenarios, you may
            need to first run a <code class="epub__literal">cd</code> shell
            command, type the full path to the Python executable, or add its
            path to your <code class="epub__literal">PATH</code> environment
            variable. If desired, you can set <code class="epub__literal">PATH</code> in your <em class="epub__filename">.cshrc</em> or <em class="epub__filename">.kshrc</em> file to make Python permanently
            available on Unix systems; on Windows, use a <em class="epub__filename">setup.bat</em>, <em class="epub__filename">autoexec.bat</em>, or the environment
            variable GUI. See Appendix A for help with
            environment variable settings.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Programs</em></span>. With the text editor of your
            choice, write a simple module file containing the single statement
            <code class="epub__literal">print('Hello module world!')</code>
            and store it as <em class="epub__filename">module1.py</em>.
            Now, run this file by using any launch option you like: running it
            in IDLE, clicking on its file icon, passing it to the Python
            interpreter on the system shell’s command line (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">python module1.py</code>), built-in <code class="epub__literal">exec</code> calls, imports and reloads, and so
            on. In fact, experiment by running your file with as many of the
            launch techniques discussed in this chapter as you can. Which
            technique seems easiest? (There is no right answer to this, of
            course.)</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Modules</em></span>. Start the Python interactive
            command line (<code class="epub__literal">&gt;&gt;&gt;</code>
            prompt) and import the module you wrote in exercise 2. Try moving
            the file to a different directory and importing it again from its
            original directory (i.e., run Python in the original directory
            when you import). What happens? (Hint: is there still a <em class="epub__filename">module1.pyc</em> byte code file in the
            original directory?)</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Scripts</em></span>. If your platform supports it,
            add the <code class="epub__literal">#!</code> line to the top of
            your <em class="epub__filename">module1.py</em> module file, give the
            file executable privileges, and run it directly as an executable.
            What does the first line need to contain? <code class="epub__literal">#!</code> usually only has meaning on Unix,
            Linux, and Unix-like platforms such as Mac OS X; if you’re working
            on Windows, instead try running your file by listing just its name
            in a DOS console window without the word “python” before it (this
            works on recent versions of Windows), or via the Start→Run...
            dialog box.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Errors and debugging</em></span>. Experiment with
            typing mathematical expressions and assignments at the Python
            interactive command line. Along the way, type the expressions
            <code class="epub__literal">2 ** 500</code> and <code class="epub__literal">1 / 0</code>, and reference an undefined
            variable name as we did in this chapter. What happens?</p>
<p>You may not know it yet, but when you make a mistake, you’re
            doing exception processing (a topic we’ll explore in depth in
            Part VII). As you’ll learn there,
            you are technically triggering what’s known as the
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>default exception handler</em></span>—logic that prints a
            standard error message. If you do not catch an error, the default
            handler does and prints the standard error message in
            response.</p>
<p>Exceptions are also bound up with the notion of
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>debugging</em></span> in Python. When you’re first
            starting out, Python’s default error messages on exceptions will
            probably provide as much error-handling support as you need—they
            give the cause of the error, as well as showing the lines in your
            code that were active when the error occurred. For more about
            debugging, see the sidebar Debugging Python Code.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Breaks and cycles</em></span>. At the Python
            command line, type:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e6780"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">L = [1, 2]              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Make a 2-item list</span></em>
L.append(L)             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Append L as a single item to itself</span></em>
L                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Print L</span></em></pre>
<p>What happens? In all recent versions of Python, you’ll see a
            strange output that we’ll describe in the solutions appendix, and
            which will make more sense when we study references in the next
            part of the book. If you’re using a Python version older than
            1.5.1, a Ctrl-C key combination will probably help on most
            platforms. Why do you think your version of Python responds the
            way it does for this code?</p><div class="epub__warning" title="Warning">
<h3 class="epub__title">Warning</h3>
<p>If you do have a Python older than Release 1.5.1 (a
              hopefully rare scenario today!), make sure your machine can stop
              a program with a Ctrl-C key combination of some sort before
              running this test, or you may be waiting a long time.</p>
<p></p>
</div>
</li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Documentation</em></span>. Spend at least 17
            minutes browsing the Python library and language manuals before
            moving on to get a feel for the available tools in the standard
            library and the structure of the documentation set. It takes at
            least this long to become familiar with the locations of major
            topics in the manual set; once you’ve done this, it’s easy to find
            what you need. You can find this manual via the Python Start
            button entry on Windows, in the Python Docs option on the Help
            pull-down menu in IDLE, or online at http://www.python.org/doc. I’ll also have a few
            more words to say about the manuals and other documentation
            sources available (including PyDoc and the <code class="epub__literal">help</code> function) in Chapter 15. If you still have time,
            go explore the Python website, as well as its PyPI third-party
            extension repository. Especially check out the Python.org
            documentation and search pages; they can be crucial
            resources.</p></li></ol>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[5] </sup>As we discussed when exploring command lines, modern
              Windows versions also let you type just the name of a <em class="epub__filename">.py</em> file at the system command
              line—they use the Registry to determine that the file should be
              opened with Python (e.g., typing <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>brian.py</code></strong> is equivalent to typing
              <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python brian.py</code></strong>). This
              command-line mode is similar in spirit to the Unix <code class="epub__literal">#!</code>, though it is system-wide on
              Windows, not per-file. Note that some
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>programs</em></span> may actually interpret and use a
              first <code class="epub__literal">#!</code> line on Windows much
              like on Unix, but the DOS system shell on Windows simply ignores
              it.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[6] </sup>It is also possible to completely suppress the pop-up DOS
              console window for clicked files on Windows. Files whose names
              end in a <em class="epub__filename">.pyw</em> extension
              will display only windows constructed by your script, not the
              default DOS console window. <em class="epub__filename">.pyw</em> files are simply <em class="epub__filename">.py</em> source files that have this
              special operational behavior on Windows. They are mostly used
              for Python-coded user interfaces that build windows of their
              own, often in conjunction with various techniques for saving
              printed output and errors to files.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[7] </sup>Notice that <code class="epub__literal">import</code> and
              <code class="epub__literal">from</code> both list the name of
              the module file as simply <em class="epub__filename">myfile</em> without its <em class="epub__filename">.py</em> suffix. As you’ll learn in Part V, when Python looks for the actual file, it
              knows to include the suffix in its search procedure. Again, you
              must include the <code class="epub__literal">.py</code> suffix
              in system shell command lines, but not in <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statements.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[8] </sup>If you’re burning with curiosity, the short story is that
              Python searches for imported modules in every directory listed
              in <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code>—a Python list of
              directory name strings in the <code class="epub__literal">sys</code> module, which is initialized from
              a <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code> environment
              variable, plus a set of standard directories. If you want to
              import from a directory other than the one you are working in,
              that directory must generally be listed in your <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code> setting. For more details,
              see Chapter 21.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[9] </sup>IDLE is officially a corruption of IDE, but it’s really
            named in honor of Monty Python member Eric Idle.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[10] </sup>IDLE is a Python program that uses the standard library’s
              <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e6105"></a>tkinter GUI toolkit (a.k.a. Tkinter in Python 2.6)
              to build the IDLE GUI. This makes IDLE portable, but it also
              means that you’ll need to have tkinter support in your Python to
              use IDLE. The Windows version of Python has this by default, but
              some Linux and Unix users may need to install the appropriate
              tkinter support (a <code class="epub__literal">yum
              tkinter</code> command may suffice on some Linux
              distributions, but see the installation hints in Appendix A for details). Mac OS
              X may have everything you need preinstalled, too; look for an
              <code class="epub__literal">idle</code> command or script on
              your machine.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[11] </sup>See <em class="epub__citetitle">Programming
              Python</em> (O’Reilly) for more details on
              embedding Python in C/C++. The embedding API can call Python
              functions directly, load modules, and more. Also, note that the
              Jython system allows Java programs to invoke Python code using a
              Java-based API (a Python interpreter class).</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
