<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 4. Introducing Python Object Types</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 4. Introducing Python Object Types"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h1 class="epub__title"><a id="introducing_python_object_types"></a>Chapter 4. Introducing Python Object Types</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>This chapter begins our tour of the <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e6822"></a>Python language. In an informal sense, in Python, we do
      things with stuff. “Things” take the form of operations like addition
      and concatenation, and “stuff” refers to the objects on which we perform
      those operations. In this part of the book, our focus is on that stuff,
      and the things our programs can do with it.</p>
<p>Somewhat more formally, in Python, data takes the form of
      <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e6833"></a>objects</em></span>—either built-in objects that Python
      provides, or objects we create using Python or external language tools
      such as C extension libraries. Although we’ll firm up this definition
      later, objects are essentially just pieces of memory, with values and
      sets of associated operations.</p>
<p>Because objects are the most fundamental notion in Python
      programming, we’ll start this chapter with a survey of Python’s
      <a id="ch04builtinobjecttypes"></a>built-in object types.</p>
<p>By way of introduction, however, let’s first establish a clear
      picture of how this chapter fits into the overall Python picture. From a
      more concrete perspective, Python programs can be decomposed into
      modules, statements, expressions, and objects, as follows:</p><div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e6849"></a>Programs are composed of modules.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e6855"></a>Modules contain statements.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e6861"></a>Statements contain expressions.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e6868"></a>Expressions create and process
          objects</em></span>.</p></li></ol>
</div>
<p>The discussion of modules in Chapter 3 introduced the highest level of this
      hierarchy. This part’s chapters begin at the bottom, exploring both
      built-in objects and the expressions you can code to use
      them.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Why Use Built-in Types?"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
