<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Why Use Built-in Types?</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="why_use_built-in_types_question"></a>Why Use Built-in Types?</h1>
<p>If you’ve used lower-level languages such as C or C++, you know
        that much of your work centers on implementing
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>objects</em></span>—also known as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e6887"></a>data structures</em></span>—to represent the components
        in your application’s domain. You need to lay out memory structures,
        manage memory allocation, implement search and access routines, and so
        on. These chores are about as tedious (and error-prone) as they sound,
        and they usually distract from your program’s real goals.</p>
<p>In typical Python programs, most of this grunt work goes away.
        Because Python provides powerful object types as an intrinsic part of
        the language, there’s usually no need to code object implementations
        before you start solving problems. In fact, unless you have a need for
        special processing that built-in types don’t provide, you’re almost
        always better off using a built-in object instead of implementing your
        own. Here are some reasons why:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Built-in objects make programs easy
            to write</strong></span>. For simple tasks, built-in types are often
            all you need to represent the structure of problem domains.
            Because you get powerful tools such as <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e6900"></a>collections (lists) and <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e6906"></a>search tables (dictionaries) for free, you can use
            them immediately. You can get a lot of work done with Python’s
            built-in object types alone.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Built-in objects are components of
            extensions</strong></span>. For more complex tasks, you may need to
            provide your own objects using Python classes or C language
            interfaces. But as you’ll see in later parts of this book, objects
            implemented manually are often built on top of built-in types such
            as lists and dictionaries.
            For instance, a stack data structure may be implemented as a class
            that manages or customizes a built-in list.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Built-in objects are often more
            efficient than custom data structures</strong></span>. Python’s
            built-in types employ already optimized data structure algorithms
            that are implemented in C for speed. Although you can write
            similar object types on your own, you’ll usually be hard-pressed
            to get the level of performance built-in object types
            provide.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Built-in objects are a standard part
            of the language</strong></span>. In some ways, Python borrows both from
            languages that rely on built-in tools (e.g., LISP) and languages
            that rely on the programmer to provide tool implementations or
            frameworks of their own (e.g., C++). Although you can implement
            unique object types in Python, you don’t need to do so just to get
            started. Moreover, because Python’s built-ins are standard,
            they’re always the same; proprietary frameworks, on the other
            hand, tend to differ from site to site.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>In other words, not only do built-in object types make
        programming easier, but they’re also more powerful and efficient than
        most of what can be created from scratch. Regardless of whether you
        implement new object types, built-in objects form the core of every
        Python program.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Python’s Core Data Types"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="python_apostrophy_s_core_data_types"></a>Python’s Core Data Types</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Table 4-1 previews Python’s
          built-in object types and some of the syntax used to code their
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e6939"></a>literals</em></span>—that is, the expressions that
          generate these objects.<sup>[12]</sup> Some of these types will probably seem familiar if
          you’ve used other languages; for instance, numbers and strings
          represent numeric and textual values, respectively, and files
          provide an interface for processing files stored on your
          computer.</p><div class="epub__table"><a id="built-in_objects_preview"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Table 4-1. Built-in objects preview</p><div class="epub__table-contents">
<table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; " summary="Built-in objects preview">
<colgroup><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Object
                  type</p></th><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Example
                  literals/creation</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Numbers</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">1234</code>, <code class="epub__literal">3.1415</code>, <code class="epub__literal">3+4j</code>, <code class="epub__literal">Decimal</code>, <code class="epub__literal">Fraction</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Strings</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">'spam'</code>, <code class="epub__literal">"guido's"</code>, <code class="epub__literal">b'a\x01c'</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Lists</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">[1, [2, 'three'],
                  4]</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Dictionaries</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">{'food': 'spam', 'taste':
                  'yum'}</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Tuples</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">(1, 'spam', 4, 'U')</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Files</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">myfile = open('eggs',
                  'r')</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Sets</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">set('abc'), {'a', 'b',
                  'c'}</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Other core
                  types</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Booleans, types,
                  <code class="epub__literal">None</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Program unit
                  types</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Functions, modules,
                  classes (Part IV, Part V, Part VI)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Implementation-related
                  types</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Compiled code, stack
                  tracebacks (Part IV, Part VII)</p></td></tr></tbody>
</table>
</div>
</div>
<p>Table 4-1 isn’t really
          complete, because <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>everything</em></span> we process in
          Python programs is a kind of object. For instance, when we perform
          text pattern matching in Python, we create pattern objects, and when
          we perform network scripting, we use socket objects. These other
          kinds of objects are generally created by importing and using
          modules and have behavior all their own.</p>
<p>As we’ll see in later parts of the book, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7089"></a><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>program units</em></span> such as functions,
          modules, and classes are objects in Python too—they are created with
          statements and expressions such as <code class="epub__literal">def</code>, <code class="epub__literal">class</code>, <code class="epub__literal">import</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code> and may be passed around scripts
          freely, stored within other objects, and so on. Python also provides
          a set of <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7109"></a>implementation-related</em></span> types such as
          compiled code objects, which are generally of interest to tool
          builders more than application developers; these are also discussed
          in later parts of this text.</p>
<p>We usually call the other object types in Table 4-1 <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7119"></a>core</em></span> data types, though, because they are
          effectively built into the Python language—that is, there is
          specific expression syntax for generating most of them. For
          instance, when you run the following code:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e7124"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'spam'</code></strong></pre>
<p>you are, technically speaking, running a literal expression
          that generates and returns a new string object. There is specific
          Python language syntax to make this object. Similarly, an expression
          wrapped in <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7130"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7133"></a>square brackets makes a list, one in <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7137"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7140"></a>curly braces makes a dictionary, and so on. Even
          though, as we’ll see, there are no type declarations in Python, the
          syntax of the expressions you run determines the types of objects
          you create and use. In fact, object-generation expressions like
          those in Table 4-1 are generally
          where types originate in the Python language.</p>
<p>Just as importantly, once you create an object, you bind its
          operation set for all time—you can perform only string operations on
          a string and list operations on a list. As you’ll learn, Python is
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7149"></a>dynamically typed</em></span> (it keeps track of types
          for you automatically instead of requiring declaration code), but it
          is also <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7155"></a>strongly typed</em></span> (you can perform on an
          object only operations that are valid for its type).</p>
<p>Functionally, the object types in Table 4-1 are more general and powerful
          than what you may be accustomed to. For instance, you’ll find that
          lists and dictionaries alone are powerful data representation tools
          that obviate most of the work you do to support collections and
          searching in lower-level languages. In short, lists provide ordered
          collections of other objects, while dictionaries store objects by
          key; both lists and dictionaries may be nested, can grow and
          shrink on demand, and may contain objects of any type.</p>
<p>We’ll study each of the object types in Table 4-1 in detail in upcoming
          chapters. Before digging into the details, though, let’s begin by
          taking a quick look at Python’s core objects in action. The rest of
          this chapter provides a preview of the operations we’ll explore in
          more depth in the chapters that follow. Don’t expect to find the
          full story here—the goal of this chapter is just to whet your
          appetite and introduce some key ideas. Still, the best way to get
          started is to get started, so let’s jump right into some real
          <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7171"></a>code.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Numbers"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
