<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Numbers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="numbers"></a>Numbers</h1>
<p>If <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7179"></a>you’ve <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7185"></a>done any programming or scripting in the past, some of
        the object types in Table 4-1 will
        probably seem familiar. Even if you haven’t, numbers are fairly
        straightforward. Python’s core objects set includes the usual
        suspects: integers (numbers without a fractional part), floating-point
        numbers (roughly, numbers with a decimal point in them), and more
        exotic numeric types (complex numbers with imaginary parts,
        fixed-precision decimals, rational fractions with numerator and
        denominator, and full-featured sets).</p>
<p>Although it offers some fancier options, Python’s basic number
        types are, well, basic. Numbers in Python support the normal
        mathematical operations. For instance, the plus sign (<code class="epub__literal">+</code>) performs addition, a star (<code class="epub__literal">*</code>) is used for multiplication, and two stars
        (<code class="epub__literal">**</code>) are used for
        exponentiation:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e7202"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>123 + 222</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Integer addition</span></em>
345
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>1.5 * 4</code></strong>                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Floating-point multiplication</span></em>
6.0
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>2 ** 100</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 2 to the power 100</span></em>
1267650600228229401496703205376</pre>
<p>Notice the last result here: Python 3.0’s integer type
        automatically provides extra precision for large numbers like this
        when needed (in 2.6, a separate long integer type handles numbers too
        large for the normal integer type in similar ways). You can, for
        instance, compute 2 to the power 1,000,000 as an integer in Python,
        but you probably shouldn’t try to print the result—with more than
        300,000 digits, you may be waiting awhile!</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e7225"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>len(str(2 ** 1000000))</code></strong>       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># How many digits in a really BIG number?</span></em>
301030</pre>
<p>Once you start experimenting with floating-point numbers, you’re
        likely to stumble across something that may look a bit odd on first
        glance:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e7235"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>3.1415 * 2</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># repr: as code</span></em>
6.2830000000000004
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(3.1415 * 2)</code></strong>            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># str: user-friendly</span></em>
6.283</pre>
<p>The first result isn’t a bug; it’s a display issue. It turns out
        that there are two ways to print every object: with full precision (as
        in the first result shown here), and in a user-friendly form (as in
        the second). Formally, the first form is known as an object’s
        <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7251"></a>as-code <code class="epub__literal">repr</code>, and the
        second is its user-friendly <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7258"></a><code class="epub__literal">str</code>. The difference
        can matter when we step up to using classes; for now, if something
        looks odd, try showing it with a <code class="epub__literal">print</code> built-in call statement.</p>
<p>Besides expressions, there are a handful of useful numeric
        modules that ship with Python—<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>modules</em></span> are
        just packages of additional tools that we import to use:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e7274"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import math</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>math.pi</code></strong>
3.1415926535897931
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>math.sqrt(85)</code></strong>
9.2195444572928871</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7289"></a>math</code> module contains more advanced numeric
        tools as functions, while the <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7296"></a>random</code> module performs random number
        generation and random selections (here, from a Python list, introduced
        later in this chapter):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e7301"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import random</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>random.random()</code></strong>
0.59268735266273953
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>random.choice([1, 2, 3, 4])</code></strong>
1</pre>
<p>Python also includes more exotic numeric objects—such as
        complex, fixed-precision, and rational numbers, as well as sets and
        Booleans—and the third-party open source extension domain has even
        more (e.g., matrixes and vectors). We’ll defer discussion of these
        types until later in the book.</p>
<p>So far, we’ve been using Python much like a simple calculator;
        to do better justice to its built-in types, let’s move on to explore
        strings.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Strings"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
