<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Strings</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="strings"></a>Strings</h1>
<p>Strings <a id="ch04builtinobjtypestring"></a>are <a id="ch04stringobjtype"></a>used to record textual information as well as arbitrary
        collections of bytes. They are our first example of what we call a
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7332"></a>sequence</em></span> in Python—that is, a positionally
        ordered collection of other objects. Sequences maintain a
        left-to-right order among the items they contain: their items are
        stored and fetched by their relative position. Strictly speaking,
        strings are sequences of one-character strings; other types of
        sequences include lists and tuples, covered later.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Sequence Operations"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="sequence_operations"></a>Sequence Operations</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7342"></a>sequences, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7346"></a>strings support operations that assume a positional
          ordering among items. For example, if we have a four-character
          string, we can verify its length with the built-in <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7353"></a>len</code> function and fetch its components with
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7359"></a>indexing</em></span> expressions:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e7364"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S = 'Spam'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>len(S)</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Length</span></em>
4
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S[0]</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># The first item in S, indexing by zero-based position</span></em>
'S'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S[1]</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># The second item from the left</span></em>
'p'</pre>
<p>In Python, indexes are coded as offsets from the front, and so
          start from 0: the first item is at index 0, the second is at index
          1, and so on.</p>
<p>Notice how we assign the string to a
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>variable</em></span> named <code class="epub__literal">S</code> here. We’ll go into detail on how this
          works later (especially in Chapter 6), but Python variables
          never need to be declared ahead of time. A variable is created when
          you assign it a value, may be assigned any type of object, and is
          replaced with its value when it shows up in an expression. It must
          also have been previously assigned by the time you use its value.
          For the purposes of this chapter, it’s enough to know that we need
          to assign an object to a variable in order to save it for later
          use.</p>
<p>In Python, we can also index backward, from the end—positive
          indexes count from the left, and negative indexes count back from
          the right:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e7402"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S[-1]</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># The last item from the end in S</span></em>
'm'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S[-2]</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># The second to last item from the end</span></em>
'a'</pre>
<p>Formally, a negative index is simply added to the string’s
          size, so the following two operations are equivalent (though the
          first is easier to code and less easy to get wrong):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e7418"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S[-1]</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># The last item in S</span></em>
'm'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S[len(S)-1]</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Negative indexing, the hard way</span></em>
'm'</pre>
<p>Notice that we can use an arbitrary expression in the square
          brackets, not just a hardcoded number literal—anywhere that Python
          expects a value, we can use a literal, a variable, or any
          expression. Python’s syntax is completely general this way.</p>
<p>In addition to simple positional indexing, sequences also
          support a more general form of indexing known as <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7436"></a><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>slicing</em></span>, which is a way to
          extract an entire section (slice) in a single step. For
          example:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e7443"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># A 4-character string</span></em>
'Spam'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S[1:3]</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Slice of S from offsets 1 through 2 (not 3)</span></em>
'pa'</pre>
<p>Probably the easiest way to think of slices is that they are a
          way to extract an entire <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>column</em></span> from a string
          in a single step. Their general form, <code class="epub__literal">X[I:J]</code>, means “give me everything in
          <code class="epub__literal">X</code> from offset <code class="epub__literal">I</code> up to but not including offset <code class="epub__literal">J</code><a name="second of"></a>.” The result is returned in a new
          object. The second of the preceding operations, for instance, gives
          us all the characters in string <code class="epub__literal">S</code>
          from offsets 1 through 2 (that is, 3 – 1) as a new string. The
          effect is to slice or “parse out” the two characters in the
          middle.</p>
<p>In a slice, the left bound defaults to zero, and the right
          bound defaults to the length of the sequence being sliced. This
          leads to some common usage variations:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e7480"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S[1:]</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Everything past the first (1:len(S))</span></em>
'pam'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># S itself hasn't changed</span></em>
'Spam'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S[0:3]</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Everything but the last</span></em>
'Spa'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S[:3]</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same as S[0:3]</span></em>
'Spa'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S[:-1]</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Everything but the last again, but simpler (0:-1)</span></em>
'Spa'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S[:]</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># All of S as a top-level copy (0:len(S))</span></em>
'Spam'</pre>
<p>Note how negative offsets can be used to give bounds for
          slices, too, and how the last operation effectively copies the
          entire string. As you’ll learn later, there is no reason to copy a
          string, but this form can be useful for sequences like lists.</p>
<p>Finally, as sequences, strings also support <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7524"></a><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>concatenation</em></span> with the plus sign
          (joining two strings into a new string) and <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7531"></a>repetition</em></span> (making a new string by
          repeating another):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e7536"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S</code></strong>
'Spam'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S + 'xyz'</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Concatenation</span></em>
'Spamxyz'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># S is unchanged</span></em>
'Spam'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S * 8</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Repetition</span></em>
'SpamSpamSpamSpamSpamSpamSpamSpam'</pre>
<p>Notice that the plus sign (<code class="epub__literal">+</code>) means different things for different
          objects: addition for numbers, and concatenation for strings. This
          is a general property of Python that we’ll call <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7566"></a>polymorphism</em></span> later in the book—in sum, the
          meaning of an operation depends on the objects being operated on. As
          you’ll see when we study dynamic typing, this polymorphism property
          accounts for much of the conciseness and flexibility of Python code.
          Because types aren’t constrained, a Python-coded operation can
          normally work on many different types of objects automatically, as
          long as they support a compatible interface (like the <code class="epub__literal">+</code> operation here). This turns out to be a
          huge idea in Python; you’ll learn more about it later on our
          tour.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Immutability"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="immutability"></a>Immutability</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Notice that in the prior <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7579"></a>examples, we were not changing the original string
          with any of the operations we ran on it. Every string operation is
          defined to produce a new string as its result, because strings are
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>immutable</em></span> in Python—they cannot be changed
          in-place after they are created. For example, you can’t change a
          string by assigning to one of its positions, but you can always
          build a new one and assign it to the same name. Because Python
          cleans up old objects as you go (as you’ll see later), this isn’t as
          inefficient as it may sound:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e7586"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S</code></strong>
'Spam'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S[0] = 'z'</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Immutable objects cannot be changed</span></em>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...error text omitted...</code></em>
TypeError: 'str' object does not support item assignment

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S = 'z' + S[1:]</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># But we can run expressions to make new objects</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S</code></strong>
'zpam'</pre>
<p>Every object in Python is classified as either immutable
          (unchangeable) or not. In terms of the core types, numbers, strings,
          and tuples are immutable; lists and dictionaries are not (they can
          be changed in-place freely). Among other things, immutability can be
          used to guarantee that an object remains constant throughout your
          program.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Type-Specific Methods"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="type-specific_methods"></a>Type-Specific Methods</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Every string operation we’ve studied so far is really a
          sequence operation—that is, these operations will work on other
          sequences in Python as well, including lists and tuples. In addition
          to generic sequence operations, though, strings also have operations
          all their own, available as <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7617"></a><span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7621"></a>methods</em></span>—functions attached to the object,
          which are triggered with a call expression.</p>
<p>For example, the string <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7631"></a>find</code> method is the basic substring search
          operation (it returns the offset of the passed-in substring, or
          <code class="epub__literal">−1</code> if it is not present), and the
          string <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7640"></a>replace</code> method performs global searches and
          replacements:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e7645"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S.find('pa')</code></strong>            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Find the offset of a substring</span></em>
1
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S</code></strong>
'Spam'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S.replace('pa', 'XYZ')</code></strong>  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Replace occurrences of a substring with another</span></em>
'SXYZm'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S</code></strong>
'Spam'</pre>
<p>Again, despite the names of these string methods, we are not
          changing the original strings here, but creating new strings as the
          results—because strings are immutable, we have to do it this way.
          String methods are the first line of text-processing tools in
          Python. Other methods split a string into substrings on a delimiter
          (handy as a simple form of parsing), perform case conversions, test
          the content of the string (digits, letters, and so on), and strip
          whitespace characters off the ends of the string:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e7668"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>line = 'aaa,bbb,ccccc,dd'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>line.split(',')</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Split on a delimiter into a list of substrings</span></em>
['aaa', 'bbb', 'ccccc', 'dd']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S = 'spam'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S.upper()</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Upper- and lowercase conversions</span></em>
'SPAM'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S.isalpha()</code></strong>              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Content tests: isalpha, isdigit, etc.</span></em>
True

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>line = 'aaa,bbb,ccccc,dd\n'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>line = line.rstrip()</code></strong>     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Remove whitespace characters on the right side</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>line</code></strong>
'aaa,bbb,ccccc,dd'</pre>
<p>Strings also support an advanced substitution operation known
          as <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7710"></a><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>formatting</em></span>, available as both an
          expression (the original) and a string method call (new in 2.6 and
          3.0):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e7716"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'%s, eggs, and %s' % ('spam', 'SPAM!')</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Formatting expression (all)</span></em>
'spam, eggs, and SPAM!'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'{0}, eggs, and {1}'.format('spam', 'SPAM!')</code></strong>    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Formatting method (2.6, 3.0)</span></em>
'spam, eggs, and SPAM!'</pre>
<p>One note here: although sequence operations are generic,
          methods are not—although some types share some method names, string
          method operations generally work only on strings, and nothing else.
          As a rule of thumb, Python’s toolset is layered: generic operations
          that span multiple types show up as built-in functions or
          expressions (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">len(X)</code>,
          <code class="epub__literal">X[0]</code>), but type-specific
          operations are method calls (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">aString.upper()</code>). Finding the tools you
          need among all these categories will become more natural as you use
          Python more, but the next section gives a few tips you can use right
          now.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Getting Help"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="getting_help"></a>Getting Help</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The methods introduced in the prior section are a
          representative, but small, sample of what is available for string
          objects. In general, this book is not exhaustive in its look at
          object methods. For more details, you can always call the built-in
          <code class="epub__literal">dir</code> function, which returns a
          list of all the attributes available for a given object. Because
          <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7749"></a>methods are function attributes, they will show up in
          this list. Assuming <code class="epub__literal">S</code> is still
          the string, here are its attributes on Python 3.0 (Python 2.6 varies
          slightly):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e7756"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dir(S)</code></strong>
['__add__', '__class__', '__contains__', '__delattr__', '__doc__', '__eq__',
'__format__', '__ge__', '__getattribute__', '__getitem__', '__getnewargs__',
'__gt__', '__hash__', '__init__', '__iter__', '__le__', '__len__', '__lt__',
'__mod__', '__mul__', '__ne__', '__new__', '__reduce__', '__reduce_ex__',
'__repr__', '__rmod__', '__rmul__', '__setattr__', '__sizeof__', '__str__',
'__subclasshook__', '_formatter_field_name_split', '_formatter_parser',
'capitalize', 'center', 'count', 'encode', 'endswith', 'expandtabs', 'find',
'format', 'index', 'isalnum','isalpha', 'isdecimal', 'isdigit', 'isidentifier',
'islower', 'isnumeric', 'isprintable', 'isspace', 'istitle', 'isupper', 'join',
'ljust', 'lower', 'lstrip', 'maketrans', 'partition', 'replace', 'rfind',
'rindex', 'rjust', 'rpartition', 'rsplit', 'rstrip', 'split', 'splitlines',
'startswith', 'strip', 'swapcase', 'title', 'translate', 'upper', 'zfill']</pre>
<p>You probably won’t care about the names with underscores in
          this list until later in the book, when we study operator
          overloading in classes—they represent the implementation of the
          string object and are available to support customization. In
          general, leading and trailing double underscores is the naming
          pattern Python uses for implementation details. The names without
          the underscores in this list are the callable methods on string
          objects.</p>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7766"></a>dir</code> function simply gives the methods’
          names. To ask what they do, you can pass them to the <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7772"></a>help</code> function:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e7777"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>help(S.replace)</code></strong>
Help on built-in function replace:

replace(...)
    S.replace (old, new[, count]) -&gt; str

    Return a copy of S with all occurrences of substring
    old replaced by new.  If the optional argument count is
    given, only the first count occurrences are replaced.</pre>
<p><code class="epub__literal">help</code> is one of a handful of
          interfaces to a system of code that ships with Python known as
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7787"></a>PyDoc</em></span>—a tool for extracting documentation
          from objects. Later in the book, you’ll see that PyDoc can also
          render its reports in HTML format.</p>
<p>You can also ask for help on an entire string (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">help(S)</code>), but you may get more help than
          you want to see—i.e., information about every string method. It’s
          generally better to ask about a specific method.</p>
<p>For more details, you can also consult Python’s standard
          library reference manual or commercially published reference books,
          but <code class="epub__literal">dir</code> and <code class="epub__literal">help</code> are the first line of documentation
          in Python.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Other Ways to Code Strings"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="other_ways_to_code_strings"></a>Other Ways to Code Strings</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>So far, we’ve looked at the <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7810"></a>string object’s sequence operations and type-specific
          methods. Python also provides a variety of ways for us to code
          strings, which we’ll explore in greater depth later. For instance,
          special characters can be represented as <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7816"></a>backslash escape sequences:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e7820"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S = 'A\nB\tC'</code></strong>            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># \n is end-of-line, \t is tab</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>len(S)</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Each stands for just one character</span></em>
5

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>ord('\n')</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># \n is a byte with the binary value 10 in ASCII</span></em>
10

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S = 'A\0B\0C'</code></strong>            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># \0, a binary zero byte, does not terminate string</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>len(S)</code></strong>
5</pre>
<p>Python allows strings to be enclosed in single or double quote
          characters (they mean the same thing). It also allows multiline
          string literals enclosed in triple quotes (single or double)—when
          this form is used, all the lines are concatenated together, and
          end-of-line characters are added where line breaks appear. This is a
          minor syntactic convenience, but it’s useful for embedding things
          like HTML and XML code in a Python script:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e7852"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>msg = """ aaaaaaaaaaaaa</code></strong>
<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bbb'''bbbbbbbbbb""bbbbbbb'bbbb</code></strong>
<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>cccccccccccccc"""</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>msg</code></strong>
' aaaaaaaaaaaaa\nbbb\'\'\'bbbbbbbbbb""bbbbbbb\'bbbb\ncccccccccccccc'</pre>
<p>Python also <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7868"></a>supports a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7875"></a>raw</em></span> string literal that turns off the
          backslash escape mechanism (such string literals start with the
          letter <code class="epub__literal">r</code>), as well as
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Unicode</em></span> string support that supports
          internationalization. In 3.0, the basic <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7887"></a>str</code> string type handles Unicode too (which
          makes sense, given that ASCII text is a simple kind of Unicode), and
          a <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> type represents raw byte
          strings; in 2.6, Unicode is a separate type, and <code class="epub__literal">str</code> handles both 8-bit strings and binary
          data. Files are also changed in 3.0 to return and accept <code class="epub__literal">str</code> for text and <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7905"></a>bytes</code> for binary data. We’ll meet all these
          special string forms in later chapters.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Pattern Matching"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="pattern_matching"></a>Pattern Matching</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>One <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7915"></a>point worth noting before we move on is that none of
          the string object’s methods support pattern-based text processing.
          Text <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7921"></a>pattern matching is an advanced tool outside this
          book’s scope, but readers with backgrounds in other scripting
          languages may be interested to know that to do pattern matching in
          Python, we import a module called <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7926"></a>re</code>. This module has analogous calls for
          searching, splitting, and replacement, but because we can use
          patterns to specify substrings, we can be much more general:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e7931"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import re</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>match = re.match('Hello[ \t]*(.*)world', 'Hello    Python world')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>match.group(1)</code></strong>
'Python '</pre>
<p>This example searches for a substring that begins with the
          word “Hello,” followed by zero or more tabs or spaces, followed by
          arbitrary characters to be saved as a matched group, terminated by
          the word “world.” If such a substring is found, portions of the
          substring matched by parts of the pattern enclosed in parentheses
          are available as groups. The following pattern, for example, picks
          out three groups separated by slashes:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e7944"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>match = re.match('/(.*)/(.*)/(.*)', '/usr/home/lumberjack')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>match.groups()</code></strong>
('usr', 'home', 'lumberjack')</pre>
<p>Pattern matching is a fairly advanced text-processing tool by
          itself, but there is also support in Python for even more advanced
          text and language processing, including XML parsing and natural
          language analysis. I’ve already said enough about strings for this
          tutorial, though, so let’s move on to the next <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7954"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e7956"></a>type.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Lists"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
