<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Lists</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="lists"></a>Lists</h1>
<p>The <a id="ch04builtinobjtypelists"></a>Python <a id="ch04listobjtype"></a>list object is the most general sequence provided by the
        language. Lists are positionally ordered collections of arbitrarily
        typed objects, and they have no fixed size. They are also
        mutable—unlike strings, lists can be modified in-place by assignment
        to offsets as well as a variety of list method calls.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Sequence Operations"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="sequence_operations-id1"></a>Sequence Operations</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Because they are sequences, lists support all the sequence
          operations we discussed for strings; the only difference is that the
          results are usually lists instead of strings. For instance, given a
          three-item list:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e7979"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = [123, 'spam', 1.23]</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># A list of three different-type objects</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>len(L)</code></strong>                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Number of items in the list</span></em>
3</pre>
<p>we can index, slice, and so on, just as for strings:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e7995"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L[0]</code></strong>                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Indexing by position</span></em>
123

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L[:-1]</code></strong>                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Slicing a list returns a new list</span></em>
[123, 'spam']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L + [4, 5, 6]</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Concatenation makes a new list too</span></em>
[123, 'spam', 1.23, 4, 5, 6]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>                                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># We're not changing the original list</span></em>
[123, 'spam', 1.23]</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Type-Specific Operations"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="type-specific_operations"></a>Type-Specific Operations</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Python’s <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e8027"></a>lists are related to arrays in other languages, but
          they tend to be more powerful. For one thing, they have no fixed
          type constraint—the list we just looked at, for example, contains
          three objects of completely different types (an integer, a string,
          and a floating-point number). Further, lists have no fixed size.
          That is, they can grow and shrink on demand, in response to
          list-specific operations:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e8033"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L.append('NI')</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Growing: add object at end of list</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
[123, 'spam', 1.23, 'NI']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L.pop(2)</code></strong>                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Shrinking: delete an item in the middle</span></em>
1.23

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># "del L[2]" deletes from a list too</span></em>
[123, 'spam', 'NI']</pre>
<p>Here, the list <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e8060"></a>append</code> method expands the list’s size and
          inserts an item at the end; the <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e8066"></a>pop</code> method (or an equivalent <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e8072"></a>del</code> statement) then removes an item at a
          given offset, causing the list to shrink. Other list methods
          <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e8077"></a>insert an item at an arbitrary position (<code class="epub__literal">insert</code>), remove a given item by value
          <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e8085"></a>(<code class="epub__literal">remove</code>), and so
          on. Because lists are mutable, most list methods also change the
          list object in-place, instead of creating a new one:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e8092"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>M = ['bb', 'aa', 'cc']</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>M.sort()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>M</code></strong>
['aa', 'bb', 'cc']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>M.reverse()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>M</code></strong>
['cc', 'bb', 'aa']</pre>
<p>The list <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e8112"></a>sort</code> method here, for example, orders the
          list in ascending fashion by default, and <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e8118"></a>reverse</code> reverses it—in both cases, the
          methods modify the list directly.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Bounds Checking"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="bounds_checking"></a>Bounds Checking</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Although lists have no fixed size, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e8128"></a>Python still doesn’t allow us to reference items that
          are not present. Indexing off the end of a list is always a mistake,
          but so is assigning off the end:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e8134"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
[123, 'spam', 'NI']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L[99]</code></strong>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...error text omitted...</code></em>
IndexError: list index out of range

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L[99] = 1</code></strong>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...error text omitted...</code></em>
IndexError: list assignment index out of range</pre>
<p>This is intentional, as it’s usually an error to try to assign
          off the end of a list (and a particularly nasty one in the C
          language, which doesn’t do as much error checking as Python). Rather
          than silently growing the list in response, Python reports an error.
          To grow a list, we call list methods such as <code class="epub__literal">append</code> instead.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Nesting"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="nesting"></a>Nesting</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>One nice <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e8161"></a>feature of Python’s core data types is that they
          support arbitrary nesting—we can nest them in any combination, and
          as deeply as we like (for example, we can have a list that contains
          a dictionary, which contains another list, and so on). One immediate
          application of this feature is to represent matrixes, or
          “multidimensional arrays” in Python. A list with nested lists will
          do the job for basic applications:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e8167"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>M = [[1, 2, 3],</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># A 3 × 3 matrix, as nested lists</span></em>
         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[4, 5, 6],</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Code can span lines if bracketed</span></em>
         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[7, 8, 9]]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>M</code></strong>
[[1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6], [7, 8, 9]]</pre>
<p>Here, we’ve coded a list that contains three other lists. The
          effect is to represent a 3 × 3
          matrix of numbers. Such a structure can be accessed in a variety of
          ways:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e8193"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>M[1]</code></strong>                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Get row 2</span></em>
[4, 5, 6]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>M[1][2]</code></strong>                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Get row 2, then get item 3 within the row</span></em>
6</pre>
<p>The first operation here fetches the entire second row, and
          the second grabs the third item within that row. Stringing together
          index operations takes us deeper and deeper into our nested-object
          structure.<sup>[13]</sup></p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Comprehensions"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="comprehensions"></a>Comprehensions</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In addition to sequence operations and list methods, Python
          includes a more advanced operation known as a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e8221"></a>list comprehension expression</em></span>, which turns
          out to be a powerful way to process structures like our matrix.
          Suppose, for instance, that we need to extract the second column of
          our sample matrix. It’s easy to grab rows by simple indexing because
          the matrix is stored by rows, but it’s almost as easy to get a
          column with a list comprehension:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e8226"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>col2 = [row[1] for row in M]</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Collect the items in column 2</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>col2</code></strong>
[2, 5, 8]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>M</code></strong>                                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># The matrix is unchanged</span></em>
[[1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6], [7, 8, 9]]</pre>
<p>List comprehensions derive from set notation; they are a way
          to build a new list by running an expression on each item in a
          sequence, one at a time, from left to right. List comprehensions are
          coded in <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e8245"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e8250"></a>square brackets (to tip you off to the fact that they
          make a list) and are composed of an expression and a looping
          construct that share a variable name (<code class="epub__literal">row</code>, here). The preceding list
          comprehension means basically what it says: “Give me <code class="epub__literal">row[1]</code> for each row in matrix <code class="epub__literal">M</code>, in a new list.” The result is a new
          list containing column 2 of the matrix.</p>
<p>List comprehensions can be more complex in practice:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e8267"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[row[1] + 1 for row in M]</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Add 1 to each item in column 2</span></em>
[3, 6, 9]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[row[1] for row in M if row[1] % 2 == 0]</code></strong>  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Filter out odd items</span></em>
[2, 8]</pre>
<p>The first operation here, for instance, adds 1 to each item as
          it is collected, and the second uses an <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e8284"></a>if</code> clause to filter odd numbers out of the
          result using the <code class="epub__literal">%</code> modulus
          expression (remainder of division). List comprehensions make new
          lists of results, but they can be used to iterate over any iterable
          object. Here, for instance, we use list comprehensions to step over
          a hardcoded list of coordinates and a string:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e8292"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>diag = [M[i][i] for i in [0, 1, 2]]</code></strong>      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Collect a diagonal from matrix</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>diag</code></strong>
[1, 5, 9]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>doubles = [c * 2 for c in 'spam']</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Repeat characters in a string</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>doubles</code></strong>
['ss', 'pp', 'aa', 'mm']</pre>
<p>List comprehensions, and relatives like the <code class="epub__literal">map</code> and <code class="epub__literal">filter</code> built-in functions, are a bit too
          involved for me to say more about them here. The main point of this
          brief introduction is to illustrate that Python includes both simple
          and advanced tools in its arsenal. List comprehensions are an
          optional feature, but they tend to be handy in practice and often
          provide a substantial processing speed advantage. They also work on
          any type that is a sequence in Python, as well as some types that
          are not. You’ll hear much more about them later in this book.</p>
<p>As a preview, though, you’ll find that in recent Pythons,
          comprehension syntax in parentheses can also be used to create
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e8324"></a>generators</em></span> that produce results on demand
          (the <code class="epub__literal">sum</code> built-in, for instance,
          sums items in a sequence):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e8332"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>G = (sum(row) for row in M)</code></strong>              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Create a generator of row sums</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(G)</code></strong>                                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># </span></em><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">iter(G) not required here</span></em>
6
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(G)</code></strong>                                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Run the iteration protocol</span></em>
15</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">map</code> built-in can do
          similar work, by generating the results of running items through a
          function. Wrapping it in <code class="epub__literal">list</code>
          forces it to return all its values in Python 3.0:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e8358"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(map(sum, M))</code></strong>                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Map sum over items in M</span></em>
[6, 15, 24]</pre>
<p>In Python 3.0, comprehension syntax can also be used to create
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>sets</em></span> and
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>dictionaries</em></span>:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e8374"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>{sum(row) for row in M}</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Create a set of row sums</span></em>
{24, 6, 15}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>{i : sum(M[i]) for i in range(3)}</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Creates key/value table of row sums</span></em>
{0: 6, 1: 15, 2: 24}</pre>
<p>In fact, lists, sets, and dictionaries can all be built with
          comprehensions in 3.0:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e8390"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[ord(x) for x in 'spaam']</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># List of character ordinals</span></em>
[115, 112, 97, 97, 109]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>{ord(x) for x in 'spaam'}</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Sets remove duplicates</span></em>
{112, 97, 115, 109}
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>{x: ord(x) for x in 'spaam'}</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Dictionary keys are unique</span></em>
{'a': 97, 'p': 112, 's': 115, 'm': 109}</pre>
<p>To understand objects like generators, sets, and dictionaries,
          though, we must move <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e8413"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e8415"></a>ahead.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Dictionaries"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
