<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Dictionaries</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="dictionaries"></a>Dictionaries</h1>
<p>Python <a id="ch04builtinobjtypedict"></a>dictionaries<a id="ch04dictobjtype"></a> are something completely different (Monty Python
        reference intended)—they are not
        sequences at all, but are instead known as
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>mappings</em></span>. Mappings are also collections of other
        objects, but they store objects by key instead of by relative
        position. In fact, mappings don’t maintain any reliable left-to-right
        order; they simply map keys to associated values. Dictionaries, the
        only mapping type in Python’s core objects set, are also mutable: they
        may be changed in-place and can grow and shrink on demand, like
        lists.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Mapping Operations"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="mapping_operations"></a>Mapping Operations</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>When <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e8445"></a>written as literals, dictionaries are coded in
          <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e8451"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e8456"></a>curly braces and consist of a series of “key: value”
          pairs. Dictionaries are useful anytime we need to associate a set of
          values with keys—to describe the properties of something, for
          instance. As an example, consider the following three-item
          dictionary (with keys “food,” “quantity,” and “color”):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e8462"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D = {'food': 'Spam', 'quantity': 4, 'color': 'pink'}</code></strong></pre>
<p>We can index this dictionary by key to fetch and change the
          keys’ associated values. The dictionary index operation uses the
          same syntax as that used for sequences, but the item in the square
          brackets is a key, not a relative position:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e8468"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D['food']</code></strong>              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Fetch value of key</span></em> '<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">food</span></em>'
'Spam'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D['quantity'] += 1</code></strong>     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Add 1 to</span></em> '<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">quantity</span></em>' <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">value</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D</code></strong>
{'food': 'Spam', 'color': 'pink', 'quantity': 5}</pre>
<p>Although the curly-braces literal form does see use, it is
          perhaps more common to see dictionaries built up in different ways.
          The following code, for example, starts with an empty dictionary and
          fills it out one key at a time. Unlike out-of-bounds assignments in
          lists, which are forbidden, assignments to new dictionary keys
          create those keys:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e8497"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D = {}</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D['name'] = 'Bob'</code></strong>      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Create keys by assignment</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D['job']  = 'dev'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D['age']  = 40</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D</code></strong>
{'age': 40, 'job': 'dev', 'name': 'Bob'}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(D['name'])</code></strong>
Bob</pre>
<p>Here, we’re effectively using dictionary keys as field names
          in a record that describes someone. In other applications,
          dictionaries can also be used to replace searching operations—indexing a dictionary by
          key is often the fastest way to code a search in Python. As we'll
          learn later, dictionaries may also be made by passing keyword
          arguments to the type name: <code class="epub__literal">dict(name='Bob', job='dev', age=40)</code> makes
          the same dictionary.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Nesting Revisited"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="nesting_revisited"></a>Nesting Revisited</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In the prior example, we used a <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e8531"></a>dictionary to describe a hypothetical person, with
          three keys. Suppose, though, that the information is more complex.
          Perhaps we need to record a first name and a last name, along with
          multiple job titles. This leads to another application of Python’s
          object nesting in action. The following dictionary, coded all at
          once as a literal, captures more structured information:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e8537"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rec = {'name': {'first': 'Bob', 'last': 'Smith'},</code></strong>
           <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'job':  ['dev', 'mgr'],</code></strong>
           <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'age':  40.5}</code></strong></pre>
<p>Here, we again have a three-key dictionary at the top (keys
          “name,” “job,” and “age”), but the values have become more complex:
          a nested dictionary for the name to support multiple parts, and a
          nested list for the job to support multiple roles and future
          expansion. We can access the components of this structure much as we
          did for our matrix earlier, but this time some of our indexes are
          dictionary keys, not list offsets:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e8550"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rec['name']</code></strong>                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">#</span></em> '<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">name</span></em>' <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">is a nested dictionary</span></em>
{'last': 'Smith', 'first': 'Bob'}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rec['name']['last']</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Index the nested dictionary</span></em>
'Smith'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rec['job']</code></strong>                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">#</span></em> '<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">job</span></em>' <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">is a nested list</span></em>
['dev', 'mgr']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rec['job'][-1]</code></strong>                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Index the nested list</span></em>
'mgr'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rec['job'].append('janitor')</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Expand Bob</span></em>'<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">s job description in-place</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rec</code></strong>
{'age': 40.5, 'job': ['dev', 'mgr', 'janitor'], 'name': {'last': 'Smith',
'first': 'Bob'}}</pre>
<p>Notice how the last operation here expands the nested job
          list—because the job list is a separate piece of memory from the
          dictionary that contains it, it can grow and shrink freely (object
          memory layout will be discussed further later in this book).</p>
<p>The real reason for showing you this example is to demonstrate
          the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>flexibility</em></span> of Python’s core data types. As
          you can see, nesting allows us to build up complex information
          structures directly and easily. Building a similar structure in a
          low-level language like C would be tedious and require much more
          code: we would have to lay out and declare structures and arrays,
          fill out values, link everything together, and so on. In Python,
          this is all automatic—running the expression creates the entire
          nested object structure for us. In fact, this is one of the main
          benefits of scripting languages like Python.</p>
<p>Just as importantly, in a lower-level language we would have
          to be careful to clean up all of the object’s space when we no
          longer need it. In Python, when we lose the last reference to the
          object—by assigning its variable to something else, for example—all
          of the memory space occupied by that object’s structure is
          automatically cleaned up for us:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e8611"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rec = 0</code></strong>                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Now the object's space is reclaimed</span></em></pre>
<p>Technically speaking, Python has a feature known as
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e8621"></a>garbage collection</em></span> that cleans up unused
          memory as your program runs and frees you from having to manage such
          details in your code. In Python, the space is reclaimed immediately,
          as soon as the last reference to an object is removed. We’ll study
          how this works later in this book; for now, it’s enough to know that
          you can use objects freely, without worrying about creating their
          space or cleaning up as you go.<sup>[14]</sup></p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Sorting Keys: for Loops"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="sorting_keys_colon_for_loops"></a>Sorting Keys: for Loops</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As mappings, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e8646"></a>as we’ve already seen, dictionaries only support
          accessing items by key. However, they also support type-specific
          operations with method calls that are useful in a variety of common
          use cases.</p>
<p>As mentioned earlier, because dictionaries are not sequences,
          they don’t maintain any dependable left-to-right order. This means
          that if we make a dictionary and print it back, its keys may come
          back in a different order than that in which we typed them:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e8654"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D = {'a': 1, 'b': 2, 'c': 3}</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D</code></strong>
{'a': 1, 'c': 3, 'b': 2}</pre>
<p>What do we do, though, if we do need to impose an ordering on
          a dictionary’s items? One common solution is to grab a list of keys
          with the dictionary <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e8665"></a>keys</code> method, sort that with the list
          <code class="epub__literal">sort</code> method, and then step
          through the result with a Python <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop (be sure to press the Enter key
          twice after coding the <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop
          below—as explained in Chapter 3, an
          empty line means “go” at the interactive prompt, and the prompt
          changes to “...” on some interfaces):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e8681"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Ks = list(D.keys())</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Unordered keys list</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Ks</code></strong>                                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># A list in 2.6, "view" in 3.0: use list()</span></em>
['a', 'c', 'b']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Ks.sort()</code></strong>                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Sorted keys list</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Ks</code></strong>
['a', 'b', 'c']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for key in Ks:</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Iterate though sorted keys</span></em>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(key, '=&gt;', D[key])</code></strong>       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># &lt;== press Enter twice here</span></em>

a =&gt; 1
b =&gt; 2
c =&gt; 3</pre>
<p>This is a three-step process, although, as we’ll see in later
          chapters, in recent versions of Python it can be done in one step
          with the newer <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e8720"></a>sorted</code> built-in function. The <code class="epub__literal">sorted</code> call returns the result and sorts a
          variety of object types, in this case sorting dictionary keys
          automatically:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e8728"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D</code></strong>
{'a': 1, 'c': 3, 'b': 2}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for key in sorted(D):</code></strong>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(key, '=&gt;', D[key])</code></strong>

a =&gt; 1
b =&gt; 2
c =&gt; 3</pre>
<p>Besides showcasing dictionaries, this use case serves to
          introduce the Python <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop.
          The <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop is a simple and
          efficient way to step through all the items in a sequence and run a
          block of code for each item in turn. A user-defined loop variable
          (<code class="epub__literal">key</code>, here) is used to reference
          the current item each time through. The net effect in our example is
          to print the unordered dictionary’s keys and values, in sorted-key
          order.</p>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop, and its more
          general cousin the <code class="epub__literal">while</code> loop,
          are the main ways we code repetitive tasks as statements in our
          scripts. Really, though, the <code class="epub__literal">for</code>
          loop (like its relative the list comprehension, which we met
          earlier) is a sequence operation. It works on any object that is a
          sequence and, like the list comprehension, even on some things that
          are not. Here, for example, it is stepping across the characters in
          a string, printing the uppercase version of each as it goes:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e8761"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for c in 'spam':</code></strong>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(c.upper())</code></strong>

S
P
A
M</pre>
<p>Python’s <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e8773"></a>while</code> loop is a more general sort of looping
          tool, not limited to stepping across sequences:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e8778"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = 4</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>while x &gt; 0:</code></strong>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('spam!' * x)</code></strong>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x -= 1</code></strong>

spam!spam!spam!spam!
spam!spam!spam!
spam!spam!
spam!</pre>
<p>We’ll discuss looping statements, syntax, and tools in depth
          later in the book.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Iteration and Optimization"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="iteration_and_optimization"></a>Iteration and Optimization</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>If the last section’s <code class="epub__literal">for</code>
          loop looks like the list comprehension expression introduced
          earlier, it should: both are really general iteration tools. In
          fact, both will work on any object that follows the
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e8803"></a>iteration protocol</em></span>—a pervasive idea in
          Python that essentially means a physically stored sequence in
          memory, or an object that generates one item at a time in the
          context of an iteration operation. An object falls into the latter
          category if it responds to the <code class="epub__literal">iter</code> built-in with an object that advances
          in response to <code class="epub__literal">next</code>. The
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>generator</em></span> comprehension expression we saw
          earlier is such an object.</p>
<p>I’ll have more to say about the iteration protocol later in
          this book. For now, keep in mind that every Python tool that scans
          an object from left to right uses the iteration protocol. This is
          why the <code class="epub__literal">sorted</code> call used in the
          prior section works on the dictionary directly—we don’t have to call
          the <code class="epub__literal">keys</code> method to get a sequence
          because dictionaries are iterable objects, with a <code class="epub__literal">next</code> that returns successive keys.</p>
<p>This also means that any list comprehension expression, such
          as this one, which computes the squares of a list of numbers:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e8830"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>squares = [x ** 2 for x in [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>squares</code></strong>
[1, 4, 9, 16, 25]</pre>
<p>can always be coded as an equivalent <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop that builds the result list
          manually by appending as it goes:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e8843"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>squares = []</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for x in [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]:</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># This is what a list comprehension does</span></em>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>squares.append(x ** 2)</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Both run the iteration protocol internally</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>squares</code></strong>
[1, 4, 9, 16, 25]</pre>
<p>The list comprehension, though, and related functional
          programming tools like <code class="epub__literal">map</code> and
          <code class="epub__literal">filter</code>, will generally run faster
          than a <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop today (perhaps
          even twice as fast)—a property
          that could matter in your programs for large data sets. Having said
          that, though, I should point out that performance measures are
          tricky business in Python because it optimizes so much, and
          performance can vary from release to release.</p>
<p>A major rule of thumb in Python is to code for simplicity and
          readability first and worry about performance later, after your
          program is working, and after you’ve proved that there is a genuine
          performance concern. More often than not, your code will be quick
          enough as it is. If you do need to tweak code for performance,
          though, Python includes tools to help you out, including the
          <code class="epub__literal">time</code> and <code class="epub__literal">timeit</code> modules and the <code class="epub__literal">profile</code> module. You’ll find more on these
          later in this book, and in the Python manuals.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Missing Keys: if Tests"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="missing_keys_colon_if_tests"></a>Missing Keys: if Tests</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>One other note about <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e8894"></a>dictionaries before we move on. Although we can assign
          to a new key to expand a dictionary, fetching a nonexistent key is
          still a mistake:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e8900"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D</code></strong>
{'a': 1, 'c': 3, 'b': 2}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D['e'] = 99</code></strong>                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Assigning new keys grows dictionaries</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D</code></strong>
{'a': 1, 'c': 3, 'b': 2, 'e': 99}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D['f']</code></strong>                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Referencing a nonexistent key is an error</span></em>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...error text omitted...</code></em>
KeyError: 'f'</pre>
<p>This is what we want—it’s usually a programming error to fetch
          something that isn’t really there. But in some generic programs, we
          can’t always know what keys will be present when we write our code.
          How do we handle such cases and avoid errors? One trick is to test
          ahead of time. The dictionary <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e8927"></a>in</code> membership expression allows us to query
          the existence of a key and branch on the result with a Python
          <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e8933"></a>if</code> statement (as with the <code class="epub__literal">for</code>, be sure to press Enter twice to run
          the <code class="epub__literal">if</code> interactively
          here):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e8944"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'f' in D</code></strong>
False

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if not 'f' in D:</code></strong>
       <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('missing')</code></strong>

missing</pre>
<p>I’ll have much more to say about the <code class="epub__literal">if</code> statement and statement syntax in
          general later in this book, but the form we’re using here is
          straightforward: it consists of the word <code class="epub__literal">if</code>, followed by an expression that is
          interpreted as a true or false result, followed by a block of code
          to run if the test is true. In its full form, the <code class="epub__literal">if</code> statement can also have an <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e8967"></a>else</code> clause for a default case, and one or
          more <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e8973"></a>elif</code> (else if) clauses for other tests. It’s
          the main selection tool in Python, and it’s the way we code logic in
          our scripts.</p>
<p>Still, there are other ways to create dictionaries and avoid
          accessing nonexistent keys: the <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e8981"></a>get</code> method (a conditional index with a
          default); the Python 2.X <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e8987"></a>has_key</code> method (which is no longer available
          in 3.0); the <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e8993"></a>try</code> statement (a tool we’ll first meet in
          Chapter 10 that catches and
          recovers from exceptions altogether); and the <code class="epub__literal">if</code>/<code class="epub__literal">else</code>
          expression (essentially, an <code class="epub__literal">if</code>
          statement squeezed onto a single line). Here are a few
          examples:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e9010"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>value = D.get('x', 0)</code></strong>                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Index but with a default</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>value</code></strong>
0
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>value = D['x'] if 'x' in D else 0</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># if/else expression form</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>value</code></strong>
0</pre>
<p>We’ll save the details on such alternatives until a later
          chapter. For now, let’s move on to <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e9033"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e9035"></a>tuples.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Tuples"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
