<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Files</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="files"></a>Files</h1>
<p>File <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e9146"></a>objects<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e9152"></a> are Python code’s main interface to external files on
        your computer. Files are a core type, but they’re something of an
        oddball—there is no specific literal syntax for creating them. Rather,
        to create a file object, you call the built-in <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e9157"></a>open</code> function, passing in an external filename
        and a processing mode as strings. For example, to create a text output
        file, you would pass in its name and the <code class="epub__literal">'w'</code> processing mode string to write
        data:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e9165"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f = open('data.txt', 'w')</code></strong>      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Make a new file in output mode</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f.write('Hello\n')</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Write strings of bytes to it</span></em>
6
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f.write('world\n')</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Returns number of bytes written in Python 3.0</span></em>
6
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f.close()</code></strong>                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Close to flush output buffers to disk</span></em></pre>
<p>This creates a file in the current directory and writes text to
        it (the filename can be a full directory path if you need to access a
        file elsewhere on your computer). To read back what you just wrote,
        reopen the file in <code class="epub__literal">'r'</code> processing
        mode, for reading text input—this is the default if you omit
        the mode in the call. Then read the file’s content into a string, and
        display it. A file’s contents are always a string in your script,
        regardless of the type of data the file contains:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e9199"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f = open('data.txt')</code></strong>           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 'r' is the default processing mode</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>text = f.read()</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Read entire file into a string</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>text</code></strong>
'Hello\nworld\n'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(text)</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># print interprets control characters</span></em>
Hello
world

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>text.split()</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># File content is always a string</span></em>
['Hello', 'world']</pre>
<p>Other file object methods support additional features we don’t
        have time to cover here. For instance, file objects provide more ways
        of reading and writing (<code class="epub__literal">read</code>
        accepts an optional byte size, <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e9235"></a>readline</code> reads one line at a time, and so on),
        as well as other tools (<code class="epub__literal">seek</code> moves
        to a new file position). As we’ll see later, though, the best way to
        read a file today is to <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>not read it at all</em></span>—files
        provide an <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>iterator</em></span> that automatically reads line
        by line in <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops and other
        contexts.</p>
<p>We’ll meet the full set of file methods later in this book, but
        if you want a quick preview now, run a <code class="epub__literal">dir</code> call on any open file and a <code class="epub__literal">help</code> on any of the method names that come
        back:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e9261"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dir(f)</code></strong>
[ <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...many names omitted...</code></em>
'buffer', 'close', 'closed', 'encoding', 'errors', 'fileno', 'flush', 'isatty',
'line_buffering', 'mode', 'name', 'newlines', 'read', 'readable', 'readline',
'readlines', 'seek', 'seekable', 'tell', 'truncate', 'writable', 'write',
'writelines']

&gt;&gt;&gt;<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>help(f.seek)</code></strong>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...try it and see...</code></em></pre>
<p>Later in the book, we’ll also see that files in Python 3.0 draw
        a sharp distinction between text and binary data. <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e9277"></a>Text files</em></span> represent content as strings and
        perform Unicode encoding and decoding automatically, while
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e9283"></a>binary files</em></span> represent content as a special
        <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> string type and allow you to
        access file content unaltered (the following partial example assumes
        there is already a binary file in your current directory):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e9291"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>data = open('data.bin', 'rb').read()</code></strong>       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Open binary file</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>data</code></strong>                                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># bytes string holds binary data</span></em>
b'\x00\x00\x00\x07spam\x00\x08'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>data[4:8]</code></strong>
b'spam'</pre>
<p>Although you won’t generally need to care about this distinction
        if you deal only with ASCII text, Python 3.0’s strings and files are
        an asset if you deal with internationalized applications or
        byte-oriented data.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Other File-Like Tools"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="other_file-like_tools"></a>Other File-Like Tools</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e9317"></a>open</code> function is the workhorse for most file
          processing you will do in Python. For more advanced tasks, though,
          Python comes with additional file-like tools: pipes, FIFOs, sockets,
          keyed-access files, persistent object shelves, descriptor-based
          files, relational and object-oriented database interfaces, and more.
          Descriptor files, for instance, support file locking and
          other low-level tools, and sockets provide an interface for
          networking and interprocess communication. We won’t cover many of
          these topics in this book, but you’ll find them useful once you
          start programming Python in earnest.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Other Core Types"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
