<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Other Core Types</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="other_core_types"></a>Other Core Types</h1>
<p>Beyond <a id="ch04builtinobjtypaddcore"></a>the core types we’ve seen so far, there are others that
        may or may not qualify for membership in the set, depending on how
        broadly it is defined. <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e9337"></a>Sets<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e9341"></a></em></span>, for example, are a recent addition to the
        language that are neither mappings nor sequences; rather, they are
        unordered collections of unique and immutable objects. Sets are
        created by calling the built-in <code class="epub__literal">set</code>
        function or using new set literals and expressions in 3.0, and they
        support the usual mathematical set operations (the choice of new
        <code class="epub__literal">{...}</code> syntax for set literals in
        3.0 makes sense, since sets are much like the keys of a valueless
        dictionary):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e9353"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = set('spam')</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Make a set out of a sequence in 2.6 and 3.0</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Y = {'h', 'a', 'm'}</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Make a set with new 3.0 set literals</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X, Y</code></strong>
({'a', 'p', 's', 'm'}, {'a', 'h', 'm'})

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X &amp; Y</code></strong>                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Intersection</span></em>
{'a', 'm'}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X | Y</code></strong>                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Union</span></em>
{'a', 'p', 's', 'h', 'm'}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X – Y</code></strong>                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Difference</span></em>
{'p', 's'}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>{x ** 2 for x in [1, 2, 3, 4]}</code></strong>  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Set comprehensions in 3.0</span></em>
{16, 1, 4, 9}</pre>
<p>In addition, Python recently grew a few new numeric types:
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>d<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e9400"></a>ecimal</em></span> numbers (fixed-precision
        floating-point numbers) and <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>fraction</em></span>
<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e9407"></a> numbers (rational numbers with both a numerator and a
        denominator). Both can be used to work around the limitations and
        inherent inaccuracies of floating-point math:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e9411"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>1 / 3</code></strong>                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Floating-point (use .0 in Python 2.6)</span></em>
0.33333333333333331
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>(2/3) + (1/2)</code></strong>
1.1666666666666665

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import decimal</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Decimals: fixed precision</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>d = decimal.Decimal('3.141')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>d + 1</code></strong>
Decimal('4.141')

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>decimal.getcontext().prec = 2</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>decimal.Decimal('1.00') / decimal.Decimal('3.00')</code></strong>
Decimal('0.33')

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from fractions import Fraction</code></strong>  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Fractions: numerator+denominator</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f = Fraction(2, 3)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f + 1</code></strong>
Fraction(5, 3)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f + Fraction(1, 2)</code></strong>
Fraction(7, 6)</pre>
<p>Python also comes with <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e9460"></a>Booleans</em></span> (with predefined <code class="epub__literal">True</code> and <code class="epub__literal">False</code> objects that are essentially just the
        integers 1 and 0 with custom display logic), and it has long supported
        a special placeholder object called <code class="epub__literal">None</code> commonly used to initialize names and
        objects:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e9474"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>1 &gt; 2, 1 &lt; 2</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Booleans</span></em>
(False, True)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bool('spam')</code></strong>
True

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = None</code></strong>                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># None placeholder</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(X)</code></strong>
None
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = [None] * 100</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Initialize a list of 100 Nones</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
[None, None, None, None, None, None, None, None, None, None, None, None,
None, None, None, None, None, None, None, None, <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...a list of 100 Nones...</code></em>]</pre>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="How to Break Your Code’s Flexibility"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="how_to_break_your_code_apostrophy_s_fle"></a>How to Break Your Code’s Flexibility</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>I’ll have more to say about all of Python’s object types
          later, but one merits special treatment here. The
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e9513"></a>type</em></span> <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e9518"></a>object, returned by the <code class="epub__literal">type</code> built-in function, is an object that
          gives the type of another object; its result differs slightly in
          3.0, because types have merged with classes completely (something
          we’ll explore in the context of “new-style” classes in Part VI). Assuming <code class="epub__literal">L</code> is still the list of the prior
          section:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e9532"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># In Python 2.6:</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type(L)</code></strong>                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Types: type of L is list type object</span></em>
&lt;type 'list'&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type(type(L))</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Even types are objects</span></em>
&lt;type 'type'&gt;

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># In Python 3.0:</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type(L)</code></strong>                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 3.0: types are classes, and vice versa</span></em>
&lt;class 'list'&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type(type(L))</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># See Chapter 31 for more on class types</span></em>
&lt;class 'type'&gt;</pre>
<p>Besides allowing you to explore your objects interactively,
          the practical application of this is that it allows code to check
          the types of the objects it processes. In fact, there are at least
          three ways to do so in a Python script<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e10087"></a>:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e9568"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if type(L) == type([]):</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Type testing, if you must...</span></em>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('yes')</code></strong>

yes
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if type(L) == list:</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Using the type name</span></em>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('yes')</code></strong>

yes
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if isinstance(L, list):</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Object-oriented tests</span></em>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('yes')</code></strong>

yes</pre>
<p>Now that I’ve shown you all these ways to do type testing,
          however, I am required by law to tell you that doing so is almost
          always the wrong thing to do in a Python program (and often a sign
          of an ex-C programmer first starting to use Python!). The reason why
          won’t become completely clear until later in the book, when we start
          writing larger code units such as functions, but it’s a (perhaps
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>the</em></span>) core Python concept. By checking for
          specific types in your code, you effectively break its
          flexibility—you limit it to working on just one type. Without such
          tests, your code may be able to work on a whole range of
          types.</p>
<p>This is related to the idea of <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e9605"></a>polymorphism mentioned earlier, and it stems from
          Python’s lack of type
          declarations. As you’ll learn, in Python, we code to object
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>interfaces</em></span> (operations supported), not to
          types. Not caring about specific types means that code is
          automatically applicable to many of them—any object with a
          compatible interface will work, regardless of its specific type.
          Although type checking is supported—and even required, in some
          rare cases—you’ll see that it’s not usually the “Pythonic” way of
          thinking. In fact, you’ll find that polymorphism is probably the key
          idea behind using Python well.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="User-Defined Classes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="user-defined_classes"></a>User-Defined Classes</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>We’ll study <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e9624"></a>object-oriented programming</em></span> in
          Python—<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e9631"></a>an optional but powerful feature of the language that
          cuts development time by supporting programming by customization—in
          depth later in this book. In abstract terms, though, classes define
          new types of objects that extend the core set, so they merit a
          passing glance here. Say, for example, that you wish to have a type
          of object that models employees. Although there is no such specific
          core type in Python, the following user-defined class might fit the
          bill:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e9635"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class Worker:</code></strong>
         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __init__(self, name, pay):</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Initialize when created</span></em>
             <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>self.name = name</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># self is the new object</span></em>
             <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>self.pay  = pay</code></strong>
         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def lastName(self):</code></strong>
             <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return self.name.split()[-1]</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Split string on blanks</span></em>
         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def giveRaise(self, percent):</code></strong>
             <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>self.pay *= (1.0 + percent</code></strong>)         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Update pay in-place</span></em></pre>
<p>This class defines a new kind of object that will have
          <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e9677"></a>name</code> and <code class="epub__literal">pay</code> attributes (sometimes called
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e9686"></a>state information</em></span>), as well as two bits of
          behavior coded as functions (normally called
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>methods</em></span>). Calling the class like a function
          generates instances of our new type, and the class’s methods
          automatically receive the instance being processed by a given method
          call (in the <code class="epub__literal">self</code>
          argument):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e9697"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bob = Worker('Bob Smith', 50000)</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Make two instances</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sue = Worker('Sue Jones', 60000)</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Each has name and pay attrs</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bob.lastName()</code></strong>                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Call method: bob is self</span></em>
'Smith'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sue.lastName()</code></strong>                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># sue is the self subject</span></em>
'Jones'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sue.giveRaise(.10)</code></strong>                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Updates sue's pay</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sue.pay</code></strong>
66000.0</pre>
<p>The implied “self” object is why we call this an
          object-oriented model: there is always an implied subject in
          functions within a class. In a sense, though, the class-based type
          simply builds on and uses core types—a user-defined <code class="epub__literal">Worker</code> object here, for example, is just a
          collection of a string and a number (<code class="epub__literal">name</code> and <code class="epub__literal">pay</code>, respectively), plus functions for
          processing those two built-in objects.</p>
<p>The larger story of classes is that their inheritance
          mechanism supports software hierarchies that lend themselves to
          customization by extension. We extend software by writing new
          classes, not by changing what already works. You should also know
          that classes are an optional feature of Python, and simpler built-in
          types such as lists and dictionaries are often better tools than
          user-coded classes. This is all well beyond the bounds of our
          introductory object-type tutorial, though, so consider this just a
          preview; for full disclosure on user-defined types coded with
          classes, you’ll have to read on to Part VI.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="And Everything Else"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="and_everything_else"></a>And Everything Else</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As mentioned earlier, everything you can process in a Python
          script is a type of object, so our <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e9753"></a>object type tour is necessarily incomplete. However,
          even though everything in Python is an “object,” only those types of
          objects we’ve met so far are considered part of Python’s core type
          set. Other types in Python either are objects related to program
          execution (like functions, modules, classes, and compiled code),
          which we will study later, or are implemented by imported module
          functions, not language syntax. The latter of these also tend to
          have application-specific roles—text patterns, database interfaces,
          network connections, and so on.</p>
<p>Moreover, keep in mind that the objects we’ve met here are
          objects, but not necessarily <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>object-oriented</em></span>—a
          concept that usually requires inheritance and the Python <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement, which we’ll meet again
          later in this book. Still, Python’s core objects are the workhorses
          of almost every Python script you’re likely to meet, and they
          usually are the basis of larger noncore <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e9765"></a>types.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Chapter Summary"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
