<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="chapter_summary-id3"></a>Chapter Summary</h1>
<p>And that’s a wrap for our concise data type tour. This chapter
        has offered a brief introduction to Python’s core object types and the
        sorts of operations we can apply to them. We’ve studied generic
        operations that work on many object types (sequence operations such as
        indexing and slicing, for example), as well as type-specific
        operations available as method calls (for instance, string splits and
        list appends). We’ve also defined some key terms, such as
        immutability, sequences, and polymorphism.</p>
<p>Along the way, we’ve seen that Python’s core object types are
        more flexible and powerful than what is available in lower-level
        languages such as C. For instance, Python’s lists and dictionaries
        obviate most of the work you do to support collections and searching
        in lower-level languages. Lists are ordered collections of other
        objects, and dictionaries are collections of other objects that are
        indexed by key instead of by position. Both dictionaries and lists may
        be nested, can grow and shrink on demand, and may contain objects of
        any type. Moreover, their space is automatically cleaned up as you
        go.</p>
<p>I’ve skipped most of the details here in order to provide a
        quick tour, so you shouldn’t expect all of this chapter to have made
        sense yet. In the next few chapters, we’ll start to dig deeper,
        filling in details of Python’s core object types that were omitted
        here so you can gain a more complete understanding. We’ll start off in
        the next chapter with an in-depth look at Python numbers. First,
        though, another quiz to review.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Test Your Knowledge: Quiz"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
