<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_answers-id3"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</h1>
<div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Numbers, strings, lists, dictionaries, tuples, files, and
            sets are generally considered to be the core object (data) types.
            Types, <code class="epub__literal">None</code>, and Booleans are
            sometimes classified this way as well. There are multiple number
            types (integer, floating point, complex, fraction, and decimal)
            and multiple string types (simple strings and Unicode strings in
            Python 2.X, and text strings and byte strings in Python
            3.X).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>They are known as “core” types because they are part of the
            Python language itself and are always available; to create other
            objects, you generally must call functions in imported modules.
            Most of the core types have specific syntax for generating the
            objects: <code class="epub__literal">'spam'</code>, for example,
            is an expression that makes a string and determines the set of
            operations that can be applied to it. Because of this, core types
            are hardwired into Python’s syntax. In contrast, you must call the
            built-in <code class="epub__literal">open</code> function to
            create a file object.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>An “immutable” object is an object that cannot be changed
            after it is created. Numbers, strings, and tuples in Python fall
            into this category. While you cannot change an immutable object
            in-place, you can always make a new one by running an
            expression.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>A “sequence” is a positionally ordered collection of
            objects. Strings, lists, and tuples are all sequences in Python.
            They share common sequence operations, such as indexing,
            concatenation, and slicing, but also have type-specific method
            calls.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The term “mapping” denotes an object that maps keys to
            associated values. Python’s dictionary is the only mapping type in
            the core type set. Mappings do not maintain any left-to-right
            positional ordering; they support access to data stored by key,
            plus type-specific method calls.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>“Polymorphism” means that the meaning of an operation (like
            a <code class="epub__literal">+</code>) depends on the objects
            being operated on. This turns out to be a key idea (perhaps
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>the</em></span> key idea) behind using Python well—not
            constraining code to specific types makes that code automatically
            applicable to many types.</p></li></ol>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[12] </sup>In this book, the term <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>literal</em></span> simply
              means an expression whose syntax generates an object—sometimes
              also called a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>constant</em></span>. Note that the term
              “constant” does not imply objects or variables that can never be
              changed (i.e., this term is unrelated to C++’s <code class="epub__literal">const</code> or Python’s “immutable”—a topic
              explored in the section Immutability).</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[13] </sup>This matrix structure works for small-scale tasks, but for
              more serious number crunching you will probably want to use one
              of the numeric extensions to Python, such as the open source
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>NumPy</em></span> system. Such tools can store and
              process large matrixes much more efficiently than our nested
              list structure. NumPy has been said to turn Python into the
              equivalent of a free and more powerful version of the Matlab
              system, and organizations such as NASA, Los Alamos, and JPMorgan
              Chase use this tool for scientific and financial tasks. Search
              the Web for more details.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[14] </sup>Keep in mind that the <code class="epub__literal">rec</code> record we just created really
              could be a database record, when we employ Python’s
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>object persistence</em></span> system—an easy way to
              store native Python objects in files or access-by-key databases.
              We won’t go into details here, but watch for discussion of
              Python’s <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> and <code class="epub__literal">shelve</code> modules later in this
              book.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
