<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Numeric Type Basics</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="numeric_type_basics"></a>Numeric Type Basics</h1>
<p>Most of Python’s <a id="ch05numobjtypes"></a>number types are fairly typical and will probably seem
        familiar if you’ve used almost any other programming language in the
        past. They can be used to keep track of your bank balance, the
        distance to Mars, the number of visitors to your website, and just
        about any other numeric quantity.</p>
<p>In Python, numbers are not really a single object type, but a
        category of similar types. Python supports the usual numeric types
        (integers and floating points), as well as literals for creating
        numbers and expressions for processing them. In addition, Python
        provides more advanced numeric programming support and objects for
        more advanced work. A complete inventory of Python’s numeric toolbox
        includes:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Integers and floating-point numbers</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Complex numbers</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Fixed-precision decimal numbers</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Rational fraction numbers</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Sets</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Booleans</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Unlimited integer precision</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>A variety of numeric built-ins and modules</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>This chapter starts with basic numbers and fundamentals, then
        moves on to explore the other tools in this list. Before we jump into
        code, though, the next few sections get us started with a brief
        overview of how we write and process numbers in our scripts.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Numeric Literals"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="numeric_literals"></a>Numeric Literals</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e9901"></a>Among its basic types, Python provides
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>integers</em></span> (positive and negative whole numbers)
          and <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>floating-point</em></span> numbers (numbers with a
          fractional part, sometimes called “floats” for economy). Python also
          allows us to write integers using hexadecimal, octal, and binary
          literals; offers a complex number type; and allows integers to have
          unlimited precision (they can grow to have as many digits as your
          memory space allows). Table 5-1
<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e9915"></a>shows what Python’s numeric types look like when
          written out in a program, as literals.</p><div class="epub__table"><a id="basic_numeric_literals"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Table 5-1. Basic numeric literals</p><div class="epub__table-contents">
<table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; " summary="Basic numeric literals">
<colgroup><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Literal</p></th><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Interpretation</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">1234</code>, <code class="epub__literal">−24</code>, <code class="epub__literal">0</code>, <code class="epub__literal">99999999999999</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Integers (unlimited
                  size)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">1.23</code>, <code class="epub__literal">1.</code>, <code class="epub__literal">3.14e-10</code>, <code class="epub__literal">4E210</code>, <code class="epub__literal">4.0e+210</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Floating-point
                  numbers</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">0177</code>, <code class="epub__literal">0x9ff</code>, <code class="epub__literal">0b101010</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Octal, hex, and
                  binary literals in 2.6</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">0o177</code>, <code class="epub__literal">0x9ff</code>, <code class="epub__literal">0b101010</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Octal, hex, and
                  binary literals in 3.0</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">3+4j</code>, <code class="epub__literal">3.0+4.0j</code>, <code class="epub__literal">3J</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Complex number
                  literals</p></td></tr></tbody>
</table>
</div>
</div>
<p>In general, Python’s numeric type literals are straightforward
          to write, but a few coding concepts are worth highlighting
          here:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Integer and floating-point literals</span></dt><dd>
<p>Integers<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10022"></a> are written as strings of decimal digits.
                Floating-point numbers<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10026"></a> have a decimal point and/or an optional signed
                exponent introduced by an <code class="epub__literal">e</code>
                or <code class="epub__literal">E</code> and followed by an
                optional sign. If you write a number with a decimal point or
                exponent, Python makes it a floating-point object and uses
                floating-point (not integer) math when the object is used in
                an expression. Floating-point numbers are implemented as C
                “doubles,” and therefore get as much precision as the C
                compiler used to build the Python interpreter gives to
                doubles.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Integers in Python 2.6: normal and long</span></dt><dd>
<p>In Python 2.6 there are two integer types, <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10043"></a>normal (32 bits) and <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10047"></a>long (unlimited precision), and an integer may
                end in an <code class="epub__literal">l</code> or <code class="epub__literal">L</code> to force it to become a long
                integer. Because integers are automatically converted to long
                integers when their values overflow 32 bits, you never need to
                type the letter <code class="epub__literal">L</code>
                yourself—Python automatically converts up to long integer when
                extra precision is needed.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Integers in Python 3.0: a single type</span></dt><dd>
<p>In <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10066"></a>Python 3.0, the normal and long integer types
                have been merged—there is only integer, which automatically
                supports the unlimited precision of Python 2.6’s separate long
                integer type. Because of this, integers can no longer be coded
                with a trailing <code class="epub__literal">l</code> or
                <code class="epub__literal">L</code>, and integers never print
                with this character either. Apart from this, most programs are
                unaffected by this change, unless they do type testing that
                checks for 2.6 long integers.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Hexadecimal, octal, and binary literals</span></dt><dd>
<p>Integers may be coded in <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10084"></a>decimal (base 10), <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10088"></a>hexadecimal (base 16), octal (base 8), or binary
                (base 2). Hexadecimals start with a leading <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10093"></a>0x</code> or <code class="epub__literal">0X</code>, followed by a string of
                hexadecimal digits (<code class="epub__literal">0</code>–<code class="epub__literal">9</code> and <code class="epub__literal">A</code>–<code class="epub__literal">F</code>). Hex digits may be coded in
                lower- or uppercase. <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10114"></a>Octal literals start with a leading <code class="epub__literal">0o</code> or <code class="epub__literal">0O</code> (zero and lower- or uppercase
                letter “o”), followed by a string of digits (<code class="epub__literal">0</code>–<code class="epub__literal">7</code>). In 2.6 and earlier, octal
                literals can also be coded with just a leading <code class="epub__literal">0</code>, but not in 3.0 (this original
                octal form is too easily confused with decimal, and is
                replaced by the new <code class="epub__literal">0o</code>
                format). <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10137"></a>Binary literals, new in 2.6 and 3.0, begin with
                a leading <code class="epub__literal">0b</code> or <code class="epub__literal">0B</code>, followed by binary digits
                (<code class="epub__literal">0</code>–<code class="epub__literal">1</code>).</p>
<p>Note that all of these literals produce integer objects
                in program code; they are just alternative syntaxes for
                specifying values. The built-in calls <code class="epub__literal">hex(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>I</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code>, <code class="epub__literal">oct(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>I</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">bin(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>I</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code> convert an integer to its
                representation string in these three bases, and <code class="epub__literal">int(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>str</code></em><code class="epub__literal">,</code>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>base</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code> converts a runtime string to an
                integer per a given base.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Complex numbers</span></dt><dd>
<p>Python <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10196"></a>complex literals are written as
                <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>realpart</code></em><code class="epub__literal">+</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>imaginarypart</code></em>,
                where the <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>imaginarypart</code></em>
                is terminated with a <code class="epub__literal">j</code> or
                <code class="epub__literal">J</code>. The
                <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>realpart</code></em> is technically optional,
                so the <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>imaginarypart</code></em> may appear on
                its own. Internally, complex numbers are implemented as pairs
                of floating-point numbers, but all numeric operations perform
                complex math when applied to complex numbers. Complex numbers
                may also be created with the <code class="epub__literal">complex(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>real</code></em><code class="epub__literal">,</code>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>imag</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code> built-in call.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Coding other numeric types</span></dt><dd>
<p>As we’ll see later in this chapter, there are
                additional, more advanced number types not included in Table 5-1. Some of these are created
                by calling functions in imported modules (e.g., decimals and
                fractions), and others have literal syntax all their own
                (e.g., sets).</p></dd></dl>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Built-in Numeric Tools"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="built-in_numeric_tools"></a>Built-in Numeric Tools</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Besides <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10250"></a>the built-in number literals shown in Table 5-1, Python provides a set of tools
          for processing number objects:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Expression operators</span></dt><dd>
<p><code class="epub__literal">+</code>, <code class="epub__literal">-</code>, <code class="epub__literal">*</code>, <code class="epub__literal">/</code>, <code class="epub__literal">&gt;&gt;</code>, <code class="epub__literal">**</code>, <code class="epub__literal">&amp;</code>, <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10286"></a>etc.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Built-in mathematical functions</span></dt><dd>
<p><code class="epub__literal">pow</code>, <code class="epub__literal">abs</code>, <code class="epub__literal">round</code>, <code class="epub__literal">int</code>, <code class="epub__literal">hex</code>, <code class="epub__literal">bin</code>, <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10314"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10317"></a>etc.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Utility modules</span></dt><dd>
<p><code class="epub__literal">random</code>, <code class="epub__literal">math</code>, <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10332"></a>etc.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>We’ll meet all of these as we go along.</p>
<p>Although numbers are primarily processed with expressions,
          built-ins, and modules, they also have a handful of type-specific
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>methods</em></span> today, which we’ll meet in this chapter
          as well. Floating-point numbers, for example, have an <code class="epub__literal">as_integer_ratio</code> <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10346"></a>method that is useful for the fraction number type,
          and an <code class="epub__literal">is_integer</code> <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10353"></a>method to test if the number is an integer. Integers
          have various attributes, including a new <code class="epub__literal">bit_length</code> <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10361"></a>method in the upcoming Python 3.1 release that gives
          the number of bits necessary to represent the object’s value.
          Moreover, as part collection and part number,
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>sets</em></span> also support both methods and
          expressions.</p>
<p>Since expressions are the most essential tool for most number
          types, though, let’s turn to them <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10370"></a>next.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Python Expression Operators"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="python_expression_operators"></a>Python Expression Operators</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Perhaps the most fundamental tool that processes numbers is
          the <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10378"></a><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>expression</em></span>: a combination of
          numbers (or other objects) and operators that computes a value when
          executed by Python. In Python, expressions are written using the
          usual mathematical notation
          and operator symbols. For instance, to add two numbers <code class="epub__literal">X</code> and <code class="epub__literal">Y</code>
          you would say <code class="epub__literal">X + Y</code>, which tells
          Python to apply the <code class="epub__literal">+</code> operator to
          the values named by <code class="epub__literal">X</code> and
          <code class="epub__literal">Y</code>. The result of the expression
          is the sum of <code class="epub__literal">X</code> and <code class="epub__literal">Y</code>, another number object.</p>
<p>Table 5-2
          lists all the operator expressions available in Python. Many are
          self-explanatory; for
          instance, the usual mathematical operators (<code class="epub__literal">+</code>, <code class="epub__literal">−</code>,
          <code class="epub__literal">*</code>, <code class="epub__literal">/</code>, and so on) are supported. A few will be
          familiar if you’ve used other languages in the past: <code class="epub__literal">%</code> computes a division remainder, <code class="epub__literal">&lt;&lt;</code> performs a bitwise<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10442"></a> left-shift, <code class="epub__literal">&amp;</code>
          computes a bitwise AND result, and so on. Others are more
          Python-specific, and not all are numeric in nature: for example, the
          <code class="epub__literal">is</code> operator tests object identity
          (i.e., address in memory, a strict form of equality), and <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code> creates unnamed <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10446"></a>functions<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10453"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10456"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10459"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10462"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10465"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10468"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10471"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10474"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10477"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10480"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10483"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10487"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10490"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10493"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10496"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10499"></a>.</p><div class="epub__table"><a id="python_expression_operators_and_precede"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Table 5-2. Python expression operators and precedence<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e11060"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e11063"></a></p><div class="epub__table-contents">
<table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; " summary="Python expression operators and precedenceprecedenceoperator precedence">
<colgroup><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Operators</p></th><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Description</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; "><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">yield x</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Generator
                  function <code class="epub__literal">send</code>
                  protocol</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">lambda args:
                  expression</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Anonymous function
                  generation</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">x if y else z</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Ternary selection
                  (<code class="epub__literal">x</code> is evaluated only if
                  <code class="epub__literal">y</code> is true)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">x or y</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Logical OR (<code class="epub__literal">y</code> is evaluated only if <code class="epub__literal">x</code> is false)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">x and y</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Logical AND (<code class="epub__literal">y</code> is evaluated only if <code class="epub__literal">x</code> is true)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">not x</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Logical
                  negation</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">x in y</code>, <code class="epub__literal">x
                  not in y</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Membership
                  (iterables, sets)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">x is y</code>, <code class="epub__literal">x
                  is not y</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Object identity
                  tests</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">x &lt; y</code>, <code class="epub__literal">x &lt;= y</code>, <code class="epub__literal">x &gt; y</code>, <code class="epub__literal">x &gt;= y</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">x == y</code>, <code class="epub__literal">x
                  != y</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Magnitude comparison,
                  set subset and superset;</p>
<p>Value equality
                  operators</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">x | y</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Bitwise OR, set
                  union</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">x ^ y</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Bitwise XOR, set
                  symmetric difference</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">x &amp; y</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Bitwise AND, set
                  intersection</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">x &lt;&lt; y</code>, <code class="epub__literal">x &gt;&gt; y</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Shift <code class="epub__literal">x</code> left or right by <code class="epub__literal">y</code> bits</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">x + y</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">x – y</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Addition,
                  concatenation;</p>
<p>Subtraction, set
                  difference</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">x * y</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">x % y</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">x / y</code>, <code class="epub__literal">x
                  // y</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Multiplication,
                  repetition;</p>
<p>Remainder, format;</p>
<p>Division: true and floor</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">−x</code>, <code class="epub__literal">+x</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Negation,
                  identity</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">˜x</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Bitwise NOT
                  (inversion)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">x ** y</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Power
                  (exponentiation)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">x[i]</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Indexing (sequence,
                  mapping, others)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">x[i:j:k]</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Slicing</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">x(...)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Call (function,
                  method, class, other callable)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">x.attr</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Attribute
                  reference</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">(...)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Tuple, expression,
                  generator expression</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">[...]</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>List, list
                  comprehension</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">{...}</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Dictionary, set, set
                  and dictionary comprehensions</p></td></tr></tbody>
</table>
</div>
</div>
<p>Since this book <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10808"></a>addresses both Python 2.6 and 3.0, here are some notes
          about version differences and recent additions related to the
          operators in<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10814"></a> Table 5-2:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In Python 2.6, value inequality can be written as either
              <code class="epub__literal">X != Y</code> or <code class="epub__literal">X &lt;&gt; Y</code>. In Python 3.0, the
              latter of these options is removed because it is redundant. In
              either version, best practice is to use <code class="epub__literal">X != Y</code> for all value inequality
              tests.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In Python 2.6, a backquotes expression <code class="epub__literal">`X`</code> works the same as <code class="epub__literal">repr(X)</code> and converts objects to
              display strings. Due to its obscurity, this expression is
              removed in Python 3.0; use the more readable <code class="epub__literal">str</code> and <code class="epub__literal">repr</code> built-in functions, described in
              Numeric Display Formats.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">X // Y</code> floor
              <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10860"></a>division <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10864"></a>expression always truncates fractional remainders
              in both Python 2.6 and 3.0. The <code class="epub__literal">X /
              Y</code> expression performs <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10871"></a>true division in 3.0 (retaining remainders) and
              <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10876"></a>classic division in 2.6 (truncating for integers).
              See Division: Classic, Floor, and True.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The syntax <code class="epub__literal">[...]</code> is
              used for both list literals and list comprehension expressions.
              The latter of these performs an implied loop and collects
              expression results in a new list. See Chapters 4, 14, and 20 for examples.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The syntax <code class="epub__literal">(...)</code> is
              used for tuples and expressions, as well as generator expressions—a form of list
              comprehension that produces results on demand, instead of
              building a result list. See Chapters 4 and 20 for examples. The parentheses
              may sometimes be omitted in all three constructs.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The syntax <code class="epub__literal">{...}</code> is
              used for dictionary literals, and in Python 3.0 for set literals
              and both dictionary and set comprehensions. See the set coverage
              in this chapter and Chapters 4, 8, 14, and 20 for examples.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">yield</code> and ternary
              <code class="epub__literal">if</code>/<code class="epub__literal">else</code> selection expressions are
              available in Python 2.5 and later. The former returns <code class="epub__literal">send(...)</code> arguments in generators; the
              latter is shorthand for a multiline <code class="epub__literal">if</code> statement. <code class="epub__literal">yield</code> requires parentheses if not
              alone on the right side of an assignment statement.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Comparison operators may be chained: <code class="epub__literal">X &lt; Y &lt; Z</code> produces the same
              result as <code class="epub__literal">X &lt; Y and Y &lt; Z</code>. See
              Comparisons: Normal and Chained for
              details.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In recent Pythons, the slice expression <code class="epub__literal">X[I:J:K]</code> is equivalent to indexing
              with a slice object: <code class="epub__literal">X[slice(I, J,
              K)]</code>.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In Python 2.X, magnitude comparisons of mixed
              types—converting numbers to a common type, and ordering other
              mixed types according to the type name—are allowed. In Python
              3.0, nonnumeric mixed-type magnitude comparisons are not allowed
              and raise exceptions; this includes sorts by proxy.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Magnitude comparisons for dictionaries are also no longer
              supported in Python 3.0 (though equality tests are); comparing
              <code class="epub__literal">sorted(dict.items())</code> is one
              possible replacement.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>We’ll see most of the operators in Table 5-2 in action
          later; first, though, we need to take a quick look at the ways these
          operators may be combined in expressions.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Mixed operators follow operator precedence"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="mixed_operators_follow_operator_precede"></a>Mixed operators follow operator precedence</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As in most languages, in Python, more complex expressions
            are coded by stringing together the operator expressions in Table 5-2. For
            instance, the sum of two multiplications might be written as a mix
            of variables and operators:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e10984"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">A * B + C * D</pre>
<p>So, how does Python know which operation to perform first?
            The answer to this question lies in <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10989"></a>operator precedence</em></span>. When you write an
            expression with more than one operator, Python groups its parts
            according to what are called <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e10995"></a>precedence rules</em></span>, and this grouping
            determines the order in which the expression’s parts are computed.
            Table 5-2 is
            ordered by operator precedence:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Operators lower in the table have higher precedence, and
                so bind more tightly in mixed expressions.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Operators in the same row in Table 5-2 generally
                group from left to right when combined (except for
                exponentiation, which groups right to left, and comparisons,
                which chain left to right).</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>For example, if you write <code class="epub__literal">X + Y *
            Z</code>, Python evaluates the multiplication first <code class="epub__literal">(Y *
            Z)</code>, then adds that result to <code class="epub__literal">X</code> because <code class="epub__literal">*</code> has higher precedence (is lower in the
            table) than <code class="epub__literal">+</code>. Similarly, in
            this section’s original example, both multiplications (<code class="epub__literal">A * B</code> and <code class="epub__literal">C *
            D</code>) will happen before their results are
            added.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Parentheses group subexpressions"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="parentheses_group_subexpressions"></a>Parentheses group subexpressions</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>You can forget about <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e11042"></a>precedence completely if you’re careful to group
            parts of expressions with <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e11048"></a>parentheses. When you enclose subexpressions in
            parentheses, you override Python’s precedence rules; Python always
            evaluates expressions in parentheses first before using their
            results in the enclosing expressions.</p>
<p>For instance, instead of coding <code class="epub__literal">X +
            Y * Z</code>, you could write one of the following to force
            Python to evaluate the expression in the desired order:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e11059"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">(X + Y) * Z
X + (Y * Z)</pre>
<p>In the first case, <code class="epub__literal">+</code> is
            applied to <code class="epub__literal">X</code> and <code class="epub__literal">Y</code> first, because this subexpression is
            wrapped in parentheses. In the second case, the <code class="epub__literal">*</code> is performed first (just as if there
            were no parentheses at all). Generally speaking, adding
            parentheses in large expressions is a good idea—it not only forces
            the evaluation order you want, but also aids readability.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Mixed types are converted up"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="mixed_types_are_converted_up"></a>Mixed types are converted up</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Besides <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e11080"></a>mixing operators in expressions, you can also mix
            numeric types. For instance, you can add an integer to a
            floating-point number:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e11086"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">40 + 3.14</pre>
<p>But this leads to another question: what type is the
            result—integer or floating-point? The answer is simple, especially
            if you’ve used almost any other language before: in mixed-type
            numeric expressions, Python first converts operands
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>up</em></span> to the type of the most complicated
            operand, and then performs the math on same-type operands. This
            behavior is similar to type conversions in the C language.</p>
<p>Python ranks the complexity of <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e11095"></a>numeric types like so: integers are simpler than
            floating-point numbers, which are simpler than complex numbers.
            So, when an integer is mixed with a floating point, as in the
            preceding example, the integer is converted up to a floating-point
            value first, and floating-point math yields the floating-point
            result. Similarly, any mixed-type expression where one operand is
            a complex number results in the other operand being converted up
            to a complex number, and the expression yields a complex result.
            (In Python 2.6, normal integers are also converted to long
            integers whenever their values are too large to fit in a normal
            integer; in 3.0, integers subsume longs entirely.)</p>
<p>You can force the issue by calling built-in functions to
            convert types manually:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e11103"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>int(3.1415)</code></strong>     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Truncates float to integer</span></em>
3
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>float(3)</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Converts integer to float</span></em>
3.0</pre>
<p>However, you won’t usually need to do this: because Python
            automatically converts up to the more complex type within an
            expression, the results are normally what you want.</p>
<p>Also, keep in mind that all these mixed-type conversions
            apply only when mixing <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>numeric</em></span> types (e.g.,
            an integer and a floating-point) in an expression, including those
            using numeric and comparison operators. In general, Python does
            not convert across any other type boundaries automatically. Adding
            a string to an integer, for example, results in an error, unless
            you manually convert one or the other; watch for an example when
            we meet strings in Chapter 7.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p>In Python 2.6, nonnumeric mixed types can be compared, but
              no conversions are performed (mixed types compare according to a
              fixed but arbitrary rule). In 3.0, nonnumeric mixed-type
              comparisons are not allowed and raise exceptions.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Preview: Operator overloading and polymorphism"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="preview_colon_operator_overloading_and"></a>Preview: Operator overloading and polymorphism</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Although <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e11134"></a>we’re focusing on built-in numbers right now, all
            Python operators may be overloaded (i.e., implemented) by Python
            classes and C extension types to work on objects you create. For
            instance, you’ll see later that objects coded with classes may be
            added or concatenated with <code class="epub__literal">+</code>
            expressions, indexed with <code class="epub__literal">[i]</code>
            expressions, and so on.</p>
<p>Furthermore, Python itself automatically overloads some
            operators, such that they perform different actions depending on
            the type of built-in objects being processed. For example, the
            <code class="epub__literal">+</code> operator performs addition
            when applied to numbers but performs concatenation when applied to
            sequence objects such as strings and lists. In fact, <code class="epub__literal">+</code> can mean anything at all when applied
            to objects you define with classes.</p>
<p>As we saw in the prior chapter, this property is usually
            called <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e11157"></a>polymorphism</em></span>—a term indicating that the
            meaning of an operation depends on the type of the objects being
            operated on. We’ll revisit this concept when we explore functions
            in Chapter 16, because it becomes a much
            more obvious feature in that context.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Numbers in Action"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
