<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Numbers in Action</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="numbers_in_action"></a>Numbers in Action</h1>
<p>On to the code! <a id="ch05numops"></a>Probably the best way to understand numeric objects and
        expressions is to see them in action, so let’s start up the
        interactive command line and try some basic but illustrative
        operations (see Chapter 3 for pointers
        if you need help starting an interactive session).</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Variables and Basic Expressions"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="variables_and_basic_expressions"></a>Variables and Basic Expressions</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>First of all, <a id="ch05mumopsvarandbasicexp"></a>let’s exercise some basic math. In the following
          interaction, we first assign two <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e11187"></a>variables</em></span> (<code class="epub__literal">a</code> and <code class="epub__literal">b</code>) to integers so we can use them later in
          a larger expression. Variables are simply names—created by you or
          Python—that are used to keep track of information in your program.
          We’ll say more about this in the next chapter, but in Python:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Variables are created when they are first assigned
              values.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Variables are replaced with their values when used in
              expressions.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Variables must be assigned before they can be used in
              expressions.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Variables refer to objects and are never declared ahead of
              time.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>In other words, these assignments cause the variables <code class="epub__literal">a</code> and <code class="epub__literal">b</code>
          to spring into existence automatically:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e11219"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a = 3</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Name created</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>b = 4</code></strong></pre>
<p>I’ve also used a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>comment</em></span> here. Recall
          that in Python code, text after a <code class="epub__literal">#</code> mark and continuing to the end of the
          line is considered to be a comment and is ignored. Comments are a
          way to write human-readable documentation for your code. Because
          code you type interactively is temporary, you won’t normally write
          comments in this context, but I’ve added them to some of this book’s
          examples to help explain the code.<sup>[15]</sup> In the next part of the book, we’ll meet a related
          feature—<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e11247"></a>documentation strings—that attaches the text of your
          comments to objects.</p>
<p>Now, let’s use our new integer objects in some expressions. At
          this point, the values of <code class="epub__literal">a</code> and
          <code class="epub__literal">b</code> are still <code class="epub__literal">3</code> and <code class="epub__literal">4</code>, respectively. Variables like these are
          replaced with their values whenever they’re used inside an
          expression, and the expression results are echoed back immediately
          when working interactively:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e11265"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a + 1, a – 1</code></strong>           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Addition (3 + 1), subtraction (3 - 1)</span></em>
(4, 2)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>b * 3, b / 2</code></strong>           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Multiplication (4 * 3), division (4 / 2)</span></em>
(12, 2.0)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a % 2, b ** 2</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Modulus (remainder), power (4 ** 2)</span></em>
(1, 16)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>2 + 4.0, 2.0 ** b</code></strong>      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Mixed-type conversions</span></em>
(6.0, 16.0)</pre>
<p>Technically, the results being echoed back here are
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e11295"></a>tuples</em></span> of two values because the lines
          typed at the prompt contain two expressions separated by commas;
          that’s why the results are displayed in parentheses (more on tuples
          later). Note that the expressions work because the variables
          <code class="epub__literal">a</code> and <code class="epub__literal">b</code> within them have been assigned values.
          If you use a different variable that has never been assigned, Python
          reports an error rather than filling in some default value:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e11306"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c * 2</code></strong>
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "&lt;stdin&gt;", line 1, in ?
NameError: name 'c' is not defined</pre>
<p>You don’t need to predeclare <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e11313"></a>variables in Python, but they must have been assigned
          at least once before you can use them. In practice, this means you
          have to initialize counters to zero before you can add to them,
          initialize lists to an empty list before you can append to them, and
          so on.</p>
<p>Here are two slightly larger expressions to illustrate
          operator grouping and more about conversions:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e11322"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>b / 2 + a</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same as ((4 / 2) + 3)</span></em>
5.0
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(b / (2.0 + a))</code></strong>    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same as (4 / (2.0 + 3))</span></em>
0.8</pre>
<p>In the first expression, there are no parentheses, so Python
          automatically groups the components according to its precedence
          rules—because <code class="epub__literal">/</code> is lower in Table 5-2 than <code class="epub__literal">+</code>, it binds more tightly and so is
          evaluated first. The result is as if the expression had been
          organized with parentheses as shown in the comment to the right of
          the code.</p>
<p>Also, notice that all the numbers are integers in the first
          expression. Because of that, Python 2.6 performs integer <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e11348"></a>division and addition and will give a result of 5,
          whereas Python 3.0 performs true division with remainders and gives
          the result shown. If you want integer division in 3.0, code this as
          <code class="epub__literal">b // 2 + a</code> (more on division in a
          moment).</p>
<p><a name="second expression"></a>In the second expression, parentheses are added around the
          <code class="epub__literal">+</code> part to force Python to
          evaluate it first (i.e., before the <code class="epub__literal">/</code>). We also made one of the operands
          floating-point by adding a decimal point: <code class="epub__literal">2.0</code>. Because of the mixed types, Python
          converts the integer referenced by <code class="epub__literal">a</code> to a floating-point value (<code class="epub__literal">3.0</code>) before performing the <code class="epub__literal">+</code>. If all the numbers in this expression
          were integers, <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e11378"></a>integer division (<code class="epub__literal">4 /
          5</code>) would yield the truncated integer <code class="epub__literal">0</code> in Python 2.6 but the floating-point
          <code class="epub__literal">0.8</code> in Python 3.0<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e11391"></a> (again, stay tuned for division details).</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Numeric Display Formats"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="numeric_display_formats"></a>Numeric Display Formats</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Notice <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e11399"></a>that we used a <code class="epub__literal">print</code> <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e11408"></a>operation in the last of the preceding examples.
          Without the <code class="epub__literal">print</code>, you’ll see
          something that may look a bit odd at first glance:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e11415"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>b / (2.0 + a)</code></strong>           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Auto echo output: more digits</span></em>
0.80000000000000004

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(b / (2.0 + a))</code></strong>    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># print rounds off digits</span></em>
0.8</pre>
<p>The full story behind this odd result has to do with the
          limitations of floating-point hardware and its inability to exactly
          represent some values in a limited number of bits. Because computer
          architecture is well beyond this book’s scope, though, we’ll finesse
          this by saying that all of the digits in the first output are really
          there in your computer’s floating-point hardware—it’s just that
          you’re not accustomed to seeing them. In fact, this is really just a
          display issue—the interactive prompt’s automatic result echo shows
          more digits than the <code class="epub__literal">print</code>
          statement. If you don’t want to see all the digits, use <code class="epub__literal">print</code>; as the sidebar str and repr Display Formats will explain, you’ll get a
          user-friendly display.</p>
<p>Note, however, that not all values have so many digits to
          display:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e11441"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>1 / 2.0</code></strong>
0.5</pre>
<p>and that there are more ways to display the bits of a number
          inside your computer than using <code class="epub__literal">print</code> and automatic echoes:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e11451"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>num = 1 / 3.0</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>num</code></strong>                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Echoes</span></em>
0.33333333333333331
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(num)</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># print rounds</span></em>
0.333333333333

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'%e' % num</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># String formatting expression</span></em>
'3.333333e-001'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'%4.2f' % num</code></strong>            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Alternative floating-point format</span></em>
'0.33'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'{0:4.2f}'.format(num)</code></strong>   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># String formatting method (Python 2.6 and 3.0)</span></em>
'0.33'</pre>
<p>The last three of these expressions employ <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>string
          formatting</em></span>, a tool that allows for format flexibility,
          which we will explore in the upcoming chapter on strings (Chapter 7). Its results are strings that are
          typically printed to displays or reports.</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="str_and_repr_display_formats"></a>
<p class="epub__title">str and repr Display Formats</p>
<p>Technically, the difference between default interactive
            echoes and <code class="epub__literal">print</code> corresponds to
            the difference between the built-in <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e11503"></a>repr</code> and <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e11511"></a>str</code> functions:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e11518"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>num = 1 / 3</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>repr(num)</code></strong>              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Used by echoes: as-code form</span></em>
'0.33333333333333331'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>str(num)</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Used by print: user-friendly form</span></em>
'0.333333333333'</pre>
<p>Both of these convert arbitrary objects to their string
            representations: <code class="epub__literal">repr</code> (and the
            default interactive echo) produces results that look as though
            they were code; <code class="epub__literal">str</code> (and the
            <code class="epub__literal">print</code> operation) converts to a
            typically more user-friendly format if available. Some objects
            have both—a <code class="epub__literal">str</code> for general
            use, and a <code class="epub__literal">repr</code> with extra
            details. This notion will resurface when we study both strings and
            operator overloading in classes, and you’ll find more on these
            built-ins in general later in the book.</p>
<p>Besides providing print strings for arbitrary objects, the
            <code class="epub__literal">str</code> built-in is also the name
            of the string data type and may be called with an encoding name to
            decode a Unicode string from a byte string. We’ll study the latter
            advanced role in Chapter 36 of
            this book.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Comparisons: Normal and Chained"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="comparisons_colon_normal_and_chained"></a>Comparisons: Normal and Chained</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>So far, <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e11564"></a>we’ve been dealing with standard numeric operations
          (addition and multiplication), but numbers can also be compared.
          Normal comparisons work for numbers exactly as you’d expect—they
          compare the relative magnitudes of their operands and return a
          Boolean result (which we would normally test in a larger
          statement):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e11570"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>1 &lt; 2</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Less than</span></em>
True
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>2.0 &gt;= 1</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Greater than or equal: mixed-type 1 converted to 1.0</span></em>
True
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>2.0 == 2.0</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Equal value</span></em>
True
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>2.0 != 2.0</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Not equal value</span></em>
False</pre>
<p>Notice again how mixed types are allowed in numeric
          expressions (only); in the second test here, Python compares values
          in terms of the more complex type, float.</p>
<p>Interestingly, Python also allows us to <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e11602"></a>chain</em></span> multiple comparisons together to
          perform range tests. Chained comparisons are a sort of shorthand for
          larger Boolean expressions. In short, Python lets us string together
          magnitude comparison tests to code chained comparisons such as range
          tests. The expression <code class="epub__literal">(A &lt; B &lt;
          C)</code>, for instance, tests whether <code class="epub__literal">B</code> is between <code class="epub__literal">A</code> and <code class="epub__literal">C</code>; it is equivalent to the Boolean test
          <code class="epub__literal">(A &lt; B and B &lt; C)</code> but is
          easier on the eyes (and the keyboard). For example, assume the
          following assignments:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e11627"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = 2</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Y = 4</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Z = 6</code></strong></pre>
<p>The following two expressions have identical effects, but the
          first is shorter to type, and it may run slightly faster since
          Python needs to evaluate <code class="epub__literal">Y</code> only
          once:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e11642"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X &lt; Y &lt; Z</code></strong>              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Chained comparisons: range tests</span></em>
True
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X &lt; Y and Y &lt; Z</code></strong>
True</pre>
<p>The same equivalence holds for false results, and arbitrary
          chain lengths are allowed:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e11655"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X &lt; Y &gt; Z</code></strong>
False
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X &lt; Y and Y &gt; Z</code></strong>
False

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>1 &lt; 2 &lt; 3.0 &lt; 4</code></strong>
True
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>1 &gt; 2 &gt; 3.0 &gt; 4</code></strong>
False</pre>
<p>You can use other comparisons in chained tests, but the
          resulting expressions can become nonintuitive unless you evaluate
          them the way Python does. The following, for instance, is false just
          because 1 is not equal to 2:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e11672"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>1 == 2 &lt; 3</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same as: 1 == 2 and 2 &lt; 3</span></em>
False                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Not same as: False &lt; 3 (which means 0 &lt; 3, which is true)</span></em></pre>
<p>Python does not compare the <code class="epub__literal">1 == 2
          False</code> result to 3—this would technically mean the same as
          <code class="epub__literal">0 &lt; 3</code>, which would be <code class="epub__literal">True</code> (as we’ll see later in this chapter,
          <code class="epub__literal">True</code> and <code class="epub__literal">False</code> are just customized 1 and 0).</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Division: Classic, Floor, and True"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="division_colon_classic_comma_floor_comm"></a>Division: Classic, Floor, and True</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>You’ve <a id="ch05numopsdiv"></a>seen <a id="ch05.2.4division"></a>how division works in the previous sections, so you
          should know that it behaves slightly differently in Python 3.0 and
          2.6. In fact, there are actually three flavors of division, and two
          different division operators, one of which changes in 3.0:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">X / Y</code></span>
</dt><dd>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Classic</em></span> <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e11724"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e11727"></a>and <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>true</em></span> division. In
                Python 2.6 and earlier, this operator performs
                <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>classic</em></span> division, truncating results for
                integers and keeping remainders for floating-point numbers. In
                Python 3.0, it performs <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>true</em></span> division,
                always keeping remainders regardless of types.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">X // Y</code></span>
</dt><dd>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Floor</em></span> division. <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e11749"></a>Added in Python 2.2 and available in both Python
                2.6 and 3.0, this operator always truncates fractional
                remainders down to their floor, regardless of types.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>True division was added to address the fact that the results
          of the original classic division model are dependent on operand
          types, and so can be difficult to anticipate in a dynamically typed
          language like Python. Classic division was removed in 3.0 because of
          this constraint—the <code class="epub__literal">/</code> and
          <code class="epub__literal">//</code> operators implement true and
          floor division in 3.0.</p>
<p>In sum:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>In 3.0</em></span>, the <code class="epub__literal">/</code> now always performs
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>true</em></span> division, returning a float result
              that includes any remainder, regardless of operand types. The
              <code class="epub__literal">//</code> performs
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>floor</em></span> division, which truncates the
              remainder and returns an integer for integer operands or a float
              if any operand is a float.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>In 2.6</em></span>, the <code class="epub__literal">/</code> does <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>classic</em></span>
              division, performing truncating integer division if both
              operands are integers and float division (keeping remainders)
              otherwise. The <code class="epub__literal">//</code> does
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>floor</em></span> division and works as it does in 3.0,
              performing truncating division for integers and floor division
              for floats.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Here are the two operators at work in 3.0 and 2.6:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e11800"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>C:\Python30\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>10 / 4</code></strong>            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Differs in 3.0: keeps remainder</span></em>
2.5
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>10 // 4</code></strong>           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same in 3.0: truncates remainder</span></em>
2
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>10 / 4.0</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same in 3.0: keeps remainder</span></em>
2.5
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>10 // 4.0</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same in 3.0: truncates to floor</span></em>
2.0

C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>C:\Python26\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>10 / 4</code></strong>
2
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>10 // 4</code></strong>
2
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>10 / 4.0</code></strong>
2.5
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>10 // 4.0</code></strong>
2.0</pre>
<p>Notice that the data type of the result for <code class="epub__literal">//</code> is still dependent on the operand types
          in 3.0: if either is a float, the result is a float; otherwise, it
          is an integer. Although this may seem similar to the type-dependent
          behavior of <code class="epub__literal">/</code> in 2.X that
          motivated its change in 3.0, the type of the return value is much
          less critical than differences in the return value itself. Moreover,
          because <code class="epub__literal">//</code> was provided in part
          as a backward-compatibility tool for programs that rely on
          truncating integer division (and this is more common than you might
          expect), it must return integers for integers.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Supporting either Python"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="supporting_either_python"></a>Supporting either Python</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Although <code class="epub__literal">/</code> behavior
            differs in 2.6 and 3.0, you can still support both versions in
            your code. If your programs depend on truncating integer division,
            use <code class="epub__literal">//</code> in both 2.6 and 3.0. If
            your programs require floating-point results with remainders for
            integers, use <code class="epub__literal">float</code> to
            guarantee that one operand is a float around a <code class="epub__literal">/</code> when run in 2.6:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e11874"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">X = Y // Z        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Always truncates, always an int result for ints in 2.6 and 3.0</span></em>

X = Y / float(Z)  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Guarantees float division with remainder in either 2.6 or 3.0</span></em></pre>
<p>Alternatively, you can enable 3.0 <code class="epub__literal">/</code> division in 2.6 with a <code class="epub__literal">__future__</code> import, rather than forcing
            it with <code class="epub__literal">float</code>
            conversions:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e11892"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>C:\Python26\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from __future__ import division</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Enable 3.0 "/" behavior</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>10 / 4</code></strong>
2.5
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>10 // 4</code></strong>
2</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Floor versus truncation"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="floor_versus_truncation"></a>Floor versus truncation</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>One subtlety: the <code class="epub__literal">//</code>
            operator is generally referred to as
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>truncating</em></span> division, but it’s more accurate
            to refer to it as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>floor</em></span> division—it truncates
            the result down to its floor, which means the closest whole number
            below the true result. The net effect is to round down, not
            strictly truncate, and this matters for negatives. You can see the
            difference for yourself with the Python <code class="epub__literal">math</code> module (modules must be imported
            before you can use their contents; more on this later):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e11926"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import math</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>math.floor(2.5</code></strong>)
2
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>math.floor(-2.5)</code></strong>
-3
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>math.trunc(2.5)</code></strong>
2
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>math.trunc(-2.5)</code></strong>
-2</pre>
<p>When running division operators, you only really truncate
            for positive results, since truncation is the same as floor; for
            negatives, it’s a floor result (really, they are both floor, but
            floor is the same as truncation for positives). Here’s the case
            for 3.0:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e11945"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python30\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>5 / 2, 5 / −2</code></strong>
(2.5, −2.5)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>5 // 2, 5 // −2</code></strong>           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Truncates to floor: rounds to first lower integer</span></em>
(2, −3)                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 2.5 becomes 2, −2.5 becomes −3</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>5 / 2.0, 5 / −2.0</code></strong>
(2.5, −2.5)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>5 // 2.0, 5 // −2.0</code></strong>       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Ditto for floats, though result is float too</span></em>
(2.0, −3.0)</pre>
<p>The 2.6 case is similar, but <code class="epub__literal">/</code> results differ again:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e11977"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python26\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>5 / 2, 5 / −2</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Differs in 3.0</span></em>
(2, −3)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>5 // 2, 5 // −2</code></strong>           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># This and the rest are the same in 2.6 and 3.0</span></em>
(2, −3)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>5 / 2.0, 5 / −2.0</code></strong>
(2.5, −2.5)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>5 // 2.0, 5 // −2.0</code></strong>
(2.0, −3.0)</pre>
<p>If you really want truncation regardless of sign, you can
            always run a float division result through <code class="epub__literal">math.trunc</code>, regardless of Python version
            (also see the <code class="epub__literal">round</code> built-in
            for related functionality):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e12009"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python30\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import math</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>5 / −2</code></strong>                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Keep remainder</span></em>
−2.5
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>5 // −2</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Floor below result</span></em>
-3
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>math.trunc(5 / −2)</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Truncate instead of floor</span></em>
−2

C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python26\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import math</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>5 / float(−2)</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Remainder in 2.6</span></em>
−2.5
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>5 / −2, 5 // −2</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Floor in 2.6</span></em>
(−3, −3)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>math.trunc(5 / float(−2))</code></strong>   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Truncate in 2.6</span></em>
−2</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Why does truncation matter?"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="why_does_truncation_matter_question"></a>Why does truncation matter?</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>If you are using 3.0, here is the short story on division
            operators for reference:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e12067"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>(5 / 2), (5 / 2.0), (5 / −2.0), (5 / −2)</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 3.0 true division</span></em>
(2.5, 2.5, −2.5, −2.5)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>(5 // 2), (5 // 2.0), (5 // −2.0), (5 // −2)</code></strong>    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 3.0 floor division</span></em>
(2, 2.0, −3.0, −3)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>(9 / 3), (9.0 / 3), (9 // 3), (9 // 3.0)</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Both</span></em>
(3.0, 3.0, 3, 3.0)</pre>
<p>For 2.6 readers, division works as follows:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e12090"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>(5 / 2), (5 / 2.0), (5 / −2.0), (5 / −2)</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 2.6 classic division</span></em>
(2, 2.5, −2.5, −3)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>(5 // 2), (5 // 2.0), (5 // −2.0), (5 // −2)</code></strong>    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 2.6 floor division (same)</span></em>
(2, 2.0, −3.0, −3)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>(9 / 3), (9.0 / 3), (9 // 3), (9 // 3.0)</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Both</span></em>
(3, 3.0, 3, 3.0)</pre>
<p>Although results have yet to come in, it’s possible that the
            nontruncating behavior of <code class="epub__literal">/</code> in
            3.0 may break a significant number of programs. Perhaps because of
            a C language legacy, many programmers rely on division truncation
            for integers and will have to learn to use <code class="epub__literal">//</code> in such contexts instead. Watch for a
            simple prime number <code class="epub__literal">while</code> loop
            example in Chapter 13, and a
            corresponding exercise at the end of Part IV
            that illustrates the sort of code that may be impacted by this
            <code class="epub__literal">/</code> change. Also stay tuned for
            more on the special <code class="epub__literal">from</code>
            command used in this section; it’s discussed further <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e12133"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e12135"></a>in Chapter 24.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Integer Precision"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="integer_precision"></a>Integer Precision</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Division <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e12145"></a>may differ slightly across Python releases, but it’s
          still fairly standard. Here’s something a bit more exotic. As
          mentioned earlier, Python 3.0 integers support unlimited
          size:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e12151"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>999999999999999999999999999999 + 1</code></strong>
1000000000000000000000000000000</pre>
<p>Python 2.6 has a separate type for long integers, but it
          automatically converts any number too large to store in a normal
          integer to this type. Hence, you don’t need to code any special
          syntax to use longs, and the only way you can tell that you’re using
          2.6 longs is that they print with a trailing “L”:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e12158"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>999999999999999999999999999999 + 1</code></strong>
1000000000000000000000000000000L</pre>
<p>Unlimited-precision integers are a convenient built-in tool.
          For instance, you can use them to count the U.S. national debt in
          pennies in Python directly (if you are so inclined, and have enough
          memory on your computer for this year’s budget!). They are also why
          we were able to raise 2 to such large powers in the examples in
          Chapter 3. Here are the 3.0 and 2.6
          cases:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e12167"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>2 ** 200</code></strong>
1606938044258990275541962092341162602522202993782792835301376

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>2 ** 200</code></strong>
1606938044258990275541962092341162602522202993782792835301376L</pre>
<p>Because Python must do extra work to support their extended
          precision, integer math is usually substantially slower than normal
          when numbers grow large. However, if you need the precision, the
          fact that it’s built in for you to use will likely outweigh its
          performance penalty.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Complex Numbers"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="complex_numbers"></a>Complex Numbers</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Although <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e12182"></a>less widely used than the types we’ve been exploring
          thus far, complex numbers are a distinct core object type in Python.
          If you know what they are, you know why they are useful; if not,
          consider this section optional reading.</p>
<p>Complex numbers are represented as two floating-point
          numbers—the real and imaginary parts—and are coded by adding a
          <code class="epub__literal">j</code> or <code class="epub__literal">J</code> suffix to the imaginary part. We can
          also write complex numbers with a nonzero real part by adding the
          two parts with a <code class="epub__literal">+</code>. For example,
          the complex number with a real part of <code class="epub__literal">2</code> and an imaginary part of <code class="epub__literal">−3</code> is written <code class="epub__literal">2 +
          −3j</code>. Here are some examples of complex math at
          work:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e12209"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>1j * 1J</code></strong>
(-1+0j)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>2 + 1j * 3</code></strong>
(2+3j)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>(2 + 1j) * 3</code></strong>
(6+3j)</pre>
<p>Complex numbers also allow us to extract their parts as
          attributes, support all the usual mathematical expressions, and may
          be processed with tools in the standard <code class="epub__literal">cmath</code> module (the complex version of the
          standard <code class="epub__literal">math</code> module). Complex
          numbers typically find roles in engineering-oriented programs.
          Because they are advanced tools, check Python’s language reference
          manual for additional details.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Hexadecimal, Octal, and Binary Notation"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="hexadecimal_comma_octal_comma_and_binar"></a>Hexadecimal, Octal, and Binary Notation</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e12233"></a>described earlier in this chapter, Python integers can
          be coded in hexadecimal, octal, and binary notation, in addition to
          the normal base 10 decimal coding. The coding rules were laid out at
          the start of this chapter; let’s look at some live examples
          here.</p>
<p>Keep in mind that these literals are simply an alternative
          syntax for specifying the value of an integer object. For example,
          the following literals coded in Python 3.0 or 2.6 produce normal
          integers with the specified values in all three bases:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e12241"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>0o1, 0o20, 0o377</code></strong>           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Octal literals</span></em>
(1, 16, 255)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>0x01, 0x10, 0xFF</code></strong>           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Hex literals</span></em>
(1, 16, 255)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>0b1, 0b10000, 0b11111111</code></strong>   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Binary literals</span></em>
(1, 16, 255)</pre>
<p>Here, the octal value <code class="epub__literal">0o377</code>, the hex value <code class="epub__literal">0xFF</code>, and the binary value <code class="epub__literal">0b11111111</code> are all decimal <code class="epub__literal">255</code>. Python prints in decimal (base 10) by
          default but provides built-in functions that allow you to convert
          integers to other bases’ digit strings:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e12276"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>oct(64), hex(64), bin(64)</code></strong>
('0o100', '0x40', '0b1000000')</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">oct</code> function converts
          decimal to octal, <code class="epub__literal">hex</code> to
          hexadecimal, and <code class="epub__literal">bin</code> to binary.
          To go the other way, the built-in <code class="epub__literal">int</code> function converts a string of digits
          to an integer, and an optional second argument lets you specify the
          numeric base:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e12295"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>int('64'), int('100', 8), int('40', 16), int('1000000', 2)</code></strong>
(64, 64, 64, 64)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>int('0x40', 16), int('0b1000000', 2)</code></strong>    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Literals okay too</span></em>
(64, 64)</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">eval</code> function, which
          you’ll meet later in this book, treats strings as though they were
          Python code. Therefore, it has a similar effect (but usually runs
          more slowly—it actually compiles and runs the string as a piece of a
          program, and it assumes you can trust the source of the string being
          run; a clever user might be able to submit a string that deletes
          files on your machine!):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e12311"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>eval('64'), eval('0o100'), eval('0x40'), eval('0b1000000')</code></strong>
(64, 64, 64, 64)</pre>
<p>Finally, you can also convert integers to octal and
          hexadecimal strings with <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>string formatting</em></span>
          method calls and expressions:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e12322"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'{0:o}, {1:x}, {2:b}'.format(64, 64, 64)</code></strong>
'100, 40, 1000000'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'%o, %x, %X' % (64, 255, 255)</code></strong>
'100, ff, FF'</pre>
<p>String formatting is covered in more detail in Chapter 7.</p>
<p>Two notes before moving on. First, Python 2.6 users should
          remember that you can code octals with simply a leading zero, the
          original octal format in Python:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e12336"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>0o1, 0o20, 0o377</code></strong>     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># New octal format in 2.6 (same as 3.0)</span></em>
(1, 16, 255)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>01, 020, 0377</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Old octal literals in 2.6 (and earlier)</span></em>
(1, 16, 255)</pre>
<p>In 3.0, the syntax in the second of these examples generates
          an error. Even though it’s not an error in 2.6, be careful not to
          begin a string of digits with a leading zero unless you really mean
          to code an octal value. Python 2.6 will treat it as base 8, which
          may not work as you’d expect—<code class="epub__literal">010</code>
          is always decimal 8 in 2.6, not decimal 10 (despite what you may or
          may not think!). This, along with symmetry with the hex and binary
          forms, is why the octal format was changed in 3.0—you must use
          <code class="epub__literal">0o010</code> in 3.0, and probably should
          in 2.6.</p>
<p>Secondly, note that these literals can produce arbitrarily
          long integers. The following, for instance, creates an integer with
          hex notation and then displays it first in decimal and then in octal
          and binary with converters (run in 2.6 here to reveal the long
          precision):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e12360"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = 0xFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X</code></strong>
5192296858534827628530496329220095L
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>oct(X)</code></strong>
'017777777777777777777777777777777777777L'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bin(X)</code></strong>
'0b1111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111111 <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...and so on...</code></em></pre>
<p>Speaking of binary digits, the next section shows tools for
          processing individual bits.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Bitwise Operations"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="bitwise_operations"></a>Bitwise Operations</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Besides <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e12383"></a>the normal numeric operations (addition, subtraction,
          and so on), Python supports most of the numeric expressions
          available in the C language. This includes operators that treat integers as
          strings of binary bits. For instance, here it is at work performing
          bitwise<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e12401"></a> shift and Boolean operations:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e12392"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = 1</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 0001</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x &lt;&lt; 2</code></strong>              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Shift left 2 bits: 0100</span></em>
4
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x | 2</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Bitwise OR: 0011</span></em>
3
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x &amp; 1</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Bitwise AND: 0001</span></em>
1</pre>
<p>In the first expression, a binary <code class="epub__literal">1</code> (in base 2, <code class="epub__literal">0001</code>) is shifted left two slots to create
          a binary <code class="epub__literal">4</code> (<code class="epub__literal">0100</code>). The last two operations perform a
          binary OR (<code class="epub__literal">0001|0010</code> = <code class="epub__literal">0011</code>) and a binary AND (<code class="epub__literal">0001&amp;0001</code> = <code class="epub__literal">0001</code>). Such bit-masking operations allow
          us to encode multiple flags and other values within a single
          integer.</p>
<p>This is one area where the binary and hexadecimal number
          support in Python 2.6 and 3.0 become especially useful—they allow us
          to code and inspect numbers by bit-strings:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e12448"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = 0b0001</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Binary literals</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X &lt;&lt; 2</code></strong>              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Shift left</span></em>
4
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bin(X &lt;&lt; 2)</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Binary digits string</span></em>
'0b100'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bin(X | 0b010)</code></strong>      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Bitwise OR</span></em>
'0b11'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bin(X &amp; 0b1)</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Bitwise AND</span></em>
'0b1'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = 0xFF</code></strong>            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Hex literals</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bin(X)</code></strong>
'0b11111111'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X ^ 0b10101010</code></strong>      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Bitwise XOR</span></em>
85
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bin(X ^ 0b10101010)</code></strong>
'0b1010101'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>int('1010101', 2)</code></strong>   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># String to int per base</span></em>
85
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>hex(85)</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Hex digit string</span></em>
'0x55'</pre>
<p>We won’t go into much more detail on “bit-twiddling” here.
          It’s supported if you need it, and it comes in handy if your Python
          code must deal with things like network packets or packed binary
          data produced by a C program. Be aware, though, that bitwise
          operations are often not as important in a high-level language such
          as Python as they are in a low-level language such as C. As a rule
          of thumb, if you find yourself wanting to flip bits in Python, you
          should think about which language you’re really coding. In general,
          there are often better ways to encode information in Python than bit
          strings.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p>In the upcoming Python 3.1 release, the integer <code class="epub__literal">bit_length</code> method also allows you to
            query the number of bits required to represent a number’s value in
            binary. The same effect can often be achieved by subtracting 2
            from the length of the <code class="epub__literal">bin</code>
            string using the <code class="epub__literal">len</code> built-in
            function we met in Chapter 4, though it may be
            less efficient:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e12529"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = 99</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bin(X), X.bit_length()</code></strong>
('0b1100011', 7)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bin(256), (256).bit_length()</code></strong>
('0b100000000', 9)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>len(bin(256)) - 2</code></strong>
9</pre>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Other Built-in Numeric Tools"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="other_built-in_numeric_tools"></a>Other Built-in Numeric Tools</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In addition <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e12548"></a>to its core object types, <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e12554"></a>Python also provides both built-in functions and
          standard library modules for numeric processing. The <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e12560"></a><code class="epub__literal">pow</code> and <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e12567"></a>abs</code> built-in functions, for instance,
          compute powers and absolute values, respectively. Here are some
          examples of the built-in <code class="epub__literal">math</code>
          module (which contains most of the tools in the C language’s math
          library) and a few built-in functions at work:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e12575"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import math</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>math.pi, math.e</code></strong>                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Common constants</span></em>
(3.1415926535897931, 2.7182818284590451)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>math.sin(2 * math.pi / 180)</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Sine, tangent, cosine</span></em>
0.034899496702500969

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>math.sqrt(144), math.sqrt(2)</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Square root</span></em>
(12.0, 1.4142135623730951)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pow(2, 4), 2 ** 4</code></strong>                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Exponentiation (power)</span></em>
(16, 16)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>abs(-42.0), sum((1, 2, 3, 4))</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Absolute value, summation</span></em>
(42.0, 10)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>min(3, 1, 2, 4), max(3, 1, 2, 4)</code></strong>              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Minimum, maximum</span></em>
(1, 4)</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e12621"></a>sum</code> function shown here works on a sequence
          of numbers, and <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e12627"></a>min</code> and <code class="epub__literal">max</code> accept either a sequence or individual
          arguments. There are a variety of ways to drop the decimal digits of
          floating-point numbers. We met truncation and floor earlier; we can
          also round, both numerically and for display purposes:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e12635"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>math.floor(2.567), math.floor(-2.567)</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Floor (next-lower integer)</span></em>
(2, −3)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>math.trunc(2.567), math.trunc(−2.567)</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Truncate (drop decimal digits)</span></em>
(2, −2)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>int(2.567), int(−2.567)</code></strong>                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Truncate (integer conversion)</span></em>
(2, −2)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>round(2.567), round(2.467), round(2.567, 2)</code></strong>   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Round (Python 3.0 version)</span></em>
(3, 2, 2.5699999999999998)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'%.1f' % 2.567, '{0:.2f}'.format(2.567)</code></strong>       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Round for display (Chapter 7)</span></em>
('2.6', '2.57')</pre>
<p>As we saw earlier, the last of these produces strings that we
          would usually print and supports a variety of formatting options. As
          also described earlier, the second to last test here will output
          <code class="epub__literal">(3, 2, 2.57)</code> if we wrap it in a
          <code class="epub__literal">print</code> call to request a more
          user-friendly display. The last two lines still differ,
          though—<code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e12679"></a>round</code> rounds a floating-point number but
          still yields a floating-point number in memory, whereas string
          formatting produces a string and doesn’t yield a modified
          number:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e12684"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>(1 / 3), round(1 / 3, 2), ('%.2f' % (1 / 3))</code></strong>
(0.33333333333333331, 0.33000000000000002, '0.33')</pre>
<p>Interestingly, there are three ways to compute
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e12692"></a>square roots</em></span> in Python: using a module
          function, an expression, or a built-in function (if you’re
          interested in performance, we will revisit these in an exercise and
          its solution at the end of Part IV, to see
          which runs quicker):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e12699"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import math</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>math.sqrt(144)</code></strong>              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Module</span></em>
12.0
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>144 ** .5</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Expression</span></em>
12.0
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pow(144, .5)</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Built-in</span></em>
12.0

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>math.sqrt(1234567890)</code></strong>       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Larger numbers</span></em>
35136.418286444619
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>1234567890 ** .5</code></strong>
35136.418286444619
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pow(1234567890, .5)</code></strong>
35136.418286444619</pre>
<p>Notice that standard library modules such as <code class="epub__literal">math</code> must be imported, but built-in
          functions such as <code class="epub__literal">abs</code> and
          <code class="epub__literal">round</code> are always available
          without imports. In other words, modules are external components,
          but built-in functions live in an implied namespace that Python
          automatically searches to find names used in your program. This
          namespace corresponds to the module called <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e12747"></a>builtins</code> in Python 3.0 (<code class="epub__literal">__builtin__</code> in 2.6). There is much more
          about name resolution in the function and module parts of this book;
          for now, when you hear “module,” think “import.”</p>
<p>The standard library <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e12758"></a>random</code> module must be imported as well. This
          module provides tools for picking a random floating-point number
          between 0 and 1, selecting a random integer between two numbers,
          choosing an item at random from a sequence, and more:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e12764"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import random</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>random.random()</code></strong>
0.44694718823781876
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>random.random()</code></strong>
0.28970426439292829

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>random.randint(1, 10)</code></strong>
5
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>random.randint(1, 10)</code></strong>
4

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>random.choice(['Life of Brian', 'Holy Grail', 'Meaning of Life'])</code></strong>
'Life of Brian'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>random.choice(['Life of Brian', 'Holy Grail', 'Meaning of Life'])</code></strong>
'Holy Grail'</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">random</code> module can be
          useful for shuffling cards in games, picking images at random in a
          slideshow GUI, performing statistical simulations, and much more.
          For more details, see Python’s library <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e12793"></a>manual.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Other Numeric Types"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
