<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Other Numeric Types</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="other_numeric_types"></a>Other Numeric Types</h1>
<p>So far <a id="ch05numobjtypenoncoretypes"></a>in this chapter, we’ve been using Python’s core numeric
        types—integer, floating point, and complex. These will suffice for
        most of the number crunching that most programmers will ever need to
        do. Python comes with a handful of more exotic numeric types, though,
        that merit a quick look here.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Decimal Type"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="decimal_type"></a>Decimal Type</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Python 2.4 <a id="ch05decnumtype"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e12815"></a>introduced a new core numeric type: the <a id="ch05numobjtypenoncoredectype"></a>decimal object, formally known as <code class="epub__literal">Decimal</code>. Syntactically, decimals are
          created by calling a function within an imported module, rather than
          running a literal expression. Functionally, decimals are like
          floating-point numbers, but
          they have a fixed number of decimal points. Hence, decimals are
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e12834"></a>fixed-precision</em></span> floating-point
          values.</p>
<p>For example, with decimals, we can have a floating-point value
          that always retains just two decimal digits. Furthermore, we can
          specify how to round or truncate the extra decimal digits beyond the
          object’s cutoff. Although it generally incurs a small performance
          penalty compared to the normal floating-point type, the decimal type
          is well suited to representing fixed-precision quantities like sums
          of money and can help you achieve better numeric accuracy.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="The basics"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="the_basics"></a>The basics</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The last point merits elaboration. As you may or may not
            already know, floating-point math is less than exact, because of
            the limited space used to store values. For example, the following
            should yield zero, but it does not. The result is close to zero,
            but there are not enough bits to be precise here:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e12846"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 - 0.3</code></strong>
5.5511151231257827e-17</pre>
<p>Printing the result to produce the user-friendly display
            format doesn’t completely help either, because the hardware
            related to floating-point math is inherently limited in terms of
            accuracy:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e12853"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 - 0.3)</code></strong>
5.55111512313e-17</pre>
<p>However, with decimals, the result can be dead-on:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e12860"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from decimal import Decimal</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Decimal('0.1') + Decimal('0.1') + Decimal('0.1') - Decimal('0.3')</code></strong>
Decimal('0.0')</pre>
<p>As shown here, we can make decimal objects by calling the
            <code class="epub__literal">Decimal</code> constructor function in
            the <code class="epub__literal">decimal</code> module and passing
            in strings that have the desired number of decimal digits for the
            resulting object (we can use the <code class="epub__literal">str</code> function to convert floating-point
            values to strings if needed). When decimals of different precision
            are mixed in expressions, Python converts up to the largest number
            of decimal digits automatically:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e12879"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Decimal('0.1') + Decimal('0.10') + Decimal('0.10') - Decimal('0.30')</code></strong>
Decimal('0.00')</pre><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p>In Python 3.1 (to be released after this book’s
              publication), it’s also possible to create a decimal object from
              a floating-point object, with a call of the form <code class="epub__literal">decimal.Decimal.from_float(1.25)</code>. The
              conversion is exact but can sometimes yield a large number of
              digits.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Setting precision globally"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="setting_precision_globally"></a>Setting precision globally</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Other <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e12895"></a>tools in the <code class="epub__literal">decimal</code> module can be used to set the
            precision of all decimal numbers, set up error handling, and more.
            For instance, a context object in this module allows for
            specifying precision (number of decimal digits) and rounding modes
            (down, ceiling, etc.). The precision is applied globally for all
            decimals created in the calling thread:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e12902"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import decimal</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>decimal.Decimal(1) / decimal.Decimal(7)</code></strong>
Decimal('0.1428571428571428571428571429')

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>decimal.getcontext().prec = 4</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>decimal.Decimal(1) / decimal.Decimal(7)</code></strong>
Decimal('0.1429')</pre>
<p>This is especially useful for monetary applications, where
            cents are represented as two decimal digits. Decimals are
            essentially an alternative to manual rounding and string
            formatting in this context:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e12918"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>1999 + 1.33</code></strong>
2000.3299999999999
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>decimal.getcontext().prec = 2</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pay = decimal.Decimal(str(1999 + 1.33))</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pay</code></strong>
Decimal('2000.33')</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Decimal context manager"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="decimal_context_manager"></a>Decimal context manager</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In Python 2.6 and 3.0 (and later), it’s also possible to
            reset precision temporarily by using the <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e12938"></a>with</code> context manager statement. The
            precision is reset to its original value on statement exit:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e12943"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>C:\Python30\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import decimal</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>decimal.Decimal('1.00') / decimal.Decimal('3.00')</code></strong>
Decimal('0.3333333333333333333333333333')
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>with decimal.localcontext() as ctx:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>ctx.prec = 2</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>decimal.Decimal('1.00') / decimal.Decimal('3.00')</code></strong>
...
Decimal('0.33')
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>decimal.Decimal('1.00') / decimal.Decimal('3.00')</code></strong>
Decimal('0.3333333333333333333333333333')</pre>
<p>Though useful, this statement requires much more background
            knowledge than you’ve obtained at this point; watch for coverage
            of the <code class="epub__literal">with</code> statement in Chapter 33.</p>
<p>Because use of the decimal type is still relatively rare in
            practice, I’ll defer to Python’s standard library manuals and
            interactive help for more details. And because decimals address
            some of the same floating-point accuracy issues as the fraction
            type, let’s move on to the next section to see how the <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e12976"></a>two <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e12979"></a>compare.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Fraction Type"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="fraction_type"></a>Fraction Type</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Python 2.6 and 3.0 <a id="ch05numobjtypenoncorefraction"></a>debut a new <a id="ch05Fracnumtype"></a>numeric type, <code class="epub__literal">Fraction</code>, which implements a
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e13003"></a>rational number</em></span> object. It essentially
          keeps both a numerator and a denominator explicitly, so as to avoid
          some of the inaccuracies and limitations of floating-point
          math.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="The basics"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="the_basics-id1"></a>The basics</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p><code class="epub__literal">Fraction</code> is a sort of
            cousin to the existing <code class="epub__literal">Decimal</code>
            fixed-precision type described in the prior section, as both can
            be used to control numerical accuracy by fixing decimal digits and
            specifying rounding or truncation policies. It’s also used in
            similar ways—like <code class="epub__literal">Decimal</code>,
            <code class="epub__literal">Fraction</code> resides in a module;
            import its constructor and pass in a numerator and a denominator
            to make one. The following interaction shows how:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e13024"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from fractions import Fraction</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = Fraction(1, 3)</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Numerator, denominator</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y = Fraction(4, 6)</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Simplified to 2, 3 by gcd</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x</code></strong>
Fraction(1, 3)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y</code></strong>
Fraction(2, 3)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(y)</code></strong>
2/3</pre>
<p>Once created, <code class="epub__literal">Fraction</code>s
            can be used in mathematical expressions as usual:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e13056"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x + y</code></strong>
Fraction(1, 1)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x – y</code></strong>                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Results are exact: numerator, denominator</span></em>
Fraction(-1, 3)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x * y</code></strong>
Fraction(2, 9)</pre>
<p><code class="epub__literal">Fraction</code> objects can also
            be created from floating-point number strings, much like
            decimals:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e13074"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Fraction('.25')</code></strong>
Fraction(1, 4)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Fraction('1.25')</code></strong>
Fraction(5, 4)
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Fraction('.25') + Fraction('1.25')</code></strong>
Fraction(3, 2)</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Numeric accuracy"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="numeric_accuracy"></a>Numeric accuracy</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Notice that this is different from floating-point-type math,
            which is constrained by the underlying limitations of
            floating-point hardware. To compare, here are the same operations
            run with floating-point objects, and notes on their limited
            accuracy:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e13090"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a = 1 / 3.0</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Only as accurate as floating-point hardware</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>b = 4 / 6.0</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Can lose precision over calculations</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a</code></strong>
0.33333333333333331
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>b</code></strong>
0.66666666666666663

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a + b</code></strong>
1.0
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a - b</code></strong>
-0.33333333333333331
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a * b</code></strong>
0.22222222222222221</pre>
<p>This floating-point limitation is especially apparent for
            values that cannot be represented accurately given their limited
            number of bits in memory. Both <code class="epub__literal">Fraction</code> and <code class="epub__literal">Decimal</code> provide ways to get exact
            results, albeit at the cost of some speed. For instance, in the
            following example (repeated from the prior section),
            floating-point numbers do not accurately give the zero answer
            expected, but both of the other types do:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e13128"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>0.1 + 0.1 + 0.1 - 0.3</code></strong>           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># This should be zero (close, but not exact)</span></em>
5.5511151231257827e-17

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from fractions import Fraction</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Fraction(1, 10) + Fraction(1, 10) + Fraction(1, 10) - Fraction(3, 10)</code></strong>
Fraction(0, 1)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from decimal import Decimal</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Decimal('0.1') + Decimal('0.1') + Decimal('0.1') - Decimal('0.3')</code></strong>
Decimal('0.0')</pre>
<p>Moreover, fractions and decimals both allow more intuitive
            and accurate results than floating points sometimes can, in
            different ways (by using rational representation and by limiting
            precision):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e13151"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>1 / 3</code></strong>                              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Use 3.0 in Python 2.6 for true "/"</span></em>
0.33333333333333331

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Fraction(1, 3)</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Numeric accuracy</span></em>
Fraction(1, 3)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import decimal</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>decimal.getcontext().prec = 2</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>decimal.Decimal(1) / decimal.Decimal(3)</code></strong>
Decimal('0.33')</pre>
<p>In fact, fractions both retain accuracy and automatically
            simplify results. Continuing the preceding interaction:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e13177"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>(1 / 3) + (6 / 12)</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Use ".0" in Python 2.6 for true "/"</span></em>
0.83333333333333326

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Fraction(6, 12)</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Automatically simplified</span></em>
Fraction(1, 2)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Fraction(1, 3) + Fraction(6, 12)</code></strong>
Fraction(5, 6)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>decimal.Decimal(str(1/3)) + decimal.Decimal(str(6/12))</code></strong>
Decimal('0.83')

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>1000.0 / 1234567890</code></strong>
8.1000000737100011e-07
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Fraction(1000, 1234567890)</code></strong>
Fraction(100, 123456789)</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Conversions and mixed types"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="conversions_and_mixed_types"></a>Conversions and mixed types</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e13209"></a>support fraction conversions, floating-point objects
            now have a method that yields their numerator and denominator
            ratio, fractions have a <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e13216"></a>from_float</code> method, and <code class="epub__literal">float</code> accepts a <code class="epub__literal">Fraction</code> as an argument. Trace through
            the following interaction to see how this pans out (the <code class="epub__literal">*</code> in the second test is special syntax
            that expands a tuple into individual arguments; more on this when
            we study function argument passing in Chapter 18):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e13233"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>(2.5).as_integer_ratio()</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># float object method</span></em>
(5, 2)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f = 2.5</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>z = Fraction(*f.as_integer_ratio())</code></strong>    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Convert float -&gt; fraction: two args</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>z</code></strong>                                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same as Fraction(5, 2)</span></em>
Fraction(5, 2)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x</code></strong>                                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># x from prior interaction</span></em>
Fraction(1, 3)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x + z</code></strong>
Fraction(17, 6)                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 5/2 + 1/3 = 15/6 + 2/6</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>float(x)</code></strong>                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Convert fraction -&gt; float</span></em>
0.33333333333333331
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>float(z)</code></strong>
2.5
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>float(x + z)</code></strong>
2.8333333333333335
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>17 / 6</code></strong>
2.8333333333333335

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Fraction.from_float(1.75)</code></strong>              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Convert float -&gt; fraction: other way</span></em>
Fraction(7, 4)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Fraction(*(1.75).as_integer_ratio())</code></strong>
Fraction(7, 4)</pre>
<p>Finally, some type mixing is allowed in expressions, though
            <code class="epub__literal">Fraction</code> must sometimes be
            manually propagated to retain accuracy. Study the following
            interaction to see how this works:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e13300"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x</code></strong>
Fraction(1, 3)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x + 2</code></strong>                                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Fraction + int -&gt; Fraction</span></em>
Fraction(7, 3)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x + 2.0</code></strong>                                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Fraction + float -&gt; float</span></em>
2.3333333333333335
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x + (1./3)</code></strong>                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Fraction + float -&gt; float</span></em>
0.66666666666666663

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x + (4./3)</code></strong>
1.6666666666666665
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x + Fraction(4, 3)</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Fraction + Fraction -&gt; Fraction</span></em>
Fraction(5, 3)</pre>
<p>Caveat: although you can convert from floating-point to
            fraction, in some cases there is an unavoidable precision loss
            when you do so, because the number is inaccurate in its original
            floating-point form. When needed, you can simplify such results by
            limiting the maximum denominator value:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e13335"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>4.0 / 3</code></strong>
1.3333333333333333
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>(4.0 / 3).as_integer_ratio()</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Precision loss from float</span></em>
(6004799503160661, 4503599627370496)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x</code></strong>
Fraction(1, 3)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a = x + Fraction(*(4.0 / 3).as_integer_ratio())</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a</code></strong>
Fraction(22517998136852479, 13510798882111488)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>22517998136852479 / 13510798882111488.</code></strong>      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 5 / 3 (or close to it!)</span></em>
1.6666666666666667

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a.limit_denominator(10)</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Simplify to closest fraction</span></em>
Fraction(5, 3)</pre>
<p>For more details on the <code class="epub__literal">Fraction</code> type, experiment further on
            your own and consult the Python 2.6 and 3.0 library manuals and
            other <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e13373"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e13375"></a>documentation.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Sets"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="sets"></a>Sets</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Python 2.4 <a id="ch05numobjtypnoncoresets"></a>also introduced a new collection type, the
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="ch05setnumtype"></a>set</em></span>—an unordered collection of unique and
          immutable objects that supports operations corresponding to
          mathematical set theory. By definition, an item appears only once in
          a set, no matter how many times it is added. As such, sets have a
          variety of applications, especially in numeric and database-focused
          work.</p>
<p>Because sets are collections of other objects, they share some
          behavior with objects such as lists and dictionaries that are
          outside the scope of this chapter. For example, sets are iterable,
          can grow and shrink on demand, and may contain a variety of object
          types. As we’ll see, a set acts much like the keys of a valueless
          dictionary, but it supports extra operations.</p>
<p>However, because sets are unordered and do not map keys to
          values, they are neither sequence nor mapping types; they are a type
          category unto themselves. Moreover, because sets are fundamentally
          mathematical in nature (and for many readers, may seem more academic
          and be used much less often than more pervasive objects like
          dictionaries), we’ll explore
          the basic utility of Python’s set objects here.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Set basics in Python 2.6"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="set_basics_in_python_2.6"></a>Set basics in Python 2.6</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>There <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e13409"></a>are a few ways to make sets today, depending on
            whether you are using Python 2.6 or 3.0. Since this book covers
            both, let’s begin with the 2.6 case, which also is available (and
            sometimes still required) in 3.0; we’ll refine this for 3.0
            extensions in a moment. To make a set object, pass in a sequence
            or other iterable object to the built-in <code class="epub__literal">set</code> function:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e13418"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = set('abcde')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y = set('bdxyz')</code></strong></pre>
<p>You get back a set object, which contains all the items in
            the object passed in (notice that sets do not have a positional
            ordering, and so are not sequences):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e13427"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x</code></strong>
set(['a', 'c', 'b', 'e', 'd'])                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 2.6 display format</span></em></pre>
<p>Sets made this way support the common mathematical set
            operations with <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>expression</em></span> operators. Note
            that we can’t perform these expressions on plain sequences—we must
            create sets from them in order to apply these tools:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e13439"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'e' in x</code></strong>                                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Membership</span></em>
True

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x – y</code></strong>                                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Difference</span></em>
set(['a', 'c', 'e'])

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x | y</code></strong>                                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Union</span></em>
set(['a', 'c', 'b', 'e', 'd', 'y', 'x', 'z'])

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x &amp; y</code></strong>                                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Intersection</span></em>
set(['b', 'd'])

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x ^ y</code></strong>                                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Symmetric difference (XOR)</span></em>
set(['a', 'c', 'e', 'y', 'x', 'z'])

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x &gt; y, x &lt; y</code></strong>                                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Superset, subset</span></em>
(False, False)</pre>
<p>In addition to expressions, the set object provides
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>methods</em></span> that correspond to these operations
            and more, and that support set changes—the set <code class="epub__literal">add</code> method inserts one item, <code class="epub__literal">update</code> is an in-place union, and
            <code class="epub__literal">remove</code> deletes an item by value
            (run a <code class="epub__literal">dir</code> call on any set
            instance or the <code class="epub__literal">set</code> type name
            to see all the available methods). Assuming <code class="epub__literal">x</code> and <code class="epub__literal">y</code> are still as they were in the prior
            interaction:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e13506"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>z = x.intersection(y)</code></strong>                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same as x &amp; y</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>z</code></strong>
set(['b', 'd'])
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>z.add('SPAM')</code></strong>                                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Insert one item</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>z</code></strong>
set(['b', 'd', 'SPAM'])
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>z.update(set(['X', 'Y']))</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Merge: in-place union</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>z</code></strong>
set(['Y', 'X', 'b', 'd', 'SPAM'])
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>z.remove('b')</code></strong>                                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Delete one item</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>z</code></strong>
set(['Y', 'X', 'd', 'SPAM'])</pre>
<p>As <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>iterable</em></span> containers, sets can also
            be used in operations such as <code class="epub__literal">len</code>, <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops, and list comprehensions.
            Because they are unordered, though, they don’t support sequence
            operations like indexing and slicing:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e13557"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for item in set('abc'): print(item * 3)</code></strong>
...
aaa
ccc
bbb</pre>
<p>Finally, although the set expressions shown earlier
            generally require two sets, their method-based counterparts can
            often work with <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>any iterable type</em></span> as
            well:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e13568"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S = set([1, 2, 3])</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S | set([3, 4])</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Expressions require both to be sets</span></em>
set([1, 2, 3, 4])
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S | [3, 4]</code></strong>
TypeError: unsupported operand type(s) for |: 'set' and 'list'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S.union([3, 4])</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># But their methods allow any iterable</span></em>
set([1, 2, 3, 4])
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S.intersection((1, 3, 5))</code></strong>
set([1, 3])
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S.issubset(range(-5, 5))</code></strong>
True</pre>
<p>For more details on set operations, see Python’s library
            reference manual or a reference book. Although set operations can
            be coded manually in Python with other types, like lists and
            dictionaries (and often were in the past), Python’s built-in sets
            use efficient algorithms and implementation techniques to provide
            quick and standard operation.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Set literals in Python 3.0"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="set_literals_in_python_3.0"></a>Set literals in Python 3.0</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>If you <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e13602"></a>think sets are “cool,” they recently became
            noticeably cooler. In Python 3.0 we can still use the <code class="epub__literal">set</code> built-in to make set objects, but
            3.0 also adds a new set literal form, using the <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e13611"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e13616"></a>curly braces formerly reserved for dictionaries. In
            3.0, the following are equivalent:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e13622"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">set([1, 2, 3, 4])                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Built-in call</span></em>
{1, 2, 3, 4}                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 3.0 set literals</span></em></pre>
<p>This syntax <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e13631"></a>makes sense, given that sets are essentially like
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>valueless dictionaries</em></span>—because a set’s items
            are unordered, unique, and immutable, the items behave much like a
            dictionary’s keys. This operational similarity is even more
            striking given that dictionary key lists in 3.0 are
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>view</em></span> objects, which support set-like behavior
            such as intersections and unions (see Chapter 8 for more on dictionary view
            objects).</p>
<p>In fact, regardless of how a set is made, 3.0 displays it
            using the new literal format. The <code class="epub__literal">set</code> built-in is still required in 3.0 to
            create empty sets and to build sets from existing iterable objects
            (short of using set comprehensions, discussed later in this
            chapter), but the new literal is convenient for initializing sets
            of known structure:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e13650"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\Misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python30\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>set([1, 2, 3, 4])</code></strong>            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Built-in: same as in 2.6</span></em>
{1, 2, 3, 4}
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>set('spam')</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Add all items in an iterable</span></em>
{'a', 'p', 's', 'm'}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>{1, 2, 3, 4}</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Set literals: new in 3.0</span></em>
{1, 2, 3, 4}
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S = {'s', 'p', 'a', 'm'}</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S.add('alot')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S</code></strong>
{'a', 'p', 's', 'm', 'alot'}</pre>
<p>All the set processing operations discussed in the prior
            section work the same in 3.0, but the result sets print
            differently:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e13685"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S1 = {1, 2, 3, 4}</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S1 &amp; {1, 3}</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Intersection</span></em>
{1, 3}
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>{1, 5, 3, 6} | S1</code></strong>            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Union</span></em>
{1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S1 - {1, 3, 4}</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Difference</span></em>
{2}
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S1 &gt; {1, 3}</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Superset</span></em>
True</pre>
<p>Note that <code class="epub__literal">{}</code> is still a
            dictionary in Python. <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Empty</em></span> sets must be
            created with the <code class="epub__literal">set</code> built-in,
            and print the same way:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e13726"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S1 - {1, 2, 3, 4}</code></strong>            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Empty sets print differently</span></em>
set()
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type({})</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Because {} is an empty dictionary</span></em>
&lt;class 'dict'&gt;

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S = set()</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Initialize an empty set</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S.add(1.23)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S</code></strong>
{1.23}</pre>
<p>As in Python 2.6, sets created with 3.0 literals support the
            same methods, some of which allow general iterable operands that
            expressions do not:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e13756"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>{1, 2, 3} | {3, 4}</code></strong>
{1, 2, 3, 4}
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>{1, 2, 3} | [3, 4]</code></strong>
TypeError: unsupported operand type(s) for |: 'set' and 'list'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>{1, 2, 3}.union([3, 4])</code></strong>
{1, 2, 3, 4}
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>{1, 2, 3}.union({3, 4})</code></strong>
{1, 2, 3, 4}
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>{1, 2, 3}.union(set([3, 4]))</code></strong>
{1, 2, 3, 4}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>{1, 2, 3}.intersection((1, 3, 5))</code></strong>
{1, 3}
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>{1, 2, 3}.issubset(range(-5, 5))</code></strong>
True</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Immutable constraints and frozen sets"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="immutable_constraints_and_frozen_sets"></a>Immutable constraints and frozen sets</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Sets are <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e13785"></a>powerful and flexible objects, but they do have one
            constraint in both 3.0 and 2.6 that you should keep in
            mind—largely because of their implementation, sets can only
            contain immutable (a.k.a “hashable”) object types. Hence, lists
            and dictionaries cannot be embedded in sets, but tuples can if you
            need to store compound values. Tuples compare by their full values
            when used in set operations:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e13791"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S</code></strong>
{1.23}
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S.add([1, 2, 3])</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Only immutable objects work in a set</span></em>
TypeError: unhashable type: 'list'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S.add({'a':1})</code></strong>
TypeError: unhashable type: 'dict'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S.add((1, 2, 3))</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S</code></strong>                                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># No list or dict, but tuple okay</span></em>
{1.23, (1, 2, 3)}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S | {(4, 5, 6), (1, 2, 3)}</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Union: same as S.union(...)</span></em>
{1.23, (4, 5, 6), (1, 2, 3)}
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>(1, 2, 3) in S</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Membership: by complete values</span></em>
True
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>(1, 4, 3) in S</code></strong>
False</pre>
<p>Tuples in a set, for instance, might be used to represent
            dates, records, IP addresses, and so on (more on tuples later in
            this part of the book). Sets themselves are mutable too, and so
            cannot be nested in other sets directly; if you need to store a
            set inside another set, the <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e13834"></a>frozenset</code> built-in call works just like
            <code class="epub__literal">set</code> but creates an immutable
            set that cannot change and thus can be embedded in other
            sets.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Set comprehensions in Python 3.0"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="set_comprehensions_in_python_3.0"></a>Set comprehensions in Python 3.0</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e13847"></a>addition to literals, 3.0 introduces a set
            comprehension construct; it is similar in form to the list
            comprehension we previewed in Chapter 4, but is coded in
            <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e13855"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e13860"></a>curly braces instead of square brackets and run to
            make a set instead of a list. Set comprehensions run a loop and
            collect the result of an expression on each iteration; a loop
            variable gives access to the current iteration value for use in
            the collection expression. The result is a new set created by
            running the code, with all the normal set behavior:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e13866"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>{x ** 2 for x in [1, 2, 3, 4]}</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 3.0 set comprehension</span></em>
{16, 1, 4, 9}</pre>
<p>In this expression, the loop is coded on the right, and the
            collection expression is coded on the left (<code class="epub__literal">x ** 2</code>). As for list comprehensions, we
            get back pretty much what this expression says: “Give me a new set
            containing X squared, for every X in a list.” Comprehensions can
            also iterate across other kinds of objects, such as strings (the
            first of the following examples illustrates the
            comprehension-based way to make a set from an existing
            iterable):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e13879"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>{x for x in 'spam'}</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same as: set('spam')</span></em>
{'a', 'p', 's', 'm'}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>{c * 4 for c in 'spam'}</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Set of collected expression results</span></em>
{'ssss', 'aaaa', 'pppp', 'mmmm'}
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>{c * 4 for c in 'spamham'}</code></strong>
{'ssss', 'aaaa', 'hhhh', 'pppp', 'mmmm'}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S = {c * 4 for c in 'spam'}</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S | {'mmmm', 'xxxx'}</code></strong>
{'ssss', 'aaaa', 'pppp', 'mmmm', 'xxxx'}
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S &amp; {'mmmm', 'xxxx'}</code></strong>
{'mmmm'}</pre>
<p>Because the rest of the comprehensions story relies upon
            underlying concepts we’re not yet prepared to address, we’ll
            postpone further details until later in this book. In Chapter 8, we’ll meet a first cousin in
            3.0, the dictionary comprehension, and I’ll have much more to say
            about all comprehensions (list, set, dictionary, and generator)
            later, especially in Chapters14 and 20. As we’ll learn later, all
            comprehensions, including sets, support additional syntax not
            shown here, including nested loops and <code class="epub__literal">if</code> tests, which can be difficult to
            understand until you’ve had a chance to study larger statements.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Why sets?"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="why_sets_question"></a>Why sets?</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Set operations have a variety of common uses, some more
            practical than mathematical. For example, because items are stored
            only once in a set, sets can be used to filter duplicates out of
            other collections. Simply convert the collection to a set, and
            then convert it back again (because sets are iterable, they work
            in the <code class="epub__literal">list</code> call here):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e13928"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = [1, 2, 1, 3, 2, 4, 5]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>set(L)</code></strong>
{1, 2, 3, 4, 5}
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = list(set(L))</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Remove duplicates</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5]</pre>
<p>Sets can also be used to keep track of where you’ve already
            been when traversing a graph or other cyclic structure. For
            example, the transitive module reloader and inheritance tree
            lister examples we’ll study in Chapters 24 and 30, respectively, must keep track
            of items visited to avoid loops. Although recording states visited
            as keys in a dictionary is efficient, sets offer an alternative
            that’s essentially equivalent (and may be more or less intuitive,
            depending on who you ask).</p>
<p>Finally, sets are also convenient when dealing with large
            data sets (database query results, for example)—the intersection
            of two sets contains objects in common to both categories, and the
            union contains all items in either set. To illustrate, here’s a
            somewhat more realistic example of set operations at work, applied
            to lists of people in a hypothetical company, using 3.0 set
            literals (use <code class="epub__literal">set</code> in
            2.6):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e13956"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>engineers = {'bob', 'sue', 'ann', 'vic'}</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>managers  = {'tom', 'sue'}</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'bob' in engineers</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Is bob an engineer?</span></em>
True

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>engineers &amp; managers</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Who is both engineer and manager?</span></em>
{'sue'}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>engineers | managers</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># All people in either category</span></em>
{'vic', 'sue', 'tom', 'bob', 'ann'}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>engineers – managers</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Engineers who are not managers</span></em>
{'vic', 'bob', 'ann'}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>managers – engineers</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Managers who are not engineers</span></em>
{'tom'}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>engineers &gt; managers</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Are all managers engineers? (superset)</span></em>
False

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>{'bob', 'sue'} &lt; engineers</code></strong>           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Are both engineers? (subset)</span></em>
True

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>(managers | engineers) &gt; managers</code></strong>    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># All people is a superset of managers</span></em>
True

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>managers ^ engineers</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Who is in one but not both?</span></em>
{'vic', 'bob', 'ann', 'tom'}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>(managers | engineers) - (managers ^ engineers)</code></strong>     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Intersection!</span></em>
{'sue'}</pre>
<p>You can find more details on set operations in the Python
            library manual and some mathematical and relational database
            theory texts. Also stay tuned for Chapter 8’s revival of some of the set
            operations we’ve seen here, in the context of dictionary view
            objects in <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e14031"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e14033"></a>Python 3.0.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Booleans"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="booleans"></a>Booleans</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Some <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e14041"></a>argue that the <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e14049"></a>Python Boolean type, <code class="epub__literal">bool</code>, is numeric in nature because its two
          values, <code class="epub__literal">True</code> and <code class="epub__literal">False</code>, are just customized versions of the
          integers 1 and 0 that print themselves differently. Although that’s
          all most programmers need to know, let’s explore this type in a bit
          more detail.</p>
<p>More formally, Python today has an explicit Boolean data type
          called <code class="epub__literal">bool</code>, with the values
          <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e14068"></a>True</code> and <code class="epub__literal">False</code> available as new preassigned
          built-in names. Internally, the names <code class="epub__literal">True</code> and <code class="epub__literal">False</code> are instances of <code class="epub__literal">bool</code>, which is in turn just a subclass (in
          the object-oriented sense) of the built-in integer type <code class="epub__literal">int</code>. <code class="epub__literal">True</code> and <code class="epub__literal">False</code> behave exactly like the integers 1
          and 0, except that they have customized printing logic—they print
          themselves as the words <code class="epub__literal">True</code> and
          <code class="epub__literal">False</code>, instead of the digits
          <code class="epub__literal">1</code> and <code class="epub__literal">0</code>. <code class="epub__literal">bool</code>
          accomplishes this by redefining <code class="epub__literal">str</code> and <code class="epub__literal">repr</code> string formats for its two
          objects.</p>
<p>Because of this customization, the output of Boolean
          expressions typed at the interactive prompt prints as the words
          <code class="epub__literal">True</code> and <code class="epub__literal">False</code> instead of the older and less
          obvious <code class="epub__literal">1</code> and <code class="epub__literal">0</code>. In addition, Booleans make truth values
          more explicit. For instance, an infinite loop can now be coded as
          <code class="epub__literal">while True:</code> instead of the less
          intuitive <code class="epub__literal">while 1:</code>. Similarly,
          flags can be initialized more clearly with <code class="epub__literal">flag = False</code>. We’ll discuss these
          statements further in Part III.</p>
<p>Again, though, for all other practical purposes, you can treat
          <code class="epub__literal">True</code> and <code class="epub__literal">False</code> as though they are predefined
          variables set to integer <code class="epub__literal">1</code> and
          <code class="epub__literal">0</code>. Most programmers used to
          preassign <code class="epub__literal">True</code> and <code class="epub__literal">False</code> to <code class="epub__literal">1</code> and <code class="epub__literal">0</code>
          anyway; the <code class="epub__literal">bool</code> type simply
          makes this standard. Its implementation can lead to curious results,
          though. Because <code class="epub__literal">True</code> is just the
          integer <code class="epub__literal">1</code> with a custom display
          format, <code class="epub__literal">True + 4</code> yields <code class="epub__literal">5</code> in Python:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e14186"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type(True)</code></strong>
&lt;class 'bool'&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>isinstance(True, int)</code></strong>
True
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>True == 1</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same value</span></em>
True
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>True is 1</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># But different object: see the next chapter</span></em>
False
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>True or False</code></strong>            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same as: 1 or 0</span></em>
True
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>True + 4</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># (Hmmm)</span></em>
5</pre>
<p>Since you probably won’t come across an expression like the
          last of these in real Python code, you can safely ignore its deeper
          metaphysical implications....</p>
<p>We’ll revisit Booleans in Chapter 9 (to define
          Python’s notion of truth) and <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e14225"></a>again in Chapter 12
          (to see how Boolean operators like <code class="epub__literal">and</code> and <code class="epub__literal">or</code> work).</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Numeric Extensions"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
