<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Numeric Extensions</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="numeric_extensions"></a>Numeric Extensions</h1>
<p>Finally, although Python core <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e14241"></a>numeric types offer plenty of power for most
        applications, there is a large library of third-party open source
        extensions available to address more focused needs. Because numeric
        programming is a popular domain for Python, you’ll find a wealth of
        advanced tools.</p>
<p>For example, if you need to do serious number crunching, an
        optional extension for Python called <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e14248"></a>NumPy</em></span> (Numeric Python) provides advanced
        numeric programming tools, such as a matrix data type, vector
        processing, and sophisticated computation libraries. Hardcore
        scientific programming groups at places like Los Alamos and NASA use
        Python with NumPy to implement the sorts of tasks they previously
        coded in C++, FORTRAN, or
        Matlab. The combination of Python and NumPy is often compared to a
        free, more flexible version of Matlab—you get NumPy’s performance,
        plus the Python language and its libraries.</p>
<p>Because it’s so advanced, we won’t talk further about NumPy in
        this book. You can find additional support for advanced numeric
        programming in Python, including graphics and plotting tools,
        statistics libraries, and the popular <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e14259"></a>SciPy</em></span> package at Python’s PyPI site, or by
        searching the Web. Also note that NumPy is currently an optional
        extension; it doesn’t come with Python and must be installed
        separately.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Chapter Summary"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
