<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_answers-id4"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</h1>
<div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The value will be <code class="epub__literal">14</code>, the
            result of 2 * 7, because the parentheses force the addition to
            happen before the multiplication.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The value will be <code class="epub__literal">10</code>, the
            result of 6 + 4. Python’s operator precedence rules are applied in
            the absence of parentheses, and multiplication has higher
            precedence than (i.e., happens before) addition, per Table 5-2.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>This expression yields <code class="epub__literal">14</code>, the result of 2 + 12, for the same
            precedence reasons as in the prior question.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Functions for obtaining the square root, as well as
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>pi</em></span>, tangents, and more, are available in the
            imported <code class="epub__literal">math</code> module. To find a
            number’s square root, import <code class="epub__literal">math</code> and call <code class="epub__literal">math.sqrt(N)</code>. To get a number’s square,
            use either the exponent expression <code class="epub__literal">X **
            2</code> or the built-in function <code class="epub__literal">pow(X, 2)</code>. Either of these last two can
            also compute the square root when given a power of <code class="epub__literal">0.5</code> (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">X **
            .5</code>).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The result will be a floating-point number: the integers are
            converted up to floating point, the most complex type in the
            expression, and floating-point math is used to evaluate it.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">int(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>N</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code> and <code class="epub__literal">math.trunc(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>N</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code> functions truncate, and the <code class="epub__literal">round(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>N</code></em><code class="epub__literal">,</code>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>digits</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code> function rounds. We can also compute
            the floor with <code class="epub__literal">math.floor(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>N</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code> and round for display with string
            formatting operations.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">float(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>I</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code> function converts an integer to a
            floating point; mixing an integer with a floating point within an
            expression will result in a conversion as well. In some sense,
            Python 3.0 <code class="epub__literal">/</code> division converts
            too—it always returns a floating-point result that includes the
            remainder, even if both operands are integers.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">oct(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>I</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code> and <code class="epub__literal">hex(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>I</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code> built-in functions return the octal
            and hexadecimal string forms for an integer. The <code class="epub__literal">bin(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>I</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code> call also returns a number’s binary
            digits string in Python 2.6 and 3.0. The <code class="epub__literal">%</code> string formatting expression and
            <code class="epub__literal">format</code> string method also
            provide targets for some such conversions.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">int(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>S</code></em><code class="epub__literal">,</code>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>base</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code> function can be used to convert from
            octal and hexadecimal strings to normal integers (pass in <code class="epub__literal">8</code>, <code class="epub__literal">16</code>, or <code class="epub__literal">2</code> for the base). The <code class="epub__literal">eval(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>S</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code> function can be used for this purpose
            too, but it’s more expensive to run and can have security issues.
            Note that integers are always stored in binary in computer memory;
            these are just display string format conversions.</p></li></ol>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[15] </sup>If you’re working along, you don’t need to type any of the
              comment text from the <code class="epub__literal">#</code>
              through to the end of the line; comments are simply ignored by
              Python and not required parts of the statements we’re
              running.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
