<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Dynamic Typing Is Everywhere</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="dynamic_typing_is_everywhere"></a>Dynamic Typing Is Everywhere</h1>
<p>Of course, you don’t really need to draw name/object diagrams
        with circles and arrows to use Python. When you’re starting out,
        though, it sometimes helps you understand unusual cases if you can
        trace their reference structures. If a mutable object changes out from
        under you when passed around your program, for example, chances are
        you are witnessing some of this chapter’s subject matter
        firsthand.</p>
<p>Moreover, even if dynamic typing seems a little abstract at this
        point, you probably will care about it eventually. Because
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>everything</em></span> seems to work by assignment and
        references in Python, a basic
        understanding of this model is useful in many different contexts. As
        you’ll see, it works the same in assignment statements, function
        arguments, <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop variables,
        module imports, class attributes, and more. The good news is that
        there is just one assignment model in Python; once you get a handle on
        dynamic typing, you’ll find that it works the same everywhere in the
        language.</p>
<p>At the most practical level, dynamic typing means there is less
        code for you to write. Just as importantly, though, dynamic typing is
        also the root of Python’s <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e15459"></a>polymorphism<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e15465"></a></em></span>, a concept we introduced in Chapter 4 and will revisit again
        later in this book. Because we do not constrain types in Python code,
        it is highly flexible. As you’ll see, when used well, dynamic typing
        and the polymorphism it provides produce code that automatically
        adapts to new requirements as your systems evolve.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Chapter Summary"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
