<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_answers-id5"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</h1>
<div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>No: <code class="epub__literal">A</code> still prints as
            <code class="epub__literal">"spam"</code>. When <code class="epub__literal">B</code> is assigned to the string <code class="epub__literal">"shrubbery"</code>, all that happens is that
            the variable <code class="epub__literal">B</code> is reset to
            point to the new string object. <code class="epub__literal">A</code> and <code class="epub__literal">B</code> initially share (i.e., reference/point
            to) the same single string object <code class="epub__literal">"spam"</code>, but two names are never linked
            together in Python. Thus, setting <code class="epub__literal">B</code> to a different object has no effect on
            <code class="epub__literal">A</code>. The same would be true if
            the last statement here was <code class="epub__literal">B = B +
            'shrubbery'</code>, by the way—the concatenation would make a
            new object for its result, which would then be assigned to
            <code class="epub__literal">B</code> only. We can never overwrite
            a string (or number, or tuple) in-place, because strings are
            immutable.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Yes: <code class="epub__literal">A</code> now prints as
            <code class="epub__literal">["shrubbery"]</code>. Technically, we
            haven’t really changed either <code class="epub__literal">A</code>
            or <code class="epub__literal">B</code>; instead, we’ve changed
            part of the object they both reference (point to) by overwriting
            that object in-place through the variable <code class="epub__literal">B</code>. Because <code class="epub__literal">A</code> references the same object as <code class="epub__literal">B</code>, the update is reflected in <code class="epub__literal">A</code> as well.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>No: <code class="epub__literal">A</code> still prints as
            <code class="epub__literal">["spam"]</code>. The in-place
            assignment through <code class="epub__literal">B</code> has no
            effect this time because the slice expression made a copy of the
            list object before it was assigned to <code class="epub__literal">B</code>. After the second assignment
            statement, there are two different list objects that have the same
            value (in Python, we say they are <code class="epub__literal">==</code>, but not <code class="epub__literal">is</code>). The third statement changes the
            value of the list object pointed to by <code class="epub__literal">B</code>, but not that pointed to by <code class="epub__literal">A</code>.</p></li></ol>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[16] </sup>Readers with a background in C may find Python references
              similar to C pointers (memory addresses). In fact, references
              are implemented as pointers, and they often serve the same
              roles, especially with objects that can be changed in-place
              (more on this later). However, because references are always
              automatically dereferenced when used, you can never actually do
              anything useful with a reference itself; this is a feature that
              eliminates a vast category of C bugs. You can think of Python
              references as C “void*” pointers, which are automatically
              followed whenever used.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
