<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 7. Strings</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 7. Strings"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h1 class="epub__title"><a id="strings-id1"></a>Chapter 7. Strings</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The next major type on our built-in object tour is the Python
      <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>string<a id="ch07stringobjtype"></a></em></span>—an ordered collection of characters used to
      store and represent text-based information. We looked briefly at strings
      in Chapter 4. Here, we will
      revisit them in more depth, filling in some of the details we skipped
      then.</p>
<p>From a functional perspective, strings can be used to represent
      just about anything that can be encoded as text: symbols and words
      (e.g., your name), contents of text files loaded into memory, Internet
      addresses, Python programs, and so on. They can also be used to hold the
      absolute binary values of bytes, and multibyte Unicode text used in
      internationalized programs.</p>
<p>You may have used strings in other languages, too. Python’s
      strings serve the same role as character arrays in languages such as C,
      but they are a somewhat higher-level tool than arrays. Unlike in C, in
      Python, strings come with a powerful set of processing tools. Also
      unlike languages such as C, Python has no distinct type for individual
      characters; instead, you just use one-character strings.</p>
<p>Strictly speaking, Python strings are categorized as immutable
      sequences, meaning that the characters they contain have a left-to-right
      positional order and that they cannot be changed in-place. In fact,
      strings are the first representative of the larger class of objects
      called <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>sequences</em></span> that we will study here. Pay
      special attention to the sequence operations introduced in this chapter,
      because they will work the same on other sequence types we’ll explore
      later, such as lists and tuples.</p>
<p>Table 7-1 previews
      common string literals and operations we will discuss in this chapter.
      <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15639"></a>Empty strings are written as a pair of quotation marks
      (single or double) with nothing in between, and there are a variety of
      ways to code strings. For processing, strings support
      <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>expression</em></span> operations such as concatenation
      (combining strings), slicing (extracting sections), indexing (fetching
      by offset), and so on. Besides expressions, Python also provides a set
      of string <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>methods</em></span> that implement common
      string-specific tasks, as well as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>modules</em></span> for more
      advanced text-processing tasks such as pattern matching. We’ll explore
      all of these later in the chapter<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15652"></a>.</p><div class="epub__table"><a id="common_string_literals_and_operations"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Table 7-1. Common string literals and operations</p><div class="epub__table-contents">
<table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; " summary="Common string literals and operations">
<colgroup><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Operation</p></th><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Interpretation</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S = ''</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Empty
              string</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S = "spam's"</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Double quotes, same as
              single</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S = 's\np\ta\x00m'</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Escape
              sequences</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S = """..."""</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Triple-quoted block
              strings</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S = r'\temp\spam'</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Raw
              strings</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S = b'spam'</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Byte strings in 3.0
              (Chapter 36)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S = u'spam'</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Unicode strings in 2.6
              only (Chapter 36)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S1 + S2</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">S * 3</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Concatenate,
              repeat</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S[i]</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">S[i:j]</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">len(S)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Index, slice,
              length</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">"a %s parrot" % kind</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>String formatting
              expression</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">"a {0}
              parrot".format(kind)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>String formatting method
              in 2.6 and 3.0</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.find('pa')</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.rstrip()</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.replace('pa', 'xx')</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.split(',')</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.isdigit()</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.lower()</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.endswith('spam')</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">'spam'.join(strlist)</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.encode('latin-1')</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>String method calls:
              search,</p>
<p>remove whitespace,</p>
<p>replacement,</p>
<p>split on delimiter,</p>
<p>content test,</p>
<p>case conversion,</p>
<p>end test,</p>
<p>delimiter join,</p>
<p>Unicode encoding, etc.</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">for x in S: print(x)</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">'spam' in S</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">[c * 2 for c in
              S]</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">map(ord,
              S)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Iteration,
              membership</p></td></tr></tbody>
</table>
</div>
</div>
<p>Beyond the core set of string tools in Table 7-1, Python also supports
      more advanced pattern-based string processing with the standard
      library’s <code class="epub__literal">re</code> (regular expression)
      module, introduced in Chapter 4, and even higher-level text
      processing tools such as XML parsers, discussed briefly in Chapter 36. This book’s scope, though, is
      focused on the fundamentals represented by Table 7-1.</p>
<p>To cover the basics, this chapter begins with an overview of
      string literal forms and string expressions, then moves on to look at
      more advanced tools such as string methods and formatting. Python comes
      with many string tools, and we won’t look at them all here; the complete
      story is chronicled in the Python library manual. Our goal here is to
      explore enough commonly used tools to give you a representative sample;
      methods we won’t see in action here, for example, are largely analogous
      to those we will.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Content note</em></span>: Technically speaking, this
        chapter tells only part of the string story in Python—the part most
        programmers need to know. It presents the basic <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15887"></a>str</code> string type, which handles ASCII text and
        works the same regardless of which version of Python you use. That is,
        this chapter intentionally limits its scope to the string processing
        essentials that are used in most Python scripts.</p>
<p>From a more formal perspective, ASCII is a simple form of
        Unicode text. Python addresses the distinction between text and binary
        data by including <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15894"></a>distinct object types:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15904"></a>Python 3.0 there are three string types: <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15911"></a>str</code> is used for Unicode text (ASCII or
            otherwise), <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15917"></a>bytes</code> is used for binary data (including
            encoded text), and <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15923"></a>bytearray</code> is a mutable variant of <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15934"></a>Python 2.6, <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e15940"></a><code class="epub__literal">unicode</code> strings
            represent wide Unicode text, and <code class="epub__literal">str</code> strings handle both 8-bit text and
            binary data.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">bytearray</code> type is also
        available as a back-port in 2.6, but not earlier, and it’s not as
        closely bound to binary data as it is in 3.0. Because most programmers
        don’t need to dig into the details of Unicode encodings or binary data
        formats, though, I’ve moved all such details to the Advanced Topics
        part of this book, in Chapter 36.</p>
<p>If you do need to deal with more advanced string concepts such
        as alternative character sets or packed binary data and files, see
        Chapter 36 after reading the material
        here. For now, we’ll focus on the basic string type and its
        operations. As you’ll find, the basics we’ll study here also apply
        directly to the more advanced string types in Python’s toolset.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="String Literals"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
