<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>String Literals</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="string_literals"></a>String Literals</h1>
<p>By <a id="ch07strobjtypestrliterals"></a>and large, strings are fairly easy to use in Python.
        Perhaps the most complicated thing about them is that there are so
        many ways to write them in your code:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Single quotes: <code class="epub__literal">'spa"m'</code></p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Double quotes: <code class="epub__literal">"spa'm"</code></p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Triple quotes: <code class="epub__literal">'''... spam
            ...'''</code>, <code class="epub__literal">"""... spam
            ..."""</code></p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Escape sequences: <code class="epub__literal">"s\tp\na\0m"</code></p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Raw strings: <code class="epub__literal">r"C:\new\test.spm"</code></p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Byte strings in 3.0 (see Chapter 36): <code class="epub__literal">b'sp\x01am'</code></p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Unicode strings in 2.6 only (see Chapter 36): <code class="epub__literal">u'eggs\u0020spam'</code></p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>The single- and double-quoted forms are by far the most common;
        the others serve specialized roles, and we’re postponing discussion of
        the last two advanced forms until Chapter 36. Let’s take a quick look at all
        the other options in turn.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Single- and Double-Quoted Strings Are the Same"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="single-_and_double-quoted_strings_are_t"></a>Single- and Double-Quoted Strings Are the Same</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Around <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16023"></a>Python strings, single and double quote characters are
          interchangeable. <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16031"></a>That is, string literals can be written enclosed in
          either two single or two double quotes—<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16035"></a>the two forms work <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16039"></a>the same and return the same type of object.
          <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16043"></a>For example, <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16048"></a>the following two strings are identical, once
          coded:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e16054"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'shrubbery', "shrubbery"</code></strong>
('shrubbery', 'shrubbery')</pre>
<p>The reason for supporting both is that it allows you to embed
          a quote character of the other variety inside a string without
          escaping it with a backslash. You may embed a single quote character
          in a string enclosed in double quote characters, and vice
          versa:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e16061"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'knight"s', "knight's"</code></strong>
('knight"s', "knight's")</pre>
<p>Incidentally, Python automatically concatenates adjacent
          string literals in any expression, although it is almost as simple
          to add a <code class="epub__literal">+</code> operator between them
          to invoke concatenation explicitly (as we’ll see in Chapter 12, wrapping this form in
          parentheses also allows it to span multiple lines):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e16073"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>title = "Meaning " 'of' " Life"</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Implicit concatenation</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>title</code></strong>
'Meaning of Life'</pre>
<p>Notice that adding commas between these strings would result
          in a tuple, not a string. Also notice in all of these outputs that
          Python prefers to print strings in single <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16086"></a>quotes, unless they embed one. You can also embed
          quotes by escaping them with backslashes:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e16092"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'knight\'s', "knight\"s"</code></strong>
("knight's", 'knight"s')</pre>
<p>To understand why, you need to know how escapes work in
          general.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Escape Sequences Represent Special Bytes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="escape_sequences_represent_special_byte"></a>Escape Sequences Represent Special Bytes</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The last <a id="ch07strobjtypestrlitescapeseq"></a>example embedded a quote inside a string by preceding
          it with a backslash. This is representative of a general pattern in
          strings: backslashes are used to introduce special byte codings
          known as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>escape sequences</em></span>.</p>
<p>Escape sequences let us embed byte codes in strings that
          cannot easily be typed on a keyboard. The character <code class="epub__literal">\</code>, and one or more characters following it
          in the string literal, are replaced with a single character in the
          resulting string object, which has the binary value specified by the
          escape sequence. For example, here is a five-character string that
          embeds a newline and a tab:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e16120"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>s = 'a\nb\tc'</code></strong></pre>
<p>The two characters <code class="epub__literal">\n</code> stand
          for a single character—the byte containing the binary value of the
          newline character in your character set (usually, ASCII code 10).
          Similarly, the sequence <code class="epub__literal">\t</code> is
          replaced with the tab character. The way this string looks when
          printed depends on how you print it. The interactive echo shows the
          special characters as escapes, but <code class="epub__literal">print</code> interprets them instead:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e16135"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>s</code></strong>
'a\nb\tc'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(s)</code></strong>
a
b       c</pre>
<p>To be completely sure how many bytes are in this string, use
          the built-in <code class="epub__literal">len</code> function—it returns the actual number
          of bytes in a string, regardless of how it is displayed:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e16151"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>len(s)</code></strong>
5</pre>
<p>This string is five bytes long: it contains an ASCII
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>a</em></span> byte, a newline byte, an ASCII
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>b</em></span> byte, and so on. Note that the original
          backslash characters are not really stored with the string in
          memory; they are used to tell Python to store special byte values in
          the string. For coding such special bytes, Python recognizes a full
          set of escape code sequences, <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16164"></a>listed in Table 7-2.</p><div class="epub__table"><a id="string_backslash_characters"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Table 7-2. String backslash characters</p><div class="epub__table-contents">
<table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; " summary="String backslash characters">
<colgroup><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Escape</p></th><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Meaning</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">\</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>newline</code></em></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Ignored (continuation
                  line)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">\\</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Backslash (stores one
                  <code class="epub__literal">\</code>)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">\'</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Single quote (stores
                  <code class="epub__literal">'</code>)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">\"</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Double quote (stores
                  <code class="epub__literal">"</code>)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">\a</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Bell</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">\b</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Backspace</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">\f</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Formfeed</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">\n</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Newline
                  (linefeed)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">\r</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Carriage
                  return</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">\t</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Horizontal
                  tab</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">\v</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Vertical
                  tab</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">\x</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>hh</code></em></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Character with hex
                  value <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>hh</code></em> (at most 2
                  digits)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">\</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>ooo</code></em></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Character with octal
                  value <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>ooo</code></em> (up to 3
                  digits)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">\0</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Null: binary 0
                  character (doesn’t end string)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">\N{ id }</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Unicode database
                  ID</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">\u</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>hhhh</code></em></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Unicode 16-bit
                  hex</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">\U</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>hhhhhhhh</code></em></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Unicode 32-bit
                  hex<sup>[a]</sup></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">\</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>other</code></em></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Not an escape (keeps
                  both <code class="epub__literal">\</code> and
                  <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>other</code></em>)</p></td></tr></tbody><tbody class="epub__footnotes"><tr><td colspan="2"><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[a] </sup>The <code class="epub__literal">\U</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>hhhh</code></em><code class="epub__literal">...</code> escape sequence takes
                      exactly eight hexadecimal digits
                      (<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>h</code></em>); both <code class="epub__literal">\u</code> and <code class="epub__literal">\U</code> can be used only in Unicode
                      string literals.</p>
</div>
</td></tr></tbody>
</table>
</div>
</div>
<p>Some escape sequences allow you to embed absolute binary
          values into the bytes of a string. For instance, here’s a
          five-character string that embeds two binary zero bytes (coded as
          octal escapes of one digit):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e16389"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>s = 'a\0b\0c'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>s</code></strong>
'a\x00b\x00c'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>len(s)</code></strong>
5</pre>
<p>In Python, the zero (null) byte does not terminate a string
          the way it typically does in C. Instead, Python keeps both the
          string’s length and text in memory. In fact, no character terminates
          a string in Python. Here’s a string that is all absolute binary
          escape codes—a binary 1 and 2 (coded in octal), followed by a binary
          3 (coded in hexadecimal):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e16402"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>s = '\001\002\x03'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>s</code></strong>
'\x01\x02\x03'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>len(s)</code></strong>
3</pre>
<p>Notice that Python displays nonprintable characters in hex,
          regardless of how they were specified. You can freely combine
          absolute value escapes and the more symbolic escape types in Table 7-2. The following string
          contains the characters “spam”, a tab and newline, and an absolute
          zero value byte coded in hex:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e16417"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S = "s\tp\na\x00m"</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S</code></strong>
's\tp\na\x00m'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>len(S)</code></strong>
7
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(S)</code></strong>
s       p
a m</pre>
<p>This becomes more important to know when you process binary
          data files in Python. Because their contents are represented as
          strings in your scripts, it’s OK to process binary files that
          contain any sorts of binary byte values (more on files in Chapter 9).<sup>[17]</sup></p>
<p>Finally, as the last entry in Table 7-2 implies, if Python does not
          recognize the character after a <code class="epub__literal">\</code>
          as being a valid escape code, it simply keeps the backslash in the
          resulting string:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e16468"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = "C:\py\code"</code></strong>           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Keeps \ literally</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x</code></strong>
'C:\\py\\code'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>len(x)</code></strong>
10</pre>
<p>Unless you’re able to commit all of Table 7-2 to memory, though, you
          probably shouldn’t rely on this behavior.<sup>[18]</sup> To code literal backslashes explicitly such that they
          are retained in your strings, double them up (<code class="epub__literal">\\</code> is an escape for one <code class="epub__literal">\</code>) or use raw strings; the next section
          shows <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16496"></a>how.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Raw Strings Suppress Escapes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="raw_strings_suppress_escapes"></a>Raw Strings Suppress Escapes</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16504"></a>we’ve seen, escape sequences are handy for embedding
          special byte codes within strings. <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16512"></a>Sometimes, though, the special treatment of
          backslashes for introducing escapes can lead to trouble. It’s
          surprisingly common, for instance, to see Python newcomers in
          classes trying to open a file with a filename argument that looks
          something like this:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e16516"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">myfile = open('C:\new\text.dat', 'w')</pre>
<p>thinking that they will open a file called <em class="epub__filename">text.dat</em> in the directory <em class="epub__filename">C:\new</em>. The problem here is that <code class="epub__literal">\n</code> is taken to stand for a newline
          character, and <code class="epub__literal">\t</code> is replaced
          with a tab. In effect, the call tries to open a file named <em class="epub__filename">C:(newline)ew(tab)ext.dat</em>, with usually
          less than stellar results.</p>
<p>This is just the sort of thing that raw strings are useful
          for. If the letter <code class="epub__literal">r</code> (uppercase
          or lowercase) appears just before the opening quote of a string, it
          turns off the escape mechanism. The result is that Python retains
          your backslashes literally, exactly as you type them. Therefore, to
          fix the filename problem, just remember to add the letter <code class="epub__literal">r</code> on Windows:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e16543"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">myfile = open(r'C:\new\text.dat', 'w')</pre>
<p>Alternatively, because two backslashes are really an escape
          sequence for one backslash, you can keep your backslashes by simply
          doubling them up:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e16547"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">myfile = open('C:\\new\\text.dat', 'w')</pre>
<p>In fact, Python itself sometimes uses this doubling scheme
          when it prints strings with embedded backslashes:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e16551"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>path = r'C:\new\text.dat'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>path</code></strong>                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Show as Python code</span></em>
'C:\\new\\text.dat'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(path)</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># User-friendly format</span></em>
C:\new\text.dat
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>len(path)</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># String length</span></em>
15</pre>
<p>As with numeric representation, the default format at the
          interactive prompt prints results as if they were code, and
          therefore escapes backslashes in the output. The <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statement provides a more
          user-friendly format that shows that there is actually only one
          backslash in each spot. To verify this is the case, you can check
          the result of the built-in <code class="epub__literal">len</code>
          function, which returns the number of bytes in the string,
          independent of display formats. If you count the characters in the
          <code class="epub__literal">print(path)</code> output, you’ll see
          that there really is just 1 character per backslash, for a total of
          15.</p>
<p>Besides directory paths on Windows, raw strings are also
          commonly used for regular expressions (text pattern matching,
          supported with the <code class="epub__literal">re</code> module
          introduced in Chapter 4).
          Also note that Python scripts can usually use
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>forward</em></span> slashes in directory paths on Windows
          and Unix because Python tries to interpret paths portably (i.e.,
          <code class="epub__literal">'C:/new/text.dat'</code> works when
          opening files, too). Raw strings are useful if you code paths using
          native Windows backslashes, though.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p>Despite its role, even a raw string cannot end in a single
            backslash, because the backslash escapes the following quote
            character—you still must escape the surrounding quote character to
            embed it in the string. That is, <code class="epub__literal">r"...\"</code> is not a valid string literal—a
            raw string cannot end in an odd number of backslashes. If you need
            to end a raw string with a single backslash, you can use two and
            slice off the second (<code class="epub__literal">r'1\nb\tc\\'[:-1]</code>), tack one on
            manually (<code class="epub__literal">r'1\nb\tc' + '\\'</code>),
            or skip the raw string syntax and just double up the backslashes
            in a normal string (<code class="epub__literal">'1\\nb\\tc\\'</code>). All three of
            these forms create the same eight-character string containing
            three backslashes.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Triple Quotes Code Multiline Block Strings"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="triple_quotes_code_multiline_block_stri"></a>Triple Quotes Code Multiline Block Strings</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>So <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16626"></a>far, you’ve seen single <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16634"></a>quotes, double quotes, escapes, and raw strings in
          action. <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16638"></a>Python also has a triple-quoted string literal format,
          sometimes called a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>block string</em></span>, that is a
          syntactic convenience for coding multiline text data. This form
          begins with three quotes (of either the single or double variety),
          is followed by any number of lines of text, and is closed with the
          same triple-quote sequence that opened it. Single and double quotes
          embedded in the string’s text may be, but do not have to be,
          escaped—the string does not end until Python sees three unescaped
          quotes of the same kind used to start the literal. For
          example:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e16647"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mantra = """Always look</code></strong>
...  <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>on the bright</code></strong>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>side of life."""</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mantra</code></strong>
'Always look\n on the bright\nside of life.'</pre>
<p>This string spans three lines (in some interfaces, the
          interactive prompt changes to <code class="epub__literal">...</code>
          on continuation lines; IDLE simply drops down one line). Python
          collects all the triple-quoted text into a single multiline string,
          with embedded newline characters (<code class="epub__literal">\n</code>) at the places where your code has line
          breaks. Notice that, as in the literal, the second line in the
          result has a leading space, but the third does not—what you type is
          truly what you get. To see the string with the newlines interpreted,
          print it instead of echoing:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e16669"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(mantra)</code></strong>
Always look
 on the bright
side of life.</pre>
<p>Triple-quoted strings are useful any time you need multiline
          text in your program; for example, to embed multiline error messages
          or HTML or XML code in your source code files. You can embed such
          blocks directly in your scripts without resorting to external text
          files or explicit concatenation and newline characters.</p>
<p>Triple-quoted strings are also commonly used for documentation
          strings, which are string literals that are taken as comments when
          they appear at specific points in your file (more on these later in
          the book). These don’t have to be triple-quoted blocks, but they
          usually are to allow for multiline comments.</p>
<p>Finally, triple-quoted strings are also sometimes used as a
          “horribly hackish” way to temporarily disable lines of code during
          development (OK, it’s not really too horrible, and it’s actually a
          fairly common practice). If you wish to turn off a few lines of code
          and run your script again, simply put three quotes above and below
          them, like this:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e16680"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">X = 1
"""
import os                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Disable this code temporarily</span></em>
print(os.getcwd())
"""
Y = 2</pre>
<p>I said this was hackish because Python really does make a
          string out of the lines of code disabled this way, but this is
          probably not significant in terms of performance. For large sections
          of code, it’s also easier than manually adding hash marks before
          each line and later removing them. This is especially true if you
          are using a text editor that does not have support for editing
          Python code specifically. In Python, practicality often beats
          aesthetics<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16687"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e16689"></a>.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Strings in Action"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
