<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>String Methods</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="string_methods"></a>String Methods</h1>
<p>In <a id="ch07strmethods"></a>addition to expression operators, strings provide a set
        of <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>methods</em></span> that implement more sophisticated
        text-processing tasks. Methods are simply functions that are
        associated with particular objects. Technically, they are attributes
        attached to objects that happen to reference callable functions. In
        Python, expressions and built-in functions may work across a range of
        types, but methods are generally <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>specific to object
        types</em></span>—string methods, for example, work only on string
        objects. The method sets of some types intersect in Python 3.0 (e.g.,
        many types have a <code class="epub__literal">count</code> method),
        but they are still more type-specific than other tools.</p>
<p>In finer-grained detail, functions are packages of code, and
        method calls combine two operations at once (an attribute fetch and a
        call):</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Attribute fetches</span></dt><dd>
<p>An <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e17680"></a>expression of the form
              <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>object</code></em><code class="epub__literal">.</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>attribute</code></em>
              means “fetch the value of <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>attribute</code></em>
              in <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>object</code></em>.”</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Call expressions</span></dt><dd>
<p>An <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e17703"></a>expression of the form
              <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>function</code></em><code class="epub__literal">(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>arguments</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code> means “invoke the code of <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>function</code></em>,
              passing zero or more comma-separated
              <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>argument</code></em> objects to it, and return
              <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>function</code></em>’s result value.”</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Putting these two together allows us to call a method of an
        object. The <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e17729"></a>method call expression
        <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>object</code></em><code class="epub__literal">.</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>method</code></em><code class="epub__literal">(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>arguments</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code> is evaluated from left to right—Python
        will first fetch the <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>method</code></em> of the
        <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>object</code></em> and then call it, passing in the
        <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>arguments</code></em>. If the method computes a result,
        it will come back as the result of the entire method-call
        expression.</p>
<p>As you’ll see throughout this part of the book, most objects
        have callable methods, and all are accessed using this same
        method-call syntax. To call an object method, as you’ll see in the
        following sections, you have to go through an existing object.</p>
<p>Table 7-3 summarizes
        the methods and call patterns for built-in string objects in Python
        3.0; these change frequently, so be sure to check Python’s standard
        library manual for the most up-to-date list, or run a <code class="epub__literal">help</code> call on any string interactively.
        Python 2.6’s string methods vary slightly; it includes a <code class="epub__literal">decode</code>, for example, because of its
        different handling of Unicode data (something we’ll discuss in Chapter 36). In this table, <code class="epub__literal">S</code> is a string object, and optional arguments
        are enclosed in square brackets. String methods in this table
        implement higher-level operations such as splitting and joining, case
        conversions, content tests, and substring searches and <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e17772"></a>replacements.</p><div class="epub__table"><a id="string_method_calls_in_python_3.0"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Table 7-3. String method calls in Python 3.0</p><div class="epub__table-contents">
<table style="border: none;" summary="String method calls in Python 3.0">
<colgroup><col></col><col></col></colgroup><tbody><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.capitalize()</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.ljust(width [,
                fill])</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.center(width [,
                fill])</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.lower()</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.count(sub [, start [,
                end]])</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.lstrip([chars])</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.encode([encoding
                [,errors]])</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.maketrans(x[, y[,
                z]])</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.endswith(suffix [, start [,
                end]])</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.partition(sep)</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.expandtabs([tabsize])</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.replace(old, new [,
                count])</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.find(sub [, start [,
                end]])</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.rfind(sub [,start
                [,end]])</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.format(fmtstr, *args,
                **kwargs)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.rindex(sub [, start [,
                end]])</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.index(sub [, start [,
                end]])</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.rjust(width [,
                fill])</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.isalnum()</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.rpartition(sep)</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.isalpha()</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.rsplit([sep[,
                maxsplit]])</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.isdecimal()</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.rstrip([chars])</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.isdigit()</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.split([sep
                [,maxsplit]])</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.isidentifier()</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.splitlines([keepends])</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.islower()</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.startswith(prefix [, start [,
                end]])</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.isnumeric()</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.strip([chars])</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.isprintable()</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.swapcase()</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.isspace()</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.title()</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.istitle()</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.translate(map)</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.isupper()</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.upper()</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.join(iterable)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">S.zfill(width)</code></p></td></tr></tbody>
</table>
</div>
</div>
<p>As you can see, there are quite a few string methods, and we
        don’t have space to cover them all; see Python’s library manual or
        reference texts for all the fine points. To help you get started,
        though, let’s work through some code that demonstrates some of the
        most commonly used methods in action, and illustrates Python
        text-processing basics along the way.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="String Method Examples: Changing Strings"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="string_method_examples_colon_changing_s"></a>String Method Examples: Changing Strings</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e17982"></a>we’ve seen, because strings are immutable, they cannot
          be changed in-place directly. To make a new text value from an
          existing string, you construct a new string with operations such as
          slicing and concatenation. For example, to replace two characters in
          the middle of a string, you can use code like this:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e17988"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S = 'spammy'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S = S[:3] + 'xx' + S[5:]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S</code></strong>
'spaxxy'</pre>
<p>But, if you’re really just out to replace a substring, you can
          use the string <code class="epub__literal">replace</code> method
          instead:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e18004"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S = 'spammy'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S = S.replace('mm', 'xx')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S</code></strong>
'spaxxy'</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">replace</code> method is more
          general than this code implies. It takes as arguments the original
          substring (of any length) and the string (of any length) to replace
          it with, and performs a global search and replace:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e18020"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'aa$bb$cc$dd'.replace('$', 'SPAM')</code></strong>
'aaSPAMbbSPAMccSPAMdd'</pre>
<p>In such a role, <code class="epub__literal">replace</code> can
          be used as a tool to implement template replacements (e.g., in form
          letters). Notice that this time we simply printed the result,
          instead of assigning it to a name—you need to assign results to
          names only if you want to retain them for later use.</p>
<p>If you need to replace one fixed-size string that can occur at
          any offset, you can do a replacement again, or search for the
          substring with the string <code class="epub__literal">find</code>
          method and then slice:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e18035"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S = 'xxxxSPAMxxxxSPAMxxxx'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>where = S.find('SPAM')</code></strong>            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Search for position</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>where</code></strong>                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Occurs at offset 4</span></em>
4
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S = S[:where] + 'EGGS' + S[(where+4):]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S</code></strong>
'xxxxEGGSxxxxSPAMxxxx'</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">find</code> method returns the
          offset where the substring appears (by default, searching from the
          front), or <code class="epub__literal">−1</code> if it is not found.
          As we saw earlier, it’s a substring search operation just like the
          <code class="epub__literal">in</code> expression, but <code class="epub__literal">find</code> returns the position of a located
          substring.</p>
<p>Another option is to use <code class="epub__literal">replace</code> with a third argument to limit it
          to a single substitution:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e18079"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S = 'xxxxSPAMxxxxSPAMxxxx'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S.replace('SPAM', 'EGGS')</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Replace all</span></em>
'xxxxEGGSxxxxEGGSxxxx'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S.replace('SPAM', 'EGGS', 1)</code></strong>      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Replace one</span></em>
'xxxxEGGSxxxxSPAMxxxx'</pre>
<p>Notice that <code class="epub__literal">replace</code> returns
          a new string object each time. Because strings are immutable,
          methods never really change the subject strings in-place, even if
          they are called “replace”!</p>
<p>The fact that concatenation operations and the <code class="epub__literal">replace</code> method generate new string objects
          each time they are run is actually a potential downside of using
          them to change strings. If you have to apply many changes to a very
          large string, you might be able to improve your script’s performance
          by converting the string to an object that does support in-place
          changes:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e18106"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S = 'spammy'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = list(S)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
['s', 'p', 'a', 'm', 'm', 'y']</pre>
<p>The built-in <code class="epub__literal">list</code> function
          (or an object construction call) builds a new list out of the items
          in any sequence—in this case, “exploding” the characters of a string
          into a list. Once the string is in this form, you can make multiple
          changes to it without generating a new copy for each change:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e18122"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L[3] = 'x'</code></strong>                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Works for lists, not strings</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L[4] = 'x'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
['s', 'p', 'a', 'x', 'x', 'y']</pre>
<p>If, after your changes, you need to convert back to a string
          (e.g., to write to a file), use the string <code class="epub__literal">join</code> method to “implode” the list back
          into a string:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e18141"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S = ''.join(L)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S</code></strong>
'spaxxy'</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">join</code> method may look a
          bit backward at first sight. Because it is a method of strings (not
          of lists), it is called through the desired delimiter. <code class="epub__literal">join</code> puts the strings in a list (or other
          iterable) together, with the delimiter between list items; in this
          case, it uses an empty string delimiter to convert from a list back
          to a string. More generally, any string delimiter and iterable of
          strings will do:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e18157"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'SPAM'.join(['eggs', 'sausage', 'ham', 'toast'])</code></strong>
'eggsSPAMsausageSPAMhamSPAMtoast'</pre>
<p>In fact, joining substrings all at once this way often runs
          much faster than concatenating them individually. Be sure to also
          see the earlier note about the mutable <code class="epub__literal">bytearray</code> string in Python 3.0 and 2.6,
          described fully in Chapter 36;
          because it may be changed in place, it offers an alternative to this
          <code class="epub__literal">list</code>/<code class="epub__literal">join</code> combination for some kinds of text
          that must be changed often.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="String Method Examples: Parsing Text"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="string_method_examples_colon_parsing_te"></a>String Method Examples: Parsing Text</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Another <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18181"></a>common role for string methods is as a simple form of
          text <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>parsing</em></span>—that is, analyzing structure and
          extracting substrings. To extract substrings at fixed offsets, we
          can employ slicing techniques:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e18190"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>line = 'aaa bbb ccc'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>col1 = line[0:3]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>col3 = line[8:]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>col1</code></strong>
'aaa'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>col3</code></strong>
'ccc'</pre>
<p>Here, the columns of data appear at fixed offsets and so may
          be sliced out of the original string. This technique passes for
          parsing, as long as the components of your data have fixed
          positions. If instead some sort of delimiter separates the data, you
          can pull out its components by splitting. This will work even if the
          data may show up at arbitrary positions within the string:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e18209"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>line = 'aaa bbb  ccc'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>cols = line.split()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>cols</code></strong>
['aaa', 'bbb', 'ccc']</pre>
<p>The string <code class="epub__literal">split</code> method
          chops up a string into a list of substrings, around a delimiter
          string. We didn’t pass a delimiter in the prior example, so it
          defaults to whitespace—the string is split at groups of one or more
          spaces, tabs, and newlines, and we get back a list of the resulting
          substrings. In other applications, more tangible delimiters may
          separate the data. This example splits (and hence parses) the string
          at commas, a separator common in data returned by some database
          tools:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e18225"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>line = 'bob,hacker,40'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>line.split(',')</code></strong>
['bob', 'hacker', '40']</pre>
<p>Delimiters can be longer than a single character, too:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e18235"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>line = "i'mSPAMaSPAMlumberjack"</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>line.split("SPAM")</code></strong>
["i'm", 'a', 'lumberjack']</pre>
<p>Although there are limits to the parsing potential of slicing
          and splitting, both run very fast and can handle basic
          text-extraction chores.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Other Common String Methods in Action"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="other_common_string_methods_in_action"></a>Other Common String Methods in Action</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Other <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18251"></a>string methods have more focused roles—for example, to
          strip off whitespace at the end of a line of text, perform case
          conversions, test content, and test for a substring at the end or
          front:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e18257"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>line = "The knights who say Ni!\n"</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>line.rstrip()</code></strong>
'The knights who say Ni!'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>line.upper()</code></strong>
'THE KNIGHTS WHO SAY NI!\n'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>line.isalpha()</code></strong>
False
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>line.endswith('Ni!\n')</code></strong>
True
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>line.startswith('The')</code></strong>
True</pre>
<p>Alternative techniques can also sometimes be used to achieve
          the same results as string methods—the <code class="epub__literal">in</code> membership operator can be used to test
          for the presence of a substring, for instance, and length and
          slicing operations can be used to mimic <code class="epub__literal">endswith</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e18286"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>line</code></strong>
'The knights who say Ni!\n'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>line.find('Ni') != −1</code></strong>       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Search via method call or expression</span></em>
True
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'Ni' in line</code></strong>
True

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sub = 'Ni!\n'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>line.endswith(sub)</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># End test via method call or slice</span></em>
True
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>line[-len(sub):] == sub</code></strong>
True</pre>
<p>See also the <code class="epub__literal">format</code> string
          formatting method described later in this chapter; it provides more
          advanced substitution tools that combine many operations in a single
          step.</p>
<p>Again, because there are so many methods available for
          strings, we won’t look at every one here. You’ll see some additional
          string examples later in this book, but for more details you can
          also turn to the Python library manual and other documentation
          sources, or simply experiment
          interactively on your own. You can also check the <code class="epub__literal">help(S.</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>method</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code> results for a
          <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>method</code></em> of any string object <code class="epub__literal">S</code> for more hints.</p>
<p>Note that none of the string methods accepts
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>patterns</em></span>—for pattern-based text processing, you
          must use the Python <code class="epub__literal">re</code> standard
          library module, an advanced tool that was introduced in Chapter 4 but is mostly outside
          the scope of this text (one further example appears at the end of
          Chapter 36). Because of this
          limitation, though, string methods may sometimes run more quickly
          than the <code class="epub__literal">re</code> module’s
          tools.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The Original string Module (Gone in 3.0)"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_original_string_module_open_parenth"></a>The Original string Module (Gone in 3.0)</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The history of <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18356"></a>Python’s string methods is somewhat convoluted. For
          roughly the first decade of its existence, Python provided a
          standard library module called <code class="epub__literal">string</code> that contained functions that
          largely mirrored the current set of string object methods. In
          response to user requests, in <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18365"></a>Python 2.0 these functions were made available as
          methods of string objects. Because so many people had written so
          much code that relied on the original <code class="epub__literal">string</code> module, however, it was retained
          for backward compatibility.</p>
<p>Today, you should use <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>only string
          methods</em></span>, not the original <code class="epub__literal">string</code> module. In fact, the original
          module-call forms of today’s string methods have been removed
          completely from Python in Release 3.0. However, because you may
          still see the module in use in older Python code, a brief look is in
          order here.</p>
<p>The upshot of this legacy is that in Python 2.6, there
          technically are still two ways to invoke advanced string operations:
          by calling object methods, or by calling <code class="epub__literal">string</code> module functions and passing in the
          objects as arguments. For instance, given a variable <code class="epub__literal">X</code> assigned to a string object, calling an
          object method:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e18390"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">X.<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>method</code></em>(<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>arguments</code></em>)</pre>
<p>is usually equivalent to calling the same operation through
          the <code class="epub__literal">string</code> module (provided that
          you have already imported the module):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e18403"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">string.<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>method</code></em>(X, <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>arguments</code></em>)</pre>
<p>Here’s an example of the method scheme in action:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e18413"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S = 'a+b+c+'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = S.replace('+', 'spam')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x</code></strong>
'aspambspamcspam'</pre>
<p>To access the same operation through the <code class="epub__literal">string</code> module in Python 2.6, you need to
          import the module (at least once in your process) and pass in the
          object:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e18429"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import string</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y = string.replace(S, '+', 'spam')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y</code></strong>
'aspambspamcspam'</pre>
<p>Because the module approach was the standard for so long, and
          because strings are such a central component of most programs, you
          might see both call patterns in Python 2.X code you come
          across.</p>
<p>Again, though, today you should always use method calls
          instead of the older module calls. There are good reasons for this,
          besides the fact that the module calls have gone away in Release
          3.0. For one thing, the module call scheme requires you to import
          the <code class="epub__literal">string</code> module (methods do not
          require imports). For another, the module makes calls a few
          characters longer to type (when you load the module with <code class="epub__literal">import</code>, that is, not using <code class="epub__literal">from</code>). And, finally, the module runs more
          slowly than methods (the module maps most calls back to the methods
          and so incurs an extra call along the way).</p>
<p>The original <code class="epub__literal">string</code> module
          itself, without its string method equivalents, is retained in Python
          3.0 because it contains additional tools, including predefined
          string constants and a template object system (a relatively obscure
          tool omitted here—see the Python library manual for details on
          template objects). Unless you really want to have to change your 2.6
          code to use 3.0, though, you should consider the basic string
          operation calls in it to be just ghosts from the <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18459"></a>past.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="String Formatting Expressions"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
