<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>String Formatting Expressions</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="string_formatting_expressions"></a>String Formatting Expressions</h1>
<p><a id="ch07strformatting"></a>Although you can get a lot done with the string methods
        and sequence operations we’ve already met, Python also provides a more
        advanced way to combine string processing tasks—<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>string
        formatting</em></span> allows us to perform multiple type-specific
        substitutions on a string in a single step. It’s never strictly
        required, but it can be convenient, especially when formatting text to
        be displayed to a program’s users. Due to the wealth of new ideas in
        the Python world, string formatting is available in two flavors in
        Python today:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">String formatting expressions</span></dt><dd>
<p>The original technique, available since Python’s
              inception; this is based upon the C language’s “printf” model
              and is used in much existing code.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">String formatting method calls</span></dt><dd>
<p>A newer technique added in Python 2.6 and 3.0; this is
              more unique to Python and largely overlaps with string
              formatting expression functionality.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Since the method call flavor is new, there is some chance that
        one or the other of these may become deprecated over time. The
        expressions are more likely to be deprecated in later Python releases,
        though this should depend on the future practice of real Python
        programmers. As they are largely just variations on a theme, though,
        either technique is valid to use today. Since string formatting
        expressions are the original in this department, let’s start with
        them.</p>
<p><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19370"></a>Python defines the <code class="epub__literal">%</code>
        binary operator to work on strings (you may recall that this is also
        the remainder of division, or modulus, operator for numbers). When
        applied to strings, the <code class="epub__literal">%</code> operator
        provides a simple way to format values as strings according to a
        format definition. In short, the <code class="epub__literal">%</code>
        operator provides a compact way to code multiple string substitutions
        all at once, instead of building and concatenating parts
        individually.</p>
<p>To format strings:</p><div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>On the left of the <code class="epub__literal">%</code>
            operator, provide a format string containing one or more embedded
            conversion targets, each of which starts with a <code class="epub__literal">%</code> (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">%d</code>).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>On the right of the <code class="epub__literal">%</code>
            operator, provide the object (or objects, embedded in a tuple)
            that you want Python to insert into the format string on the left
            in place of the conversion target (or targets).</p></li></ol>
</div>
<p>For instance, in the formatting example we saw earlier in this
        chapter, the integer <code class="epub__literal">1</code> replaces the
        <code class="epub__literal">%d</code> in the format string on the
        left, and the string <code class="epub__literal">'dead'</code>
        replaces the <code class="epub__literal">%s</code>. The result is a
        new string that reflects these two substitutions:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e18534"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'That is %d %s bird!' % (1, 'dead')</code></strong>           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Format expression</span></em>
That is 1 dead bird!</pre>
<p>Technically speaking, string formatting expressions are usually
        optional—you can generally do similar work with multiple
        concatenations and conversions. However, formatting allows us to
        combine many steps into a single operation. It’s powerful enough to
        warrant a few more examples:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e18544"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>exclamation = "Ni"</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>"The knights who say %s!" % exclamation</code></strong>
'The knights who say Ni!'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>"%d %s %d you" % (1, 'spam', 4)</code></strong>
'1 spam 4 you'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>"%s -- %s -- %s" % (42, 3.14159, [1, 2, 3])</code></strong>
'42 -- 3.14159 -- [1, 2, 3]'</pre>
<p>The first example here plugs the string <code class="epub__literal">"Ni"</code> into the target on the left, replacing
        the <code class="epub__literal">%s</code> marker. In the second
        example, three values are inserted into the target string. Note that
        when you’re inserting more than one value, you need to group the
        values on the right in parentheses (i.e., put them in a tuple). The
        <code class="epub__literal">%</code> formatting expression operator
        expects either a single item or a tuple of one or more items on its
        right side.</p>
<p>The third example again inserts three values—an integer, a
        floating-point object, and a list object—but notice that all of the
        targets on the left are <code class="epub__literal">%s</code>, which
        stands for conversion to string. As every type of object can be
        converted to a string (the one used when printing), every object type
        works with the <code class="epub__literal">%s</code> conversion code.
        Because of this, unless you will be doing some special formatting,
        <code class="epub__literal">%s</code> is often the only code you need
        to remember for the formatting expression.</p>
<p>Again, keep in mind that formatting always makes a new string,
        rather than changing the string on the left; because strings are
        immutable, it must work this way. As before, assign the result to a
        variable name if you need to retain it.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Advanced String Formatting Expressions"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="advanced_string_formatting_expressions"></a>Advanced String Formatting Expressions</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>For more <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18588"></a>advanced type-specific formatting, you can use any of
          the conversion type codes listed in Table 7-4 in formatting expressions;
          they appear after the <code class="epub__literal">%</code> character
          in substitution targets. C programmers will recognize most of these
          because Python string formatting supports all the usual C <code class="epub__literal">printf</code> format codes (but returns the
          result, instead of displaying it, like <code class="epub__literal">printf</code>). Some of the format codes in the
          table provide alternative ways to format the same type; for
          instance, <code class="epub__literal">%e</code>, <code class="epub__literal">%f</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">%g</code> provide alternative ways to format
          floating-point <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18615"></a>numbers.</p><div class="epub__table"><a id="string_formatting_type_codes"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Table 7-4. String formatting type codes</p><div class="epub__table-contents">
<table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; " summary="String formatting type codes">
<colgroup><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Code</p></th><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Meaning</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">s</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>String (or any
                  object’s <code class="epub__literal">str(X)</code>
                  string)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">r</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">s</code>, but uses <code class="epub__literal">repr</code>, not <code class="epub__literal">str</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">c</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Character</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">d</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Decimal
                  (integer)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">i</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Integer</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">u</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Same as <code class="epub__literal">d</code> (obsolete: no longer
                  unsigned)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">o</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Octal
                  integer</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">x</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Hex
                  integer</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">X</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">x</code>, but prints
                  uppercase</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">e</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Floating-point
                  exponent, lowercase</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">E</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Same as <code class="epub__literal">e</code>, but prints
                  uppercase</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">f</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Floating-point
                  decimal</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">F</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Floating-point
                  decimal</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">g</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Floating-point
                  <code class="epub__literal">e</code> or <code class="epub__literal">f</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">G</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Floating-point
                  <code class="epub__literal">E</code> or <code class="epub__literal">F</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">%</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Literal <code class="epub__literal">%</code></p></td></tr></tbody>
</table>
</div>
</div>
<p>In fact, conversion targets in the format string on the
          expression’s left side support a variety of conversion operations
          with a fairly sophisticated syntax all their own. The general
          structure of conversion targets looks like this:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e18797"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">%[(<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>name</code></em>)][<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>flags</code></em>][<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>width</code></em>][.<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>precision</code></em>]<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>typecode</code></em></pre>
<p>The character type codes in Table 7-4 show up at the end of the
          target string. Between the <code class="epub__literal">%</code> and
          the character code, you can do any of the following: provide a
          dictionary key; list flags that specify things like left
          justification (<code class="epub__literal">−</code>), numeric sign
          (<code class="epub__literal">+</code>), and zero fills (<code class="epub__literal">0</code>); give a total minimum field width and
          the number of digits after a decimal point; and more. Both
          <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>width</code></em> and
          <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>precision</code></em> can also be coded as a <code class="epub__literal">*</code> to specify that they should take their
          values from the next item in the input values.</p>
<p>Formatting target syntax is documented in full in the Python
          standard manuals, but to demonstrate common usage, let’s look at a
          few examples. This one formats integers by default, and then in a
          six-character field with left justification and zero padding:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e18841"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = 1234</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res = "integers: ...%d...%−6d...%06d" % (x, x, x)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res</code></strong>
'integers: ...1234...1234  ...001234'</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">%e</code>, <code class="epub__literal">%f</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">%g</code> formats display floating-point numbers
          in different ways, as the following interaction demonstrates
          (<code class="epub__literal">%E</code> is the same as <code class="epub__literal">%e</code> but the exponent is uppercase):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e18869"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = 1.23456789</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x</code></strong>
1.2345678899999999

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'%e | %f | %g' % (x, x, x)</code></strong>
'1.234568e+00 | 1.234568 | 1.23457'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'%E' % x</code></strong>
'1.234568E+00'</pre>
<p>For floating-point numbers, you can achieve a variety of
          additional formatting effects by specifying left justification, zero
          padding, numeric signs, field width, and digits after the decimal
          point. For simpler tasks, you might get by with simply converting to
          strings with a format expression or the <code class="epub__literal">str</code> built-in function shown
          earlier:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e18889"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'%−6.2f | %05.2f | %+06.1f' % (x, x, x)</code></strong>
'1.23   | 01.23 | +001.2'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>"%s" % x, str(x)</code></strong>
('1.23456789', '1.23456789')</pre>
<p>When sizes are not known until runtime, you can have the width
          and precision computed by specifying them with a <code class="epub__literal">*</code> in the format string to force their
          values to be taken from the next item in the inputs to the right of
          the <code class="epub__literal">%</code> operator—the 4 in the tuple
          here gives precision:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e18905"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'%f, %.2f, %.*f' % (1/3.0, 1/3.0, 4, 1/3.0)</code></strong>
'0.333333, 0.33, 0.3333'</pre>
<p>If you’re interested in this feature, experiment with some of
          these examples and operations on your own for more
          information.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Dictionary-Based String Formatting Expressions"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="dictionary-based_string_formatting_expr"></a>Dictionary-Based String Formatting Expressions</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>String <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e18917"></a>formatting also allows conversion targets on the left
          to refer to the keys in a dictionary on the right and fetch the
          corresponding values. I haven’t told you much about dictionaries
          yet, so here’s an example that demonstrates the basics:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e18923"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>"%(n)d %(x)s" % {"n":1, "x":"spam"}</code></strong>
'1 spam'</pre>
<p>Here, the <code class="epub__literal">(n)</code> and <code class="epub__literal">(x)</code> in the format string refer to keys in
          the dictionary literal on the right and fetch their associated
          values. Programs that generate text such as HTML or XML often use
          this technique—you can build up a dictionary of values and
          substitute them all at once with a single formatting expression that
          uses key-based references:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e18936"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>reply = """</code></strong>                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Template with substitution targets</span></em>
<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Greetings...</code></strong>
<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Hello %(name)s!</code></strong>
<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Your age squared is %(age)s</code></strong>
<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>"""</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>values = {'name': 'Bob', 'age': 40}</code></strong>       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Build up values to substitute</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(reply % values)</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Perform substitutions</span></em>

Greetings...
Hello Bob!
Your age squared is 40</pre>
<p><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19922"></a>This trick is also used in conjunction with the
          <code class="epub__literal">vars</code> built-in function, which
          returns a dictionary containing all the variables that exist in the
          place it is called:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e18974"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>food = 'spam'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>age = 40</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>vars()</code></strong>
{'food': 'spam', 'age': 40, <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...many more...</code></em> }</pre>
<p>When used on the right of a format operation, this allows the
          format string to refer to variables by name (i.e., by dictionary
          key):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e18990"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>"%(age)d %(food)s" % vars()</code></strong>
'40 spam'</pre>
<p>We’ll study dictionaries in more depth in Chapter 8. See also Chapter 5 for examples that convert to hexadecimal
          and octal number strings with the <code class="epub__literal">%x</code> and <code class="epub__literal">%o</code> formatting target <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19007"></a>codes.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="String Formatting Method Calls"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
