<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>General Type Categories</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="general_type_categories"></a>General Type Categories</h1>
<p>Now <a id="ch07objtypecat"></a>that we’ve explored the first of Python’s collection
        objects, the string, let’s pause to define a few general type concepts
        that will apply to most of the types we look at from here on. With
        regard to built-in types, it turns out that operations work the same
        for all the types in the same category, so we’ll only need to define
        most of these ideas once. We’ve only examined numbers and strings so
        far, but because they are representative of two of the three major
        type categories in Python, you already know more about several other
        types than you might think.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Types Share Operation Sets by Categories"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="types_share_operation_sets_by_categorie"></a>Types Share Operation Sets by Categories</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As you’ve learned, <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19923"></a>strings are immutable sequences: they cannot be
          changed in-place (the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>immutable</em></span> part), and they
          are positionally ordered collections that are accessed by offset
          (the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>sequence</em></span> part). Now, it so happens that
          all the sequences we’ll study in this part of the book respond to
          the same sequence operations shown in this chapter at work on
          strings—concatenation, indexing, iteration, and so on. More
          formally, there are three major type (and operation) categories in
          Python:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Numbers (integer, floating-point, decimal, fraction,
              others)</span></dt><dd>
<p>Support addition, multiplication, etc.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Sequences (strings, lists, tuples)</span></dt><dd>
<p>Support indexing, slicing, concatenation, etc.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Mappings (dictionaries)</span></dt><dd>
<p>Support indexing by key, etc.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Sets are something of a category unto themselves (they don’t
          map keys to values and are not positionally ordered sequences), and
          we haven’t yet explored mappings on our in-depth tour (dictionaries
          are discussed in the next chapter). However, many of the other types
          we will encounter will be similar to numbers and strings. For
          example, for any sequence objects <code class="epub__literal">X</code> and <code class="epub__literal">Y</code>:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">X + Y</code> makes a new
              sequence object with the contents of both operands.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">X * N</code> makes a new
              sequence object with <code class="epub__literal">N</code> copies
              of the sequence operand <code class="epub__literal">X</code>.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>In other words, these operations work the same way on any kind
          of sequence, including strings, lists, tuples, and some user-defined
          object types. The only difference is that the new result object you
          get back is of the same type as the operands <code class="epub__literal">X</code> and <code class="epub__literal">Y</code>—if you concatenate lists, you get back a
          new list, not a string. Indexing, slicing, and other sequence
          operations work the same on all sequences, too; the type of the
          objects being processed tells Python which flavor of the task to
          perform.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Mutable Types Can Be Changed In-Place"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="mutable_types_can_be_changed_in-place"></a>Mutable Types Can Be Changed In-Place</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The immutable <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e19992"></a>classification is an important constraint to be aware
          of, yet it tends to trip up new users. If an object type is
          immutable, you cannot change its value in-place; Python raises an
          error if you try. Instead, you must run code to make a new object
          containing the new value. The major core types in Python break down
          as follows:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Immutables (numbers, strings, tuples, frozensets)</span></dt><dd>
<p>None of the object types in the immutable category
                support in-place changes, though we can always run expressions
                to make new objects and assign their results to variables as
                needed.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Mutables (lists, dictionaries, sets, bytearray)</span></dt><dd>
<p>Conversely, the mutable types can always be changed
                in-place with operations that do not create new objects.
                Although such objects can be copied, in-place changes support
                direct modification.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Generally, immutable types give some degree of integrity by
          guaranteeing that an object won’t be changed by another part of a
          program. For a refresher on why this matters, see the discussion of
          shared object references in Chapter 6. To see how lists,
          dictionaries, and tuples participate in type categories, we need to
          move ahead to the next chapter.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Chapter Summary"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
