<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="chapter_summary-id6"></a>Chapter Summary</h1>
<p>In this chapter, we took an in-depth tour of the string object
        type. We learned about coding string literals, and we explored string
        operations, including sequence expressions, string method calls, and
        string formatting with both expressions and method calls. Along the
        way, we studied a variety of concepts in depth, such as slicing,
        method call syntax, and triple-quoted block strings. We also defined
        some core ideas common to a variety of types: sequences, for example,
        share an entire set of operations.</p>
<p>In the next chapter, we’ll continue our types tour with a look
        at the most general object collections in Python—lists and
        dictionaries. As you’ll find, much of what you’ve learned here will
        apply to those types as well. And as mentioned earlier, in the final
        part of this book we’ll return to Python’s string model to flesh out
        the details of Unicode text and binary data, which are of interest to
        some, but not all, Python programmers. Before moving on, though,
        here’s another chapter quiz to review the material covered <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e20022"></a>here.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Test Your Knowledge: Quiz"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
