<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_answers-id6"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</h1>
<div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>No, because methods are always type-specific; that is, they
            only work on a single data type. Expressions like <code class="epub__literal">X+Y</code> and built-in functions like <code class="epub__literal">len(X)</code> are generic, though, and may work
            on a variety of types. In this case, for instance, the <code class="epub__literal">in</code> membership expression has a similar
            effect as the string <code class="epub__literal">find</code>, but
            it can be used to search both strings and lists. In Python 3.0,
            there is some attempt to group methods by categories (for example,
            the mutable sequence types <code class="epub__literal">list</code>
            and <code class="epub__literal">bytearray</code> have similar
            method sets), but methods are still more type-specific than other
            operation sets.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Yes. Unlike methods, expressions are generic and apply to
            many types. In this case, the slice expression is really a
            sequence operation—it works on any type of sequence object,
            including strings, lists, and tuples. The only difference is that
            when you slice a list, you get back a new list.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The built-in <code class="epub__literal">ord(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>S</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code> function converts from a one-character
            string to an integer character code; <code class="epub__literal">chr(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>I</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code> converts from the integer code back to
            a string.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Strings cannot be changed; they are immutable. However, you
            can achieve a similar effect by creating a new string—by
            concatenating, slicing, running formatting expressions, or using a
            method call like <code class="epub__literal">replace</code>—and
            then assigning the result back to the original variable
            name.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>You can slice the string using <code class="epub__literal">S[2:4]</code>, or split on the comma and index
            the string using <code class="epub__literal">S.split(',')[1]</code>. Try these interactively
            to see for yourself.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Six. The string <code class="epub__literal">"a\nb\x1f\000d"</code> contains the bytes
            <code class="epub__literal">a</code>, newline (<code class="epub__literal">\n</code>), <code class="epub__literal">b</code>, binary <code class="epub__literal">31</code> (a hex escape <code class="epub__literal">\x1f</code>), binary <code class="epub__literal">0</code> (an octal escape <code class="epub__literal">\000</code>), and <code class="epub__literal">d</code>. Pass the string to the built-in
            <code class="epub__literal">len</code> function to verify this,
            and print each of its character’s <code class="epub__literal">ord</code> results to see the actual byte
            values. See Table 7-2 for
            more details.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>You should never use the <code class="epub__literal">string</code> module instead of string object
            method calls today—it’s
            deprecated, and its calls are removed completely in Python 3.0.
            The only reason for using the <code class="epub__literal">string</code> module at all is for its other
            tools, such as predefined constants. You might also see it appear
            in what is now very old and dusty Python code.</p></li></ol>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[17] </sup>If you need to care about binary data files, the chief
              distinction is that you open them in binary mode (using open
              mode flags with a <code class="epub__literal">b</code>, such as
              <code class="epub__literal">'rb'</code>, <code class="epub__literal">'wb'</code>, and so on). In Python 3.0,
              binary file content is a <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> string, with an interface
              similar to that of normal strings; in 2.6, such content is a
              normal <code class="epub__literal">str</code> string. See also
              the standard <code class="epub__literal">struct</code> module
              introduced in Chapter 9, which can
              parse binary data loaded from a file, and the extended coverage
              of binary files and byte strings in Chapter 36.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[18] </sup>In classes, I’ve met people who have indeed committed most
              or all of this table to memory; I’d probably think that was
              really sick, but for the fact that I’m a member of the set,
              too.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[19] </sup>Unlike with C character arrays, you don’t need to allocate
              or manage storage arrays when using Python strings; you can
              simply create string objects as needed and let Python manage the
              underlying memory space. As discussed in Chapter 6, Python reclaims
              unused objects’ memory space automatically, using a
              reference-count garbage-collection strategy. Each object keeps
              track of the number of names, data structures, etc., that
              reference it; when the count reaches zero, Python frees the
              object’s space. This scheme means Python doesn’t have to stop
              and scan all the memory to find unused space to free (an
              additional garbage component also collects cyclic
              objects).</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[20] </sup>More mathematically minded readers (and students in my
              classes) sometimes detect a small asymmetry here: the leftmost
              item is at offset 0, but the rightmost is at offset –1. Alas,
              there is no such thing as a distinct –0 value in Python.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
