<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Lists</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="lists-id1"></a>Lists</h1>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e20191"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e20196"></a>next stop on our built-in object tour is the Python
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>list</em></span>. Lists are Python’s most flexible ordered
        collection object type. Unlike strings, lists can contain any sort of
        object: numbers, strings, and
        even other lists. Also, unlike strings, lists may be changed in-place
        by assignment to offsets and slices, list method calls, deletion
        statements, and more—they are <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e20206"></a><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>mutable</em></span> objects.</p>
<p>Python lists do the work of most of the collection data
        structures you might have to implement manually in lower-level
        languages such as C. Here is a quick look at their main properties.
        Python lists are:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Ordered collections of arbitrary objects</span></dt><dd>
<p>From a functional view, lists are just places to collect
              other objects so you can treat them as groups. Lists also
              maintain a left-to-right positional ordering among the items
              they contain (i.e., they are sequences).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Accessed by offset</span></dt><dd>
<p>Just as with strings, you can fetch a component object out
              of a list by indexing the list on the object’s offset. Because
              items in lists are ordered by their positions, you can also do
              tasks such as slicing and concatenation.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Variable-length, heterogeneous, and arbitrarily
            nestable</span></dt><dd>
<p>Unlike strings, lists can grow and shrink in-place (their
              lengths can vary), and they can contain any sort of object, not
              just one-character strings (they’re heterogeneous). Because lists can
              contain other complex objects, they also support arbitrary
              nesting; you can create lists of lists of lists, and so
              on.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Of the category “mutable sequence”</span></dt><dd>
<p>In terms of our type category qualifiers, lists are
              mutable (i.e., can be changed in-place) and can respond to all
              the sequence operations used with strings, such as indexing,
              slicing, and concatenation. In fact, sequence operations work
              the same on lists as they do on strings; the only difference is
              that sequence operations such as concatenation and slicing
              return new lists instead of new strings when applied to lists.
              Because lists are mutable, however, they also support other
              operations that strings don’t (such as deletion and index
              assignment operations, which change the lists in-place).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Arrays of object references</span></dt><dd>
<p>Technically, Python lists contain zero or more references
              to other objects. Lists might remind you of arrays of pointers
              (addresses) if you have a background in some other languages.
              Fetching an item from a Python list is about as fast as indexing
              a C array; in fact, lists really are arrays inside the standard
              Python interpreter, not linked structures. As we learned in
              Chapter 6, though, Python
              always follows a reference to an object whenever the reference
              is used, so your program deals only with objects. Whenever you
              assign an object to a data structure component or variable name,
              Python always stores a reference to that same object, not a copy
              of it (unless you request a copy explicitly).</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Table 8-1
        summarizes common and representative list object operations. As usual,
        for the full story see the Python standard library manual, or run a
        <code class="epub__literal">help(list)</code> or <code class="epub__literal">dir(list)</code> call interactively for a complete
        list of list methods—you can pass in a real list, or the word <code class="epub__literal">list</code>, which is the name of the list data
        <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e20263"></a>type.</p><div class="epub__table"><a id="common_list_literals_and_operations"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Table 8-1. Common list literals and operations</p><div class="epub__table-contents">
<table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; " summary="Common list literals and operations">
<colgroup><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Operation</p></th><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Interpretation</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">L = []</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>An empty
                list</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">L = [0, 1, 2, 3]</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Four items: indexes
                0..3</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">L = ['abc', ['def',
                'ghi']]</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Nested
                sublists</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">L = list('spam')</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">L = list(range(-4,
                4))</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Lists of an iterable’s
                items, list of successive integers</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">L[i]</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">L[i][j]</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">L[i:j]</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">len(L)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Index, index of index,
                slice, length</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">L1 + L2</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">L * 3</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Concatenate,
                repeat</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">for x in L: print(x)</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">3 in L</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Iteration,
                membership</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">L.append(4)</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">L.extend([5,6,7])</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">L.insert(I,
                X)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Methods:
                growing</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">L.index(1)</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">L.count(X)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Methods:
                searching</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">L.sort()</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">L.reverse()</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Methods: sorting,
                reversing, etc.</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">del L[k]</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">del L[i:j]</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">L.pop()</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">L.remove(2)</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">L[i:j] = []</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Methods, statement:
                shrinking</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">L[i] = 1</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">L[i:j] = [4,5,6]</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Index assignment, slice
                assignment</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">L = [x**2 for x in range(5)]</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">list(map(ord,
                'spam'))</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>List comprehensions and
                maps (Chapters 14, 20)</p></td></tr></tbody>
</table>
</div>
</div>
<p>When written down as a literal expression, a <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e20459"></a>list is coded as a series of objects (really,
        expressions that return objects) in <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e20465"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e20470"></a>square brackets, separated by commas. For instance, the
        second row in Table 8-1
        assigns the variable <code class="epub__literal">L</code> to a
        four-item list. A nested list is coded as a nested square-bracketed
        series (row 3), and the empty list is just a square-bracket pair with
        nothing inside (row 1).<sup>[21]</sup></p>
<p>Many of the operations in Table 8-1 should look familiar,
        as they are the same sequence operations we put to work on
        strings—indexing, concatenation, iteration, and so on. Lists also
        respond to list-specific method calls (which provide utilities such as
        sorting, reversing, adding items to the end, etc.), as well as
        in-place change operations (deleting items, assignment to indexes and
        slices, and so forth). Lists have these tools for change operations
        because they are a mutable object type.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Lists in Action"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
