<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Lists in Action</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="lists_in_action"></a>Lists in Action</h1>
<p>Perhaps the best way to understand lists is to see them at work.
        Let’s once again turn to some simple interpreter interactions to
        illustrate the operations in Table 8-1.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Basic List Operations"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="basic_list_operations"></a>Basic List Operations</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Because <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e20500"></a>they are sequences, lists support many of the same
          operations as strings. For example, lists respond to the <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e20507"></a>+</code> and <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e20513"></a>*</code> operators much like strings—they mean
          concatenation and repetition here too, except that the result is a
          new list, not a string:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e20518"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>len([1, 2, 3])</code></strong>                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Length</span></em>
3
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[1, 2, 3] + [4, 5, 6]</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Concatenation</span></em>
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>['Ni!'] * 4</code></strong>                              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Repetition</span></em>
['Ni!', 'Ni!', 'Ni!', 'Ni!']</pre>
<p>Although the <code class="epub__literal">+</code> operator
          works the same for lists and strings, it’s important to know that it
          expects the same sort of sequence on both sides—otherwise, you get a
          type error when the code runs. For instance, you cannot concatenate
          a list and a string unless you first convert the list to a string
          (using tools such as <code class="epub__literal">str</code> or
          <code class="epub__literal">%</code> formatting) or convert the
          string to a list (the <code class="epub__literal">list</code>
          built-in function does the trick):</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e20556"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>str([1, 2]) + "34"</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same as "[1, 2]" + "34"</span></em>
'[1, 2]34'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[1, 2] + list("34")</code></strong>              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same as [1, 2] + ["3", "4"]</span></em>
[1, 2, '3', '4']</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="List Iteration and Comprehensions"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="list_iteration_and_comprehensions"></a>List Iteration and Comprehensions</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>More <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e20575"></a>generally, lists respond to all the sequence
          operations we used on strings in the prior chapter, including
          iteration tools:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e20581"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>3 in [1, 2, 3]</code></strong>                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Membership</span></em>
True
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for x in [1, 2, 3]:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(x, end=' ')</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Iteration</span></em>
...
1 2 3</pre>
<p>We will talk more formally about <code class="epub__literal">for</code> iteration and the <code class="epub__literal">range</code> built-ins in Chapter 13, because they are related to
          statement syntax. In short, <code class="epub__literal">for</code>
          loops step through items in any sequence from left to right,
          executing one or more statements for each item.</p>
<p>The last items in Table 8-1, list
          comprehensions and <code class="epub__literal">map</code> calls, are
          covered in more detail in Chapter 14 and expanded on
          in Chapter 20. Their
          basic operation is straightforward, though—as introduced in Chapter 4, list comprehensions
          are a way to build a new list by applying an expression to each item
          in a sequence, and are close relatives to <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e20628"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res =</code></strong> <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[c * 4 for c in 'SPAM']</code></strong>            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># List comprehensions</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res</code></strong>
['SSSS', 'PPPP', 'AAAA', 'MMMM']</pre>
<p>This expression is functionally equivalent to a <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop that builds up a list of results
          manually, but as we’ll learn in later chapters, list comprehensions
          are simpler to code and faster to run today:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e20647"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res = []</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for c in 'SPAM':</code></strong>                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># List comprehension equivalent</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res.append(c * 4)</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res</code></strong>
['SSSS', 'PPPP', 'AAAA', 'MMMM']</pre>
<p>As also introduced in Chapter 4, the <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e20669"></a>map</code> built-in function does similar work, but
          applies a function to items in a sequence and collects all the
          results in a new list:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e20674"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(map(abs, [−1, −2, 0, 1, 2]))</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># map function across sequence</span></em>
[1, 2, 0, 1, 2]</pre>
<p>Because we’re not quite ready for the full iteration story,
          we’ll postpone further details for now, but watch for a similar
          comprehension expression for dictionaries later in this
          chapter.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Indexing, Slicing, and Matrixes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="indexing_comma_slicing_comma_and_matrix"></a>Indexing, Slicing, and Matrixes</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Because<a id="I_indexterm5_d1e20689"></a> lists are sequences, indexing and slicing work the
          same way for lists as they do for strings. However, the result of
          indexing a list is whatever type of object lives at the offset you
          specify, while slicing a list always returns a new list:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e20695"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = ['spam', 'Spam', 'SPAM!']</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L[2]</code></strong>                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Offsets start at zero</span></em>
'SPAM!'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L[−2]</code></strong>                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Negative: count from the right</span></em>
'Spam'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L[1:]</code></strong>                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Slicing fetches sections</span></em>
['Spam', 'SPAM!']</pre>
<p>One note here: because you can nest lists and other object
          types within lists, you will sometimes need to string together index
          operations to go deeper into a data structure. For example, one of
          the simplest ways to represent matrixes (multidimensional arrays) in
          Python is as lists with nested sublists. Here’s a basic 3 × 3
          two-dimensional list-based array:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e20721"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>matrix = [[1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6], [7, 8, 9]]</code></strong></pre>
<p>With one index, you get an entire row (really, a nested
          sublist), and with two, you get an item within the row:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e20727"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>matrix[1]</code></strong>
[4, 5, 6]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>matrix[1][1]</code></strong>
5
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>matrix[2][0]</code></strong>
7
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>matrix = [[1, 2, 3],</code></strong>
...           <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[4, 5, 6],</code></strong>
...           <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[7, 8, 9]]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>matrix[1][1]</code></strong>
5</pre>
<p>Notice in the preceding interaction that lists can naturally
          span multiple lines if you want them to because they are contained
          by a pair of brackets (more on syntax in the next part of the book).
          Later in this chapter, you’ll also see a dictionary-based matrix
          representation. For high-powered numeric work, the NumPy extension
          mentioned in Chapter 5 provides other ways to
          handle matrixes.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Changing Lists In-Place"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="changing_lists_in-place"></a>Changing Lists In-Place</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Because <a id="ch08listschnginplc"></a>lists are mutable, they support operations that change
          a list object <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>in-place</em></span>. That is, the operations
          in this section all modify the list object directly, without
          requiring that you make a new copy, as you had to for strings.
          Because Python deals only in object references, this distinction
          between changing an object in-place and creating a new object
          matters—as discussed in Chapter 6, if you change an object
          in-place, you might impact more than one reference to it at the same
          time.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Index and slice assignments"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="index_and_slice_assignments"></a>Index and slice assignments</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>When using a <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e20776"></a>list, you can change its contents by assigning to
            either a particular item (offset) or an entire section
            (slice):</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e20784"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = ['spam', 'Spam', 'SPAM!']</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L[1] = 'eggs'</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Index assignment</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
['spam', 'eggs', 'SPAM!']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L[0:2] = ['eat', 'more']</code></strong>      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Slice assignment: delete+insert</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Replaces items 0,1</span></em>
['eat', 'more', 'SPAM!']</pre>
<p>Both index and slice assignments are in-place changes—they
            modify the subject list directly, rather than generating a new
            list object for the result. Index assignment in Python works much
            as it does in C and most other languages: Python replaces the
            object reference at the designated offset with a new one.</p>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e20815"></a>Slice assignment</em></span>, the last operation in
            the preceding example, replaces an entire section of a list in a
            single step. Because it can be a bit complex, it is perhaps best
            thought of as a combination of two steps:</p><div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Deletion</em></span>. The slice you specify to
                the left of the <code class="epub__literal">=</code> is
                deleted.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Insertion</em></span>. The new items contained
                in the object to the right of the <code class="epub__literal">=</code> are inserted into the list on the
                left, at the place where the old slice was deleted.<sup>[22]</sup></p></li></ol>
</div>
<p>This isn’t what really happens, but it tends to help clarify
            why the number of items inserted doesn’t have to match the number
            of items deleted. For instance, given a list <code class="epub__literal">L</code> that has the value <code class="epub__literal">[1,2,3]</code>, the assignment <code class="epub__literal">L[1:2]=[4,5]</code> sets <code class="epub__literal">L</code> to the list <code class="epub__literal">[1,4,5,3]</code>. Python first deletes the
            <code class="epub__literal">2</code> (a one-item slice), then
            inserts the <code class="epub__literal">4</code> and <code class="epub__literal">5</code> where the deleted <code class="epub__literal">2</code> used to be. This also explains why
            <code class="epub__literal">L[1:2]=[]</code> is really a deletion
            operation—Python deletes the slice (the item at offset 1), and
            then inserts nothing.</p>
<p>In effect, slice assignment replaces an entire section, or
            “column,” all at once. Because the length of the sequence being
            assigned does not have to match the length of the slice being
            assigned to, slice assignment can be used to replace (by
            overwriting), expand (by inserting), or shrink (by deleting) the
            subject list. It’s a powerful operation, but frankly, one that you
            may not see very often in practice. There are usually more
            straightforward ways to replace, insert, and delete (concatenation
            and the <code class="epub__literal">insert</code>, <code class="epub__literal">pop</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">remove</code> list methods, for example), which
            Python programmers tend to prefer in practice.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="List method calls"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="list_method_calls"></a>List method calls</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Like <a id="ch08listschngplacelmethcalls"></a>strings, Python list objects also support
            type-specific method calls, many of which change the subject list
            in-place:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e20901"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L.append('please')</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Append method call: add item at end</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
['eat', 'more', 'SPAM!', 'please']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L.sort()</code></strong>                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Sort list items ('S' &lt; 'e')</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
['SPAM!', 'eat', 'more', 'please']</pre>
<p>Methods <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e20924"></a>were introduced in Chapter 7.
            In brief, they are functions (really, attributes that reference
            functions) that are associated with particular objects. Methods
            provide type-specific tools; the list methods presented here, for
            instance, are generally available only for lists.</p>
<p>Perhaps the most commonly used list method is <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e20933"></a>append</code>, which simply tacks a single item
            (object reference) onto the end of the list. Unlike concatenation,
            <code class="epub__literal">append</code> expects you to pass in a
            single object, not a list. The effect of <code class="epub__literal">L.append(X)</code> is similar to <code class="epub__literal">L+[X]</code>, but while the former changes
            <code class="epub__literal">L</code> in-place, the latter makes a
            new list.<sup>[23]</sup></p>
<p>Another commonly seen method, <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e20985"></a>sort</code>, orders a list in-place; it uses
            Python standard comparison tests (here, string comparisons), and
            by default sorts in ascending order. You can modify sort behavior
            by passing in <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e20991"></a>keyword arguments</em></span>—a special “name=value”
            syntax in function calls that specifies passing by name and is
            often used for giving configuration options. In sorts, the
            <code class="epub__literal">key</code> argument gives a
            one-argument function that returns the value to be used in
            sorting, and the <code class="epub__literal">reverse</code>
            argument allows sorts to be made in descending instead of
            ascending order:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e21002"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = ['abc', 'ABD', 'aBe']</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L.sort()</code></strong>                                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Sort with mixed case</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
['ABD', 'aBe', 'abc']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = ['abc', 'ABD', 'aBe']</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L.sort(key=str.lower)</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Normalize to lowercase</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
['abc', 'ABD', 'aBe']
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = ['abc', 'ABD', 'aBe']</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L.sort(key=str.lower, reverse=True)</code></strong>     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Change sort order</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
['aBe', 'ABD', 'abc']</pre>
<p>The sort <code class="epub__literal">key</code> argument
            might also be useful when sorting lists of dictionaries, to pick
            out a sort key by indexing each dictionary. We’ll study
            dictionaries later in this chapter, and you’ll learn more about
            keyword function arguments in Part IV.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Comparison and sorts in 3.0</em></span>:
              <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21054"></a>In Python 2.6 and earlier, <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21060"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21063"></a>comparisons of differently typed objects (e.g., a
              string and a list) work—the language defines a fixed ordering
              among different types, which is deterministic, if not
              aesthetically pleasing. That is, the ordering is based on the
              names of the types involved: all integers are less than all
              strings, for example, because <code class="epub__literal">"int"</code> is less than <code class="epub__literal">"str"</code>. Comparisons never automatically
              convert types, except when comparing numeric type
              objects.</p>
<p>In Python 3.0, this has changed: comparison of mixed types
              raises an exception instead of falling back on the fixed
              cross-type ordering. Because sorting uses comparisons
              internally, this means that <code class="epub__literal">[1, 2,
              'spam'].sort()</code> succeeds in Python 2.X but will raise
              an exception in Python 3.0 and later.</p>
<p>Python 3.0 also no longer supports passing in an arbitrary
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>comparison function</em></span> to sorts, to implement
              different orderings. The suggested workaround is to use the
              <code class="epub__literal">key=</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>func</code></em>
              keyword argument to code value transformations during the sort,
              and use the <code class="epub__literal">reverse=True</code>
              keyword argument to change the sort order to descending. These
              were the typical uses of comparison functions in the
              past.</p>
</div>
<p>One warning here: beware that <code class="epub__literal">append</code> and <code class="epub__literal">sort</code> change the associated list object
            in-place, but don’t return the list as a result (technically, they
            both return a value called <code class="epub__literal">None</code>). If you say something like
            <code class="epub__literal">L=L.append(X)</code>, you won’t get
            the modified value of <code class="epub__literal">L</code> (in
            fact, you’ll lose the reference to the list altogether!). When you
            use attributes such as <code class="epub__literal">append</code>
            and <code class="epub__literal">sort</code>, objects are changed
            as a side effect, so there’s no reason to reassign.</p>
<p>Partly because of such constraints, sorting is also
            available in recent Pythons as a built-in function, which sorts
            any collection (not just lists) and returns a new list for the
            result (instead of in-place changes):</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e21118"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = ['abc', 'ABD', 'aBe']</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sorted(L, key=str.lower, reverse=True)</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Sorting built-in</span></em>
['aBe', 'ABD', 'abc']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = ['abc', 'ABD', 'aBe']</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sorted([x.lower() for x in L], reverse=True)</code></strong>    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Pretransform items: differs!</span></em>
['abe', 'abd', 'abc']</pre>
<p>Notice the last example here—we can convert to lowercase
            prior to the sort with a list comprehension, but the result does
            not contain the original list’s values as it does with the
            <code class="epub__literal">key</code> argument. The latter is
            applied temporarily during the sort, instead of changing the
            values to be sorted. As we move along, we’ll see contexts in which
            the <code class="epub__literal">sorted</code> built-in can
            sometimes be more useful than the <code class="epub__literal">sort</code> method.</p>
<p>Like strings, lists have other methods that perform other
            specialized operations. For instance, <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21153"></a>reverse</code> reverses the list in-place, and
            the <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21159"></a>extend</code> and <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21165"></a>pop</code> methods insert multiple items at the
            end of and delete an item from the end of the list, respectively.
            There is also a <code class="epub__literal">reversed</code>
            built-in function that works much like <code class="epub__literal">sorted</code>, but it must be wrapped in a
            <code class="epub__literal">list</code> call because it’s an
            iterator (more on iterators later):</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e21180"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = [1, 2]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L.extend([3,4,5])</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Add many items at end</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L.pop()</code></strong>                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Delete and return last item</span></em>
5
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
[1, 2, 3, 4]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L.reverse()</code></strong>                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># In-place reversal method</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
[4, 3, 2, 1]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(reversed(L))</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Reversal built-in with a result</span></em>
[1, 2, 3, 4]</pre>
<p>In some types of programs, the list <code class="epub__literal">pop</code> method used here is often used in
            conjunction with <code class="epub__literal">append</code> to
            implement a quick last-in-first-out (LIFO)
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>stack</em></span> structure. The end of the list serves
            as the top of the stack:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e21231"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = []</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L.append(1)</code></strong>                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Push onto stack</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L.append(2)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
[1, 2]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L.pop()</code></strong>                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Pop off stack</span></em>
2
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
[1]</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">pop</code> method also
            accepts an optional offset of the item to be deleted and returned
            (the default is the last item). Other list methods remove an item
            by value (<code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21264"></a>remove</code>), insert an item at an offset
            (<code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21270"></a>insert</code>), search for an item’s offset
            (<code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21276"></a>index</code>), and more:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e21281"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = ['spam', 'eggs', 'ham']</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L.index('eggs')</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Index of an object</span></em>
1
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L.insert(1, 'toast')</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Insert at position</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
['spam', 'toast', 'eggs', 'ham']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L.remove('eggs')</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Delete by value</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
['spam', 'toast', 'ham']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L.pop(1)</code></strong>                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Delete by position</span></em>
'toast'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
['spam', 'ham']</pre>
<p>See other documentation sources or experiment with these
            calls interactively on your own to learn more about list
            <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21323"></a>methods.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Other common list operations"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="other_common_list_operations"></a>Other common list operations</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Because <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21331"></a>lists are mutable, you can use the <code class="epub__literal">del</code> statement to delete an item or
            section in-place:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e21342"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
['SPAM!', 'eat', 'more', 'please']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>del L[0]</code></strong>                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Delete one item</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
['eat', 'more', 'please']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>del L[1:]</code></strong>                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Delete an entire section</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>                                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same as L[1:] = []</span></em>
['eat']</pre>
<p>Because slice assignment is a deletion plus an insertion,
            you can also delete a section of a list by assigning an empty list
            to a slice (<code class="epub__literal">L[i:j]=[]</code>); Python
            deletes the slice named on the left, and then inserts nothing.
            Assigning an empty list to an index, on the other hand, just
            stores a reference to the empty list in the specified slot, rather
            than deleting it:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e21374"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = ['Already', 'got', 'one']</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L[1:] = []</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
['Already']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L[0] = []</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
[[]]</pre>
<p>Although all the operations just discussed are typical,
            there are additional list methods and operations not illustrated
            here (including methods for inserting and searching). For a
            comprehensive and up-to-date list of type tools, you should always
            consult Python’s manuals,
            Python’s <code class="epub__literal">dir</code> and <code class="epub__literal">help</code> functions (which we first met in
            Chapter 4), or one of the
            reference texts mentioned in the Preface.</p>
<p>I’d also like to remind you one more time that all the
            in-place change operations discussed here work only for mutable
            objects: they won’t work on strings (or tuples, discussed in Chapter 9), no matter
            how hard you try. Mutability is an inherent property of each
            object <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21408"></a>type.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Dictionaries"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
