<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Dictionaries</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="dictionaries-id1"></a>Dictionaries</h1>
<p>Apart <a id="ch08builtinobjtypesdict"></a>from lists, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="ch08dict"></a>dictionaries</em></span> are perhaps the most flexible
        built-in data type in Python. If you think of lists as ordered
        collections of objects, you can think of dictionaries as unordered
        collections; the chief distinction is that in dictionaries, items are
        stored and fetched by <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>key</em></span>, instead of by
        positional offset.</p>
<p>Being a built-in type, dictionaries can replace many of the
        searching algorithms and data structures you might have to implement
        manually in lower-level languages—indexing a dictionary is a very fast
        search operation. Dictionaries also sometimes do the work of records
        and symbol tables used in other languages, can represent sparse
        (mostly empty) data structures, and much more. Here’s a rundown of
        their main properties. Python dictionaries are:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Accessed by key, not offset</span></dt><dd>
<p>Dictionaries are sometimes called <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21444"></a>associative arrays</em></span> or
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21450"></a>hashes</em></span>. They associate a set of values
              with keys, so you can fetch an item out of a dictionary using
              the key under which you originally stored it. You use the same
              indexing operation to get components in a dictionary as you do
              in a list, but the index takes the form of a key, not a relative
              offset.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Unordered collections of arbitrary objects</span></dt><dd>
<p>Unlike in a list, items stored in a dictionary aren’t kept
              in any particular order; in fact, Python randomizes their
              left-to-right order to provide quick lookup. Keys provide the
              symbolic (not physical) locations of items in a
              dictionary.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Variable-length, heterogeneous, and arbitrarily
            nestable</span></dt><dd>
<p>Like lists, dictionaries can grow and shrink in-place
              (without new copies being made), they can contain objects of any
              type, and they support nesting to any depth (they can contain
              lists, other dictionaries, and so on).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Of the category “mutable mapping”</span></dt><dd>
<p>Dictionaries can be changed in-place by assigning to
              indexes (they are mutable), but they don’t support the sequence
              operations that work on strings and lists. Because dictionaries
              are unordered collections, operations that depend on a fixed
              positional order (e.g., concatenation, slicing) don’t make
              sense. Instead, dictionaries are the only built-in
              representatives of the mapping type category (objects that map
              keys to values).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Tables of object references (hash tables)</span></dt><dd>
<p>If lists <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21479"></a>are arrays of object references that support
              access by position, dictionaries are unordered tables of object
              references that support access by key. Internally, dictionaries
              are implemented as hash tables (data structures that support
              very fast retrieval), which start small and grow on demand.
              Moreover, Python employs optimized hashing algorithms to find
              keys, so retrieval is quick. Like lists, dictionaries store
              object references (not copies).</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Table 8-2
        summarizes some of the most common and representative dictionary
        operations (again, see the library manual or run a <code class="epub__literal">dir(dict)</code> or <code class="epub__literal">help(dict)</code> call for a complete list—<code class="epub__literal">dict</code> is the name of the type). When
        <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21495"></a>coded as a literal expression, a dictionary is written
        as a series of <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>key</code></em><code class="epub__literal">:</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>value</code></em> pairs,
        separated by commas, enclosed in <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21509"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21514"></a>curly braces.<sup>[24]</sup> An empty dictionary is an empty set of braces, and
        dictionaries can be nested by writing one as a value inside another
        dictionary, or <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21530"></a>within a list or tuple.</p><div class="epub__table"><a id="common_dictionary_literals_and_operatio"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Table 8-2. Common dictionary literals and operations</p><div class="epub__table-contents">
<table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; " summary="Common dictionary literals and operations">
<colgroup><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Operation</p></th><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Interpretation</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">D = {}</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Empty
                dictionary</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">D = {'spam': 2, 'eggs':
                3}</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Two-item
                dictionary</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">D = {'food': {'ham': 1, 'egg':
                2}}</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Nesting</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">D = dict(name='Bob', age=40)</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">D = dict(zip(keyslist,
                valslist))</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">D =
                dict.fromkeys(['a', 'b'])</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Alternative
                construction techniques:</p>
<p>keywords, zipped pairs,
                key lists</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">D['eggs']</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">D['food']['ham']</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Indexing by
                key</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">'eggs' in D</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Membership: key present
                test</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">D.keys()</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">D.values()</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">D.items()</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">D.copy()</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">D.get(key, default)</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">D.update(D2)</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">D.pop(key)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Methods: keys,</p>
<p>values,</p>
<p>keys+values,</p>
<p>copies,</p>
<p>defaults,</p>
<p>merge,</p>
<p>delete, etc.</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">len(D)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Length: number of
                stored entries</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">D[key] = 42</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Adding/changing
                keys</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">del D[key]</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Deleting entries by
                key</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">list(D.keys())</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">D1.keys() &amp;
                D2.keys()</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Dictionary views
                (Python 3.0)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">D = {x: x*2 for x in
                range(10)}</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Dictionary
                comprehensions (Python 3.0)</p></td></tr></tbody>
</table>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Dictionaries in Action"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
