<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Dictionaries in Action</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="dictionaries_in_action"></a>Dictionaries in Action</h1>
<p>As Table 8-2
        suggests, dictionaries are indexed by key, and nested dictionary
        entries are referenced by a series of indexes (keys in <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21718"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21723"></a>square brackets). When Python creates a dictionary, it
        stores its items in any left-to-right order it chooses; to fetch a
        value back, you supply the key with which it is associated, not its
        relative position. Let’s go back to the interpreter to get a feel for
        some of the dictionary operations in Table 8-2.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Basic Dictionary Operations"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="basic_dictionary_operations"></a>Basic Dictionary Operations</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In normal <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21736"></a>operation, you create dictionaries with literals and
          store and access items by key with indexing:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e21742"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D = {'spam': 2, 'ham': 1, 'eggs': 3}</code></strong>      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Make a dictionary</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D['spam']</code></strong>                                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Fetch a value by key</span></em>
2
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D</code></strong>                                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Order is scrambled</span></em>
{'eggs': 3, 'ham': 1, 'spam': 2}</pre>
<p>Here, the dictionary is assigned to the variable <code class="epub__literal">D</code>; the value of the key <code class="epub__literal">'spam'</code> is the integer <code class="epub__literal">2</code>, and so on. We use the same square
          bracket syntax to index dictionaries by key as we did to index lists
          by offset, but here it means access by key, not by position.</p>
<p>Notice the end of this example: the left-to-right order of
          keys in a dictionary will almost always be different from what you
          originally typed. This is on purpose: to implement fast key lookup
          (a.k.a. hashing), keys need to be reordered in memory. That’s why
          operations that assume a fixed left-to-right order (e.g., slicing,
          concatenation) do not apply to dictionaries; you can fetch values
          only by key, not by position.</p>
<p>The built-in <code class="epub__literal">len</code> function
          works on dictionaries, too; it returns the number of items stored in
          the dictionary or, equivalently, the length of its keys list. The
          dictionary <code class="epub__literal">in</code> membership operator
          allows you to test for key existence, and the <code class="epub__literal">keys</code> method returns all the keys in the
          dictionary. The latter of these can be useful for processing
          dictionaries sequentially, but you shouldn’t depend on the order of
          the keys list. Because the <code class="epub__literal">keys</code>
          result can be used as a normal list, however, it can always be
          sorted if order matters (more on sorting and dictionaries
          later):</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e21793"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>len(D)</code></strong>                                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Number of entries in dictionary</span></em>
3
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'ham' in D</code></strong>                                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Key membership test alternative</span></em>
True
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(D.keys())</code></strong>                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Create a new list of my keys</span></em>
['eggs', 'ham', 'spam']</pre>
<p>Notice the second expression in this listing. As mentioned
          earlier, the <code class="epub__literal">in</code> membership test
          used for strings and lists also works on dictionaries—it checks
          whether a key is stored in the dictionary. Technically, this works
          because dictionaries define <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>iterators</em></span> that step
          through their keys lists. Other types provide iterators that reflect
          their common uses; files, for
          example, have iterators that read line by line. We’ll discuss
          iterators in Chapters 14 and 20.</p>
<p>Also note the syntax of the last example in this listing. We
          have to enclose it in a <code class="epub__literal">list</code> call
          in Python 3.0 for similar reasons—<code class="epub__literal">keys</code> in 3.0 returns an iterator, instead
          of a physical list. The <code class="epub__literal">list</code> call
          forces it to produce all its values at once so we can print them. In
          2.6, <code class="epub__literal">keys</code> builds and returns an
          actual list, so the <code class="epub__literal">list</code> call
          isn’t needed to display results. More on this later in this
          chapter.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p>The order of keys in a dictionary is arbitrary and can
            change from release to release, so don’t be alarmed if your
            dictionaries print in a different order than shown here. In fact,
            the order has changed for me too—I’m running all these examples
            with Python 3.0, but their keys had a different order in an
            earlier edition when displayed. You shouldn’t depend on dictionary
            key ordering, in either programs or books!</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Changing Dictionaries In-Place"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="changing_dictionaries_in-place"></a>Changing Dictionaries In-Place</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Let’s <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21854"></a>continue with our interactive session. Dictionaries,
          like lists, are mutable, so you can change, expand, and shrink them
          in-place without making new dictionaries: simply assign a value to a
          key to change or create an entry. The <code class="epub__literal">del</code> statement works here, too; it deletes
          the entry associated with the key specified as an index. Notice also
          the nesting of a list inside a dictionary in this example (the value
          of the key <code class="epub__literal">'ham'</code>). All collection
          data types in Python can nest inside each other arbitrarily:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e21866"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D</code></strong>
{'eggs': 3, 'ham': 1, 'spam': 2}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D['ham'] = ['grill', 'bake', 'fry']</code></strong>           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Change entry</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D</code></strong>
{'eggs': 3, 'ham': ['grill', 'bake', 'fry'], 'spam': 2}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>del D['eggs']</code></strong>                                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Delete entry</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D</code></strong>
{'ham': ['grill', 'bake', 'fry'], 'spam': 2}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D['brunch'] = 'Bacon'</code></strong>                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Add new entry</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D</code></strong>
{'brunch': 'Bacon', 'ham': ['grill', 'bake', 'fry'], 'spam': 2}</pre>
<p>As with lists, assigning to an existing index in a dictionary
          changes its associated value. Unlike with lists, however, whenever
          you assign a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>new</em></span> dictionary key (one that
          hasn’t been assigned before) you create a new entry in the
          dictionary, as was done in the previous example for the key <code class="epub__literal">'brunch'</code>. This doesn’t work for lists
          because Python considers an offset beyond the end of a list out of
          bounds and throws an error. To expand a list, you need to use tools
          such as the <code class="epub__literal">append</code> method or
          slice assignment instead.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="More Dictionary Methods"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="more_dictionary_methods"></a>More Dictionary Methods</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Dictionary <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21915"></a>methods provide a variety of tools. For instance, the
          dictionary <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21922"></a>values</code> and <code class="epub__literal">items</code> <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21930"></a>methods <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21934"></a>return the dictionary’s values and <code class="epub__literal">(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>key</code></em><code class="epub__literal">,</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>value</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code> pair tuples, respectively (as with
          <code class="epub__literal">keys</code>, wrap them in a <code class="epub__literal">list</code> call in Python 3.0 to collect their
          values for display):</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e21958"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D = {'spam': 2, 'ham': 1, 'eggs': 3}</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(D.values())</code></strong>
[3, 1, 2]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(D.items())</code></strong>
 [('eggs', 3), ('ham', 1), ('spam', 2)]</pre>
<p>Such lists are useful in loops that need to step through
          dictionary entries one by one. Fetching a nonexistent key is
          normally an error, but the <code class="epub__literal">get</code>
          method returns a default value (<code class="epub__literal">None</code>, or a passed-in default) if the key
          doesn’t exist. It’s an easy way to fill in a default for a key that
          isn’t present and avoid a missing-key error:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e21977"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D.get('spam')</code></strong>                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># A key that is there</span></em>
2
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(D.get('toast'))</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># A key that is missing</span></em>
None
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D.get('toast', 88)</code></strong>
88</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e21997"></a>update</code> <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e22004"></a>method provides something similar to concatenation for
          dictionaries, though it has nothing to do with left-to-right
          ordering (again, there is no such thing in dictionaries). It merges
          the keys and values of one dictionary into another, blindly
          overwriting values of the same key:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e22008"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D</code></strong>
{'eggs': 3, 'ham': 1, 'spam': 2}
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D2 = {'toast':4, 'muffin':5}</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D.update(D2)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D</code></strong>
{'toast': 4, 'muffin': 5, 'eggs': 3, 'ham': 1, 'spam': 2}</pre>
<p>Finally, the dictionary <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e22025"></a>pop</code> method deletes <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e22032"></a>a key from a dictionary and returns the value it had.
          It’s similar to the list <code class="epub__literal">pop</code>
          method, but it takes a key instead of an optional position:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e22039"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"># pop a dictionary by key
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D</code></strong>
{'toast': 4, 'muffin': 5, 'eggs': 3, 'ham': 1, 'spam': 2}
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D.pop('muffin')</code></strong>
5
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D.pop('toast')</code></strong>                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Delete and return from a key</span></em>
4
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D</code></strong>
{'eggs': 3, 'ham': 1, 'spam': 2}

# pop a list by position
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = ['aa', 'bb', 'cc', 'dd']</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L.pop()</code></strong>                                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Delete and return from the end</span></em>
'dd'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
['aa', 'bb', 'cc']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L.pop(1)</code></strong>                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Delete from a specific position</span></em>
'bb'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
['aa', 'cc']</pre>
<p>Dictionaries also provide a <code class="epub__literal">copy</code> method; we’ll discuss this in Chapter 9, as it’s a way
          to avoid the potential side effects of shared references to the same
          dictionary. In fact, dictionaries come with many more methods than
          those listed in Table 8-2; see the Python
          library manual or other documentation sources for a comprehensive
          list.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="A Languages Table"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="a_languages_table"></a>A Languages Table</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Let’s look at a more <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e22093"></a>realistic dictionary example. The following example
          creates a table that maps programming language names (the keys) to
          their creators (the values). You fetch creator names by indexing on
          language names:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e22099"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>table = {'Python':  'Guido van Rossum',</code></strong>
...          <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'Perl':    'Larry Wall',</code></strong>
...          <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'Tcl':     'John Ousterhout' }</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>language = 'Python'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>creator  = table[language]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>creator</code></strong>
'Guido van Rossum'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for lang in table:</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same as: for lang in table.keys()</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(lang, '\t', table[lang])</code></strong>
...
Tcl     John Ousterhout
Python  Guido van Rossum
Perl    Larry Wall</pre>
<p>The last command uses a <code class="epub__literal">for</code>
          loop, which we haven’t covered in detail yet. If you aren’t familiar
          with <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops, this command
          simply iterates through each key in the table and prints a
          tab-separated list of keys and their values. We’ll learn more about
          <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops in Chapter 13.</p>
<p>Dictionaries aren’t sequences like lists and strings, but if
          you need to step through the items in a dictionary, it’s
          easy—calling the dictionary <code class="epub__literal">keys</code>
          method returns all stored keys, which you can iterate through with a
          <code class="epub__literal">for</code>. If needed, you can index
          from key to value inside the <code class="epub__literal">for</code>
          loop, as was done in this code.</p>
<p>In fact, Python also lets you step through a dictionary’s keys
          list without actually calling the <code class="epub__literal">keys</code> method in most <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops. For any dictionary <code class="epub__literal">D</code>, saying <code class="epub__literal">for key
          in D:</code> works the same as saying the complete <code class="epub__literal">for key in D.keys():</code>. This is really just
          another instance of the iterators mentioned earlier, which allow the
          <code class="epub__literal">in</code> membership operator to work on
          dictionaries as well (more on iterators later in this book).</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Dictionary Usage Notes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="dictionary_usage_notes"></a>Dictionary Usage Notes</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Dictionaries are <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e22179"></a>fairly straightforward tools once you get the hang of
          them, but here are a few additional pointers and reminders you
          should be aware of when using them:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Sequence operations don’t
              work</strong></span>. Dictionaries are mappings, not sequences;
              because there’s no notion of ordering among their items, things
              like concatenation (an ordered joining) and slicing (extracting
              a contiguous section) simply don’t apply. In fact, Python raises
              an error when your code runs if you try to do such
              things.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Assigning to new indexes adds
              entries</strong></span>. Keys can be created when you write a
              dictionary literal (in which case they are embedded in the
              literal itself), or when you assign values to new keys of an
              existing dictionary object. The end result is the same.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Keys need not always be
              strings</strong></span>. Our examples so far have used strings as
              keys, but any other <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>immutable</em></span> objects
              (i.e., not lists) work just as well. For instance, you can use
              integers as keys, which makes the dictionary look much like a
              list (when indexing, at least). Tuples are sometimes used as
              dictionary keys too, allowing for compound key values. Class
              instance objects (discussed in Part VI) can also be used as keys, as long
              as they have the proper protocol methods; roughly, they need to
              tell Python that their values are hashable and won’t change, as
              otherwise they would be useless as fixed keys.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Using dictionaries to simulate flexible lists"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="using_dictionaries_to_simulate_flexible"></a>Using dictionaries to simulate flexible lists</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e22211"></a>last point in the prior list is important enough to
            demonstrate with a few examples. When you use lists, it is illegal
            to assign to an offset that is off the end of the list:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e22219"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = []</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L[99] = 'spam'</code></strong>
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "&lt;stdin&gt;", line 1, in ?
IndexError: list assignment index out of range</pre>
<p>Although you can use repetition to preallocate as big a list
            as you’ll need (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">[0]*100</code>),
            you can also do something that looks similar with dictionaries
            that does not require such space allocations. By using integer
            keys, dictionaries can emulate lists that seem to grow on offset
            assignment:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e22232"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D = {}</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D[99] = 'spam'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D[99]</code></strong>
'spam'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D</code></strong>
{99: 'spam'}</pre>
<p>Here, it looks as if <code class="epub__literal">D</code> is
            a 100-item list, but it’s really a dictionary with a single entry;
            the value of the key <code class="epub__literal">99</code> is the
            string <code class="epub__literal">'spam'</code>. You can access
            this structure with offsets much like a list, but you don’t have
            to allocate space for all the positions you might ever need to
            assign values to in the future. When used like this, dictionaries
            are like more flexible equivalents of lists.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Using dictionaries for sparse data structures"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="using_dictionaries_for_sparse_data_stru"></a>Using dictionaries for sparse data structures</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In a <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e22262"></a>similar way, dictionary keys are also commonly
            leveraged to implement <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>sparse</em></span> data
            structures—for example, multidimensional arrays where only a few
            positions have values stored in them:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e22273"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Matrix = {}</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Matrix[(2, 3, 4)] = 88</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Matrix[(7, 8, 9)] = 99</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = 2; Y = 3; Z = 4</code></strong>           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># ; separates statements</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Matrix[(X, Y, Z)]</code></strong>
88
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Matrix</code></strong>
{(2, 3, 4): 88, (7, 8, 9): 99}</pre>
<p>Here, we’ve used a dictionary to represent a
            three-dimensional array that is empty except for the two positions
            <code class="epub__literal">(2,3,4)</code> and <code class="epub__literal">(7,8,9)</code>. The keys are
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>tuples</em></span> that record the coordinates of
            nonempty slots. Rather than allocating a large and mostly empty
            three-dimensional matrix to hold these values, we can use a simple
            two-item dictionary. In this scheme, accessing an empty slot
            triggers a nonexistent key exception, as these slots are not
            physically stored:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e22308"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Matrix[(2,3,6)]</code></strong>
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "&lt;stdin&gt;", line 1, in ?
KeyError: (2, 3, 6)</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Avoiding missing-key errors"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="avoiding_missing-key_errors"></a>Avoiding missing-key errors</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Errors for <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e22318"></a>nonexistent key fetches are common in sparse
            matrixes, but you probably won’t want them to shut down your
            program. There are at least three ways to fill in a default value
            instead of getting such an error message—you can test for keys
            ahead of time in <code class="epub__literal">if</code> statements,
            use a <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement to catch
            and recover from the exception explicitly, or simply use the
            dictionary <code class="epub__literal">get</code> method shown
            earlier to provide a default for keys that do not exist:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e22335"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if (2,3,6) in Matrix:</code></strong>              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Check for key before fetch</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(Matrix[(2,3,6)])</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># See Chapter 12 for if/else</span></em>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>else:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(0)</code></strong>
...
0
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>try:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(Matrix[(2,3,6)])</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Try to index</span></em>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>except KeyError:</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Catch and recover</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(0)</code></strong>                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># See Chapter 33 for try/except</span></em>
...
0
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Matrix.get((2,3,4), 0)</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Exists; fetch and return</span></em>
88
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Matrix.get((2,3,6), 0)</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Doesn't exist; use default arg</span></em>
0</pre>
<p>Of these, the <code class="epub__literal">get</code> method
            is the most concise in terms of coding requirements; we’ll study
            the <code class="epub__literal">if</code> and <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statements in more detail later in
            this book.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Using dictionaries as “records”"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="using_dictionaries_as_quotation_mark"></a>Using dictionaries as “records”</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e22410"></a>you can see, dictionaries can play many roles in
            Python. In general, they can replace search data structures
            (because indexing by key is a search operation) and can represent
            many types of structured information. For example, dictionaries
            are one of many ways to describe the properties of an item in your
            program’s domain; that is, they can serve the same role as
            “records” or “structs” in other languages.</p>
<p>The following, for example, fills out a dictionary by
            assigning to new keys over time:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e22420"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rec = {}</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rec['name'] = 'mel'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rec['age']  = 45</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rec['job']  = 'trainer/writer'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(rec['name'])</code></strong>
mel</pre>
<p>Especially when nested, Python’s built-in data types allow
            us to easily represent structured information. This example again
            uses a dictionary to capture object properties, but it codes it
            all at once (rather than assigning to each key separately) and
            nests a list and a dictionary to represent structured property
            values:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e22439"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mel = {'name': 'Mark',</code></strong>
...        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'jobs': ['trainer', 'writer'],</code></strong>
...        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'web':  'www.rmi.net/˜lutz',</code></strong>
...        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'home': {'state': 'CO', 'zip':80513}}</code></strong>
</pre>
<p>To fetch components of nested objects, simply string
            together indexing operations:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e22455"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mel['name']</code></strong>
'Mark'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mel['jobs']</code></strong>
['trainer', 'writer']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mel['jobs'][1]</code></strong>
'writer'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mel['home']['zip']</code></strong>
80513</pre>
<p>Although we’ll learn in Part VI
            that classes (which group both data and logic) can be better in
            this record role, dictionaries are an easy-to-use tool for simpler
            requirements.</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="why_you_will_care_colon_dictionary_inte"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Why You Will Care: Dictionary Interfaces</p>
<p><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e23549"></a>Dictionaries aren’t just a convenient way to store
              information by key in your programs—some Python extensions
              also present interfaces that look like and work the same as
              dictionaries. For instance, Python’s interface to DBM
              access-by-key files looks much like a dictionary that must be
              opened. Strings are stored and fetched using key indexes:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e22481"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import dbm
file = dbm.open("filename")    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Link to file</span></em>
file['key'] = 'data'           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Store data by key</span></em>
data = file['key']             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Fetch data by key</span></em></pre>
<p>In Chapter 27, you’ll see
              that you can store entire Python objects this way, too, if you
              replace <code class="epub__literal">dbm</code> in the preceding
              code with <code class="epub__literal">shelve</code> (shelves are
              access-by-key databases of persistent Python objects). For
              Internet work, Python’s CGI script support also presents a
              dictionary-like interface. A call to <code class="epub__literal">cgi.FieldStorage</code> yields a
              dictionary-like object with one entry per input field on the
              client’s web page:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e22504"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import cgi
form = cgi.FieldStorage()      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Parse form data</span></em>
if 'name' in form:
    showReply('Hello, ' + form['name'].value)</pre>
<p>All of these, like dictionaries, are instances of
              mappings. Once you learn dictionary interfaces, you’ll find that
              they apply to a variety of built-in tools in Python.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Other Ways to Make Dictionaries"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="other_ways_to_make_dictionaries"></a>Other Ways to Make Dictionaries</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Finally, <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e22516"></a>note that because dictionaries are so useful, more
          ways to build them have emerged over time. In Python 2.3 and later,
          for example, the last two calls to the <code class="epub__literal">dict</code> constructor (really, type name) shown
          here have the same effect as the literal and key-assignment forms
          above them:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e22525"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">{'name': 'mel', 'age': 45}             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Traditional literal expression</span></em>

D = {}                                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Assign by keys dynamically</span></em>
D['name'] = 'mel'
D['age']  = 45

dict(name='mel', age=45)               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># dict keyword argument form</span></em>

dict([('name', 'mel'), ('age', 45)])   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># dict key/value tuples form</span></em></pre>
<p>All four of these forms create the same two-key dictionary,
          but they are useful in differing circumstances:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The first is handy if you can spell out the entire
              dictionary ahead of time.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The second is of use if you need to create the dictionary
              one field at a time on the fly.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The third involves less typing than the first, but it
              requires all keys to be strings.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The last is useful if you need to build up keys and values
              as sequences at runtime.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>We met keyword arguments earlier when sorting; the third form
          illustrated in this code listing has become especially popular in
          Python code today, since it has less syntax (and hence there is less
          opportunity for mistakes). As suggested previously in Table 8-2, the last form
          in the listing is also commonly used in conjunction with the
          <code class="epub__literal">zip</code> function, to combine separate
          lists of keys and values obtained dynamically at runtime (parsed out
          of a data file’s columns, for instance). More on this option in the
          next section.</p>
<p>Provided all the key’s values are the same initially, you can
          also create a dictionary with this special form—simply pass in a
          list of keys and an initial value for all of the values (the default
          is <code class="epub__literal">None</code>):</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e22565"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dict.fromkeys(['a', 'b'], 0)</code></strong>
{'a': 0, 'b': 0}</pre>
<p>Although you could get by with just literals and key
          assignments at this point in your Python career, you’ll probably
          find uses for all of these dictionary-creation forms as you start
          applying them in realistic, flexible, and dynamic Python
          programs.</p>
<p>The listings in this section document the various ways to
          create dictionaries in both Python 2.6 and 3.0. However, there is
          yet another way to create dictionaries, available only in Python 3.0
          (and later): the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>dictionary comprehension</em></span>
          expression. To see how this last form looks, we need to move on to
          the next section.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Dictionary Changes in Python 3.0"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="dictionary_changes_in_python_3.0"></a>Dictionary Changes in Python 3.0</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>This <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e22582"></a>chapter <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e22588"></a>has so far focused on dictionary basics that span
          releases, but the dictionary’s functionality has mutated in Python
          3.0. If you are using Python 2.X code, you may come across some
          dictionary tools that either behave differently or are missing
          altogether in 3.0. Moreover, 3.0 coders have access to additional
          dictionary tools not available in 2.X. Specifically, dictionaries in
          3.0:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Support a new dictionary comprehension expression, a close
              cousin to list and set comprehensions</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Return iterable views instead of lists for the methods
              <code class="epub__literal">D.keys</code>, <code class="epub__literal">D.values</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">D.items</code></p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Require new coding styles for scanning by sorted keys,
              because of the prior point</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>No longer support relative magnitude comparisons
              directly—compare manually instead</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>No longer have the <code class="epub__literal">D.has_key</code> method—the <code class="epub__literal">in</code> membership test is used
              instead</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Let’s take a look at what’s new in 3.0 dictionaries.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Dictionary comprehensions"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="dictionary_comprehensions"></a>Dictionary comprehensions</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e22631"></a>mentioned at the end of the prior section,
            dictionaries in 3.0 can also be created with dictionary
            comprehensions. Like the set comprehensions we met in Chapter 5, dictionary comprehensions are
            available only in 3.0 (not in 2.6). Like the longstanding list
            comprehensions we met briefly in Chapter 4 and earlier in this
            chapter, they run an implied loop, collecting the key/value
            results of expressions on each iteration and using them to fill
            out a new dictionary. A loop variable allows the comprehension to
            use loop iteration values along the way.</p>
<p><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e23719"></a>For example, a standard way to initialize a
            dictionary dynamically in both 2.6 and 3.0 is to zip together its
            keys and values and pass the result to the <code class="epub__literal">dict</code> call. As we’ll learn in more detail
            in Chapter 13, the <code class="epub__literal">zip</code> function is a way to construct a
            dictionary from key and value lists in a single call. If you
            cannot predict the set of keys and values in your code, you can
            always build them up as lists and zip them together:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e22653"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(zip(['a', 'b', 'c'], [1, 2, 3]))</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Zip together keys and values</span></em>
[('a', 1), ('b', 2), ('c', 3)]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D = dict(zip(['a', 'b', 'c'], [1, 2, 3]))</code></strong>    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Make a dict from zip result</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D</code></strong>
{'a': 1, 'c': 3, 'b': 2}</pre>
<p>In Python 3.0, you can achieve the same effect with a
            dictionary comprehension expression. The following builds a new
            dictionary with a key/value pair for every such pair in the
            <code class="epub__literal">zip</code> result (it reads almost the
            same in Python, but with a bit more formality):</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e22675"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python30\python</code></strong>                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Use a dict comprehension</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D = {k: v for (k, v) in zip(['a', 'b', 'c'], [1, 2, 3])}</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D</code></strong>
{'a': 1, 'c': 3, 'b': 2}</pre>
<p>Comprehensions actually require more code in this case, but
            they are also more general than this example implies—we can use
            them to map a single stream of values to dictionaries as well, and
            keys can be computed with expressions just like values:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e22691"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D = {x: x ** 2 for x in [1, 2, 3, 4]}</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Or: range(1, 5)</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D</code></strong>
{1: 1, 2: 4, 3: 9, 4: 16}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D = {c: c * 4 for c in 'SPAM'}</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Loop over any iterable</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D</code></strong>
{'A': 'AAAA', 'P': 'PPPP', 'S': 'SSSS', 'M': 'MMMM'}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D = {c.lower(): c + '!' for c in ['SPAM', 'EGGS', 'HAM']}</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D</code></strong>
{'eggs': 'EGGS!', 'ham': 'HAM!', 'spam': 'SPAM!'}</pre>
<p>Dictionary comprehensions are also useful for initializing
            dictionaries from keys lists, in much the same way as the <code class="epub__literal">fromkeys</code> method we met at the end of the
            preceding section:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e22723"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D = dict.fromkeys(['a', 'b', 'c'], 0)</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Initialize dict from keys</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D</code></strong>
{'a': 0, 'c': 0, 'b': 0}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D = {k:0 for k in ['a', 'b', 'c']}</code></strong>           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same, but with a comprehension</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D</code></strong>
{'a': 0, 'c': 0, 'b': 0}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D = dict.fromkeys('spam')</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Other iterators, default value</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D</code></strong>
{'a': None, 'p': None, 's': None, 'm': None}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D = {k: None for k in 'spam'}</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D</code></strong>
{'a': None, 'p': None, 's': None, 'm': None}</pre>
<p>Like related tools, dictionary comprehensions support
            additional syntax not shown here, including nested loops and
            <code class="epub__literal">if</code> clauses. Unfortunately, to
            truly understand dictionary comprehensions, we need to also know
            more about iteration statements and concepts in Python, and we
            don’t yet have enough information to address that story well.
            We’ll learn much more about all flavors of comprehensions (list,
            set, and dictionary) in Chapters 14 and 20, so we’ll defer further details
            until later. We’ll also study the <code class="epub__literal">zip</code> built-in we used in this section in
            more detail in Chapter 13, when we
            explore <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Dictionary views"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="dictionary_views"></a>Dictionary views</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In 3.0 the <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e22782"></a>dictionary <code class="epub__literal">keys</code>,
            <code class="epub__literal">values</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">items</code> methods all return <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>view
            objects</em></span>, whereas in 2.6 they return actual result
            lists. View objects are <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>iterables</em></span>, which
            simply means objects that generate result items one at a time,
            instead of producing the result list all at once in memory.
            Besides being iterable, dictionary views also retain the original
            order of dictionary components, reflect future changes to the
            dictionary, and may support set operations. On the other hand,
            they are not lists, and they do not support operations like
            indexing or the list <code class="epub__literal">sort</code>
            method; nor do they display their items when printed.</p>
<p>We’ll discuss the notion of iterables more formally in Chapter 14, but for our
            purposes here it’s enough to know that we have to run the results
            of these three methods through the <code class="epub__literal">list</code> built-in if we want to apply list
            operations or display their values:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e22816"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D = dict(a=1, b=2, c=3)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D</code></strong>
{'a': 1, 'c': 3, 'b': 2}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>K = D.keys()</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Makes a view object in 3.0, not a list</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>K</code></strong>
&lt;dict_keys object at 0x026D83C0&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(K)</code></strong>                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Force a real list in 3.0 if needed</span></em>
['a', 'c', 'b']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>V = D.values()</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Ditto for values and items views</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>V</code></strong>
&lt;dict_values object at 0x026D8260&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(V)</code></strong>
[1, 3, 2]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(D.items())</code></strong>
[('a', 1), ('c', 3), ('b', 2)]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>K[0]</code></strong>                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># List operations fail unless converted</span></em>
TypeError: 'dict_keys' object does not support indexing
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(K)[0]</code></strong>
'a'</pre>
<p>Apart from when displaying results at the interactive
            prompt, you will probably rarely even notice this change, because
            looping constructs in Python automatically force iterable objects
            to produce one result on each iteration:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e22867"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for k in D.keys(): print(k)</code></strong>    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Iterators used automatically in loops</span></em>
...
a
c
b</pre>
<p>In addition, 3.0 dictionaries still have iterators
            themselves, which return successive keys—as in 2.6, it’s still often not
            necessary to call keys directly:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e22880"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for key in D: print(key)</code></strong>       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Still no need to call keys() to iterate</span></em>
...
a
c
b</pre>
<p>Unlike 2.X’s list results, though, dictionary views in 3.0
            are not carved in stone when created—they <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>dynamically
            reflect future changes</em></span> made to the dictionary after the
            view object has been created:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e22893"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D = {'a':1, 'b':2, 'c':3}</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D</code></strong>
{'a': 1, 'c': 3, 'b': 2}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>K = D.keys()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>V = D.values()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(K)</code></strong>                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Views maintain same order as dictionary</span></em>
['a', 'c', 'b']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(V)</code></strong>
[1, 3, 2]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>del D['b']</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Change the dictionary in-place</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D</code></strong>
{'a': 1, 'c': 3}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(K)</code></strong>                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Reflected in any current view objects</span></em>
['a', 'c']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(V)</code></strong>                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Not true in 2.X!</span></em>
[1, 3]</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Dictionary views and sets"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="dictionary_views_and_sets"></a>Dictionary views and sets</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Also <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e22944"></a>unlike 2.X’s list results, 3.0’s view objects
            returned by the <code class="epub__literal">keys</code> method are
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>set-like</em></span> and support common set operations
            such as intersection and union; <code class="epub__literal">values</code> views are not, since they aren’t
            unique, but <code class="epub__literal">items</code> results are
            if their <code class="epub__literal">(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>key</code></em><code class="epub__literal">,</code>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>value</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code> pairs are unique and hashable. Given
            that sets behave much like valueless dictionaries (and are even
            coded in <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e22977"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e22982"></a>curly braces like dictionaries in 3.0), this is a
            logical symmetry. Like dictionary keys, set items are unordered,
            unique, and immutable.</p>
<p>Here is what keys lists look like when used in set
            operations. In set operations, views may be mixed with other
            views, sets, and dictionaries (dictionaries are treated the same
            as their <code class="epub__literal">keys</code> views in this
            context):</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e22993"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>K | {'x': 4}</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Keys (and some items) views are set-like</span></em>
{'a', 'x', 'c'}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>V &amp; {'x': 4}</code></strong>
TypeError: unsupported operand type(s) for &amp;: 'dict_values' and 'dict'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>V &amp; {'x': 4}.values()</code></strong>
TypeError: unsupported operand type(s) for &amp;: 'dict_values' and 'dict_values'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D = {'a':1, 'b':2, 'c':3}</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D.keys() &amp; D.keys()</code></strong>            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Intersect keys views</span></em>
{'a', 'c', 'b'}
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D.keys() &amp; {'b'}</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Intersect keys and set</span></em>
{'b'}
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D.keys() &amp; {'b': 1}</code></strong>            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Intersect keys and dict</span></em>
{'b'}
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D.keys() | {'b', 'c', 'd'}</code></strong>     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Union keys and set</span></em>
{'a', 'c', 'b', 'd'}</pre>
<p>Dictionary items views are set-like too if they are
            hashable—that is, if they contain only immutable objects:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e23038"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D = {'a': 1}</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(D.items())</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Items set-like if hashable</span></em>
[('a', 1)]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D.items() | D.keys()</code></strong>           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Union view and view</span></em>
{('a', 1), 'a'}
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D.items() | D</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># dict treated same as its keys</span></em>
{('a', 1), 'a'}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D.items() | {('c', 3), ('d', 4)}</code></strong>           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Set of key/value pairs</span></em>
{('a', 1), ('d', 4), ('c', 3)}
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dict(D.items() | {('c', 3), ('d', 4)})</code></strong>     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># dict accepts iterable sets too</span></em>
{'a': 1, 'c': 3, 'd': 4}</pre>
<p>For more details on set operations in general, see Chapter 5. Now, let’s look at three other quick
            coding notes for 3.0 dictionaries.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Sorting dictionary keys"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="sorting_dictionary_keys"></a>Sorting dictionary keys</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>First <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e23084"></a>of all, because <code class="epub__literal">keys</code> does not return a list, the
            traditional coding pattern for scanning a dictionary by sorted
            keys in 2.X won’t work in 3.0. You must either convert to a list
            manually or use the <code class="epub__literal">sorted</code> call
            introduced in Chapter 4
            and earlier in this chapter on either a <code class="epub__literal">keys</code> view or the dictionary
            itself:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e23103"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D = {'a':1, 'b':2, 'c':3}</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D</code></strong>
{'a': 1, 'c': 3, 'b': 2}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Ks = D.keys()</code></strong>                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Sorting a view object doesn't work!</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Ks.sort()</code></strong>
AttributeError: 'dict_keys' object has no attribute 'sort'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Ks = list(Ks)</code></strong>                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Force it to be a list and then sort</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Ks.sort()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for k in Ks: print(k, D[k])</code></strong>
...
a 1
b 2
c 3

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D</code></strong>
{'a': 1, 'c': 3, 'b': 2}
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Ks = D.keys()</code></strong>                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Or you can use sorted() on the keys</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for k in sorted(Ks): print(k, D[k])</code></strong>      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># sorted() accepts any iterable</span></em>
...                                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># sorted() returns its result</span></em>
a 1
b 2
c 3

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D</code></strong>
{'a': 1, 'c': 3, 'b': 2}                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Better yet, sort the dict directly</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for k in sorted(D): print(k, D[k])</code></strong>       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># dict iterators return keys</span></em>
...
a 1
b 2
c 3</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Dictionary magnitude comparisons no longer work"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="dictionary_magnitude_comparisons_no_lon"></a>Dictionary magnitude comparisons no longer work</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Secondly, <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e23170"></a>while in Python 2.6 dictionaries may be compared for
            relative magnitude directly with <code class="epub__literal">&lt;</code>, <code class="epub__literal">&gt;</code>, and so on, in Python 3.0 this no
            longer works. However, it can be simulated by comparing sorted
            keys lists manually:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e23184"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">sorted(D1.items()) &lt; sorted(D2.items())      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Like 2.6 D1 &lt; D2</span></em></pre>
<p>Dictionary equality tests still work in 3.0, though. Since
            we’ll revisit this in the next chapter in the context of
            comparisons at large, we’ll defer further details here.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="The has_key method is dead: long live in!"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="the_has_underscore_key_method_is_dead_c"></a>The has_key method is dead: long live in!</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Finally, <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e23195"></a>the widely used dictionary <code class="epub__literal">has_key</code> key presence test method is gone
            in 3.0. Instead, use the <code class="epub__literal">in</code>
            membership expression, or a <code class="epub__literal">get</code>
            with a default test (of these, <code class="epub__literal">in</code> is generally preferred):</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e23215"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D</code></strong>
{'a': 1, 'c': 3, 'b': 2}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D.has_key('c')</code></strong>                                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 2.X only: True/False</span></em>
AttributeError: 'dict' object has no attribute 'has_key'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'c' in D</code></strong>
True
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'x' in D</code></strong>
False
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if 'c' in D: print('present', D['c'])</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Preferred in 3.0</span></em>
...
present 3

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(D.get('c'))</code></strong>
3
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(D.get('x'))</code></strong>
None
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if D.get('c') != None: print('present', D['c'])</code></strong>       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Another option</span></em>
...
present 3</pre>
<p>If you work in 2.6 and care about 3.0 compatibility, note
            that the first two changes (comprehensions and views) can only be
            coded in 3.0, but the last three (<code class="epub__literal">sorted</code>, manual comparisons, and <code class="epub__literal">in</code>) can be coded in 2.6 today to ease
            3.0 migration in the <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e23259"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e23261"></a>future.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Chapter Summary"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
