<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_answers-id7"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</h1>
<div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>A literal expression like <code class="epub__literal">[0, 0, 0,
            0, 0]</code> and a repetition expression like <code class="epub__literal">[0] * 5</code> will each create a list of five
            zeros. In practice, you might also build one up with a loop that
            starts with an empty list and appends <code class="epub__literal">0</code> to it in each iteration:</p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">L.append(0)</code>. A list
            comprehension (<code class="epub__literal">[0 for i in
            range(5)]</code>) could work here, too, but this is more work
            than you need to do.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>A literal expression such as <code class="epub__literal">{'a':
            0, 'b': 0}</code> or a series of assignments like <code class="epub__literal">D =
            {}</code>, <code class="epub__literal">D['a'] =
            0</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">D['b'] = 0</code>
            would create the desired dictionary. You can also use the newer
            and simpler-to-code <code class="epub__literal">dict(a=0,
            b=0)</code> keyword form, or the more flexible <code class="epub__literal">dict([('a', 0), ('b', 0)])</code> key/value
            sequences form. Or, because all the values are the same, you can
            use the special form <code class="epub__literal">dict.fromkeys('ab',
            0)</code>. In 3.0, you can also use a dictionary comprehension:
            <code class="epub__literal">{k:0 for k in 'ab'}</code>.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">append</code> and <code class="epub__literal">extend</code> methods grow a list in-place, the
            <code class="epub__literal">sort</code> and <code class="epub__literal">reverse</code> methods order and reverse lists,
            the <code class="epub__literal">insert</code> method inserts an
            item at an offset, the <code class="epub__literal">remove</code>
            and <code class="epub__literal">pop</code> methods delete from a
            list by value and by position, the <code class="epub__literal">del</code> statement deletes an item or slice,
            and index and slice assignment statements replace an item or
            entire section. Pick any four of these for the quiz.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Dictionaries are primarily changed by assignment to a new or
            existing key, which creates or changes the key’s entry in the
            table. Also, the <code class="epub__literal">del</code> statement
            deletes a key’s entry, the dictionary <code class="epub__literal">update</code> method merges one dictionary into
            another in-place, and <code class="epub__literal">D.pop(key)</code> removes a key and returns the
            value it had. Dictionaries also have other, more exotic in-place
            change methods not listed in this chapter, such as <code class="epub__literal">setdefault</code>; see reference sources for
            more details.</p></li></ol>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[21] </sup>In practice, you won’t see many lists written out like this
            in list-processing programs. It’s more common to see code that
            processes lists constructed dynamically (at runtime). In fact,
            although it’s important to master literal syntax, most data
            structures in Python are built by running program code at
            runtime.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[22] </sup>This description needs elaboration when the value
                    and the slice being assigned overlap: <code class="epub__literal">L[2:5]=L[3:6]</code>, for instance,
                    works fine because the value to be inserted is fetched
                    before the deletion happens on the left.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[23] </sup>Unlike <code class="epub__literal">+</code>
                concatenation, <code class="epub__literal">append</code>
                doesn’t have to generate new objects, so it’s usually faster.
                You can also mimic <code class="epub__literal">append</code>
                with clever slice assignments: <code class="epub__literal">L[len(L):]=[X]</code> is like <code class="epub__literal">L.append(X)</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">L[:0]=[X]</code> is like appending at the
                front of a list. Both delete an empty slice and insert
                <code class="epub__literal">X</code>, changing <code class="epub__literal">L</code> in-place quickly, like <code class="epub__literal">append</code>.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[24] </sup>As with lists, you won’t often see dictionaries constructed
            using literals. Lists and dictionaries are grown in different
            ways, though. As you’ll see in the next section, dictionaries are
            typically built up by assigning to new keys at runtime; this
            approach fails for lists (lists are commonly grown with <code class="epub__literal">append</code> instead).</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
