<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Tuples</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="tuples-id1"></a>Tuples</h1>
<p>The <a id="ch09builtinobjtypestuples"></a>last <a id="ch09tuples"></a>collection type in our survey is the Python tuple.
        Tuples construct simple groups of objects. They work exactly like
        lists, except that tuples can’t be changed in-place (they’re
        immutable) and are usually written as a series of items in
        parentheses, not square brackets. Although they don’t support as many
        methods, tuples share most of their properties with lists. Here’s a
        quick look at the basics. Tuples are:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Ordered collections of arbitrary objects</span></dt><dd>
<p>Like strings and lists, tuples are positionally ordered
              collections of objects (i.e., they maintain a left-to-right
              order among their contents); like lists, they can embed any kind
              of object.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Accessed by offset</span></dt><dd>
<p>Like strings and lists, items in a tuple are accessed by
              offset (not by key); they support all the offset-based access
              operations, such as indexing and slicing.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Of the category “immutable sequence”</span></dt><dd>
<p>Like strings and lists, tuples are sequences; they support
              many of the same operations. However, like strings, tuples are
              immutable; they don’t support any of the in-place change
              operations applied to lists.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Fixed-length, heterogeneous, and arbitrarily nestable</span></dt><dd>
<p>Because tuples are immutable, you cannot change the size
              of a tuple without making a copy. On the other hand, tuples can
              hold any type of object, including other compound objects (e.g.,
              lists, dictionaries, other tuples), and so support arbitrary
              nesting.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Arrays of object references</span></dt><dd>
<p>Like lists, tuples are best thought of as object reference
              arrays; tuples store access points to other objects
              (references), and indexing a tuple is relatively quick.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Table 9-1
        highlights common tuple operations. A tuple is written as a series of
        objects (technically, expressions that generate objects), separated by
        commas and normally enclosed in parentheses. An empty tuple is just a
        <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e23469"></a>parentheses pair with nothing inside.</p><div class="epub__table"><a id="common_tuple_literals_and_operations"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Table 9-1. Common tuple literals and operations</p><div class="epub__table-contents">
<table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; " summary="Common tuple literals and operations">
<colgroup><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Operation</p></th><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Interpretation</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">()</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>An empty
                tuple</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">T = (0,)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>A one-item tuple (not
                an expression)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">T = (0, 'Ni', 1.2, 3)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>A four-item
                tuple</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">T = 0, 'Ni', 1.2, 3</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Another four-item tuple
                (same as prior line)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">T = ('abc', ('def',
                'ghi'))</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Nested
                tuples</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">T = tuple('spam')</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Tuple of items in an
                iterable</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">T[i]</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">T[i][j]</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">T[i:j]</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">len(T)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Index, index of index,
                slice, length</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">T1 + T2</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">T * 3</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Concatenate,
                repeat</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">for x in T: print(x)</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">'spam' in T</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">[x ** 2 for x in
                T]</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Iteration,
                membership</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">T.index('Ni')</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">T.count('Ni')</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Methods in 2.6 and 3.0:
                search, count</p></td></tr></tbody>
</table>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Tuples in Action"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="tuples_in_action"></a>Tuples in Action</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e23603"></a>usual, let’s start an interactive session to explore
          tuples at work. Notice in Table 9-1 that tuples do not
          have all the methods that lists have (e.g., an <code class="epub__literal">append</code> call won’t work here). They do,
          however, support the usual sequence operations that we saw for both
          strings and lists:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e23614"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>(1, 2) + (3, 4)</code></strong>            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Concatenation</span></em>
(1, 2, 3, 4)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>(1, 2) * 4</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Repetition</span></em>
(1, 2, 1, 2, 1, 2, 1, 2)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>T = (1, 2, 3, 4)</code></strong>           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Indexing, slicing</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>T[0], T[1:3]</code></strong>
(1, (2, 3))</pre>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Tuple syntax peculiarities: Commas and parentheses"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="tuple_syntax_peculiarities_colon_commas"></a>Tuple syntax peculiarities: Commas and parentheses</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The second and fourth entries in Table 9-1 merit a bit more
            explanation. Because <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e23645"></a>parentheses can also enclose expressions (see Chapter 5), you need to do something special to
            tell Python when a single object in parentheses is a tuple object
            and not a simple expression. If you really want a single-item
            tuple, simply add a trailing comma after the single item, before
            the closing parenthesis:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e23653"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = (40)</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># An integer!</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x</code></strong>
40
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y = (40,)</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># A tuple containing an integer</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y</code></strong>
(40,)</pre>
<p>As a special case, Python also allows you to omit the
            opening and closing parentheses for a tuple in contexts where it
            isn’t syntactically ambiguous to do so. For instance, the fourth
            line of Table 9-1
            simply lists four items separated by commas. In the context of an
            assignment statement, Python recognizes this as a tuple, even
            though it doesn’t have parentheses.</p>
<p>Now, some people will tell you to always use parentheses in
            your tuples, and some will tell you to never use parentheses in
            tuples (and still others have lives, and won’t tell you what to do
            with your tuples!). The only significant places where the
            parentheses are <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>required</em></span> are when a tuple is
            passed as a literal in a function call (where parentheses matter),
            and when one is listed in a Python 2.X <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statement (where commas are
            significant).</p>
<p>For beginners, the best advice is that it’s probably easier
            to use the parentheses than it is to figure out when they are
            optional. Many programmers (myself included) also find that
            parentheses tend to aid script readability by making the tuples
            more explicit, but your mileage may vary.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Conversions, methods, and immutability"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="conversions_comma_methods_comma_and_imm"></a>Conversions, methods, and immutability</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Apart from literal syntax differences, <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e23693"></a>tuple operations (the middle rows in Table 9-1) are identical
            to string and list operations. The only differences worth noting
            are that the <code class="epub__literal">+</code>, <code class="epub__literal">*</code>, and slicing operations return new
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>tuples</em></span> when applied to tuples, and that
            tuples don’t provide the same methods you saw for strings, lists,
            and dictionaries. If you want to sort a<a id="I_indexterm6_d1e23711"></a> tuple, for example, you’ll usually have to either
            first convert it to a list to gain access to a sorting method call
            and make it a mutable object, or use the newer <code class="epub__literal">sorted</code> built-in that accepts any
            sequence object (and more):</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e23720"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>T = ('cc', 'aa', 'dd', 'bb')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>tmp = list(T)</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Make a list from a tuple's items</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>tmp.sort()</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Sort the list</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>tmp</code></strong>
['aa', 'bb', 'cc', 'dd']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>T = tuple(tmp)</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Make a tuple from the list's items</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>T</code></strong>
('aa', 'bb', 'cc', 'dd')

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sorted(T)</code></strong>                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Or use the sorted built-in</span></em>
['aa', 'bb', 'cc', 'dd']</pre>
<p>Here, the <code class="epub__literal">list</code> and
            <code class="epub__literal">tuple</code> built-in functions are
            used to convert the object to a list and then back to a tuple;
            really, both calls make new objects, but the net effect is like a
            conversion.</p>
<p>List comprehensions can also be used to convert tuples. The
            following, for example, makes a list from a tuple, adding 20 to
            each item along the way:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e23766"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>T = (1, 2, 3, 4, 5)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = [x + 20 for x in T]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
[21, 22, 23, 24, 25]</pre>
<p>List comprehensions are really sequence operations—they
            always build new lists, but they may be used to iterate over any
            sequence objects, including tuples, strings, and other lists. As
            we’ll see later in the book, they even work on some things that
            are not physically stored sequences—any iterable objects will do,
            including files, which are automatically read line by line.</p>
<p>Although tuples don’t have the same methods as lists and
            strings, they do have two of their own as of Python 2.6 and
            3.0—<code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm6_d1e23782"></a>index</code> and <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm6_d1e23790"></a>count</code> works as they do for lists, but they
            are defined for tuple objects:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e23795"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>T = (1, 2, 3, 2, 4, 2)</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Tuple methods in 2.6 and 3.0</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>T.index(2)</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Offset of first appearance of 2</span></em>
1
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>T.index(2, 2)</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Offset of appearance after offset 2</span></em>
3
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>T.count(2)</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># How many 2s are there?</span></em>
3</pre>
<p>Prior to 2.6 and 3.0, tuples have no methods at all—this was
            an old Python convention for immutable types, which was violated
            years ago on grounds of practicality with strings, and more
            recently with both numbers and tuples.</p>
<p>Also, note that the rule about <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e23826"></a>tuple <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>immutability</em></span> applies only
            to the top level of the tuple itself, not to its contents. A list
            inside a tuple, for instance, can be changed as usual:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e23836"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>T = (1, [2, 3], 4)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>T[1] = 'spam'</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># This fails: can't change tuple itself</span></em>
TypeError: object doesn't support item assignment

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>T[1][0] = 'spam'</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># This works: can change mutables inside</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>T</code></strong>
(1, ['spam', 3], 4)</pre>
<p>For most programs, this one-level-deep immutability is
            sufficient for common tuple roles. Which, coincidentally, brings
            us to the next section.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Why Lists and Tuples?"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="why_lists_and_tuples_question"></a>Why Lists and Tuples?</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>This <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e23864"></a>seems to be the first question that always comes up
          when teaching beginners about tuples: why do we need tuples if we
          have lists? Some of the reasoning may be historic; Python’s creator
          is a mathematician by training, and he has been quoted as seeing a
          tuple as a simple association of objects and a list as a data
          structure that changes over time. In fact, this use of the word
          “tuple” derives from mathematics, as does its frequent use for a row
          in a relational database table.</p>
<p>The best answer, however, seems to be that the immutability of
          tuples provides some <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>integrity</em></span>—you can be sure
          a tuple won’t be changed through another reference elsewhere in a
          program, but there’s no such guarantee for lists. Tuples, therefore,
          serve a similar role to “constant” declarations in other languages,
          though the notion of constantness is associated with
          objects in Python, not variables.</p>
<p>Tuples can also be used in places that lists cannot—for
          example, as dictionary keys (see the sparse matrix example in Chapter 8). Some built-in operations may
          also require or imply tuples, not lists, though such operations have
          often been generalized in recent years. As a rule of thumb, lists
          are the tool of choice for ordered collections that might need to
          change; tuples can handle the other cases of fixed <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e23882"></a><a id="I_indexterm6_d1e23884"></a>associations.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Files"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
