<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Files</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="files-id1"></a>Files</h1>
<p>You <a id="ch09builtinobjtypesfiles"></a>may <a id="ch08files"></a>already be familiar with the notion of files, which are
        named storage compartments on your computer that are managed by your
        operating system. The last major built-in object type that we’ll
        examine on our object types tour provides a way to access those files
        inside Python programs.</p>
<p>In short, the built-in <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm6_d1e23905"></a>open</code> function creates a Python file object,
        which serves as a link to a file residing on your machine. After
        calling <code class="epub__literal">open</code>, you can transfer
        strings of data to and from the associated external file by calling
        the returned file object’s methods.</p>
<p>Compared to the types you’ve seen so far, file objects are
        somewhat unusual. They’re not numbers, sequences, or mappings, and
        they don’t respond to expression operators; they export only methods
        for common file-processing tasks. Most file methods are concerned with
        performing input from and output to the external file associated with
        a file object, but other file methods allow us to seek to a new
        position in the file, flush output buffers, and so on. Table 9-2 summarizes <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e23917"></a>common file operations.</p><div class="epub__table"><a id="common_file_operations"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Table 9-2. Common file operations</p><div class="epub__table-contents">
<table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; " summary="Common file operations">
<colgroup><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Operation</p></th><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Interpretation</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">output = open(r'C:\spam',
                'w')</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Create output file
                (<code class="epub__literal">'w'</code> means
                write)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">input = open('data',
                'r')</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Create input file
                (<code class="epub__literal">'r'</code> means
                read)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">input = open('data')</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Same as prior line
                (<code class="epub__literal">'r'</code> is the
                default)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">aString =
                input.read()</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Read entire file into a
                single string</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">aString =
                input.read(N)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Read up to next
                <code class="epub__literal">N</code> characters (or bytes)
                into a string</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">aString =
                input.readline()</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Read next line
                (including <code class="epub__literal">\n</code> newline) into
                a string</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">aList =
                input.readlines()</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Read entire file into
                list of line strings (with <code class="epub__literal">\n</code>)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">output.write(aString)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Write a string of
                characters (or bytes) into file</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">output.writelines(aList)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Write all line strings
                in a list into file</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">output.close()</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Manual close (done for
                you when file is collected)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">output.flush()</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Flush output buffer to
                disk without closing</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">anyFile.seek(N)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Change file position to
                offset <code class="epub__literal">N</code> for next
                operation</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">for line in open('data'):</code>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>use line</code></em></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>File iterators read
                line by line</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">open('f.txt',
                encoding='latin-1')</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Python 3.0 Unicode text
                files (<code class="epub__literal">str</code>
                strings)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">open('f.bin', 'rb')</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Python 3.0 binary bytes
                files (<code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>
                strings)</p></td></tr></tbody>
</table>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Opening Files"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="opening_files"></a>Opening Files</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To open a file, a <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e24094"></a>program calls the built-in <code class="epub__literal">open</code> function, with the external filename
          first, followed by a processing <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>mode</em></span>. The mode
          is typically the string <code class="epub__literal">'r'</code> to
          open for text input (the default), <code class="epub__literal">'w'</code> to create and open for text output, or
          <code class="epub__literal">'a'</code> to open for appending text to
          the end. The processing mode argument can specify additional options:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Adding a <code class="epub__literal">b</code> to the mode
              string allows for <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>binary</em></span> data (end-of-line
              translations and 3.0 Unicode encodings are turned off).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Adding a <code class="epub__literal">+</code> opens the
              file for <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>both</em></span> input and output (i.e., you
              can both read and write to the same file object, often in
              conjunction with seek operations to reposition in the
              file).</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Both arguments to <code class="epub__literal">open</code> must
          be Python strings, and an optional third argument can be used to
          control output buffering—passing a zero means that output is
          unbuffered (it is transferred to the external file immediately on a
          write method call). The external filename argument may include a
          platform-specific and absolute or relative directory path prefix;
          without a directory path, the file is assumed to exist in the
          current working directory (i.e., where the script runs). We’ll cover
          file fundamentals and explore some basic examples here, but we won’t
          go into all file-processing mode options; as usual, consult the
          Python library manual for additional details.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Using Files"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="using_files"></a>Using Files</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Once you <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e24147"></a>make a file object with <code class="epub__literal">open</code>, you can call its methods to read
          from or write to the associated external file. In all cases, file
          text takes the form of strings in Python programs; reading a file
          returns its text in strings, and text is passed to the write methods
          as strings. Reading and writing methods come in multiple flavors;
          Table 9-2 lists the most common.
          Here are a few fundamental usage notes:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">File iterators are best for reading lines</span></dt><dd>
<p>Though the reading and writing methods in the table are
                common, keep in mind that probably the best way to read lines
                from a text file today is to not read the file at all—as we’ll
                see in Chapter 14, files
                also have an <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>iterator</em></span> that automatically
                reads one line at a time in a <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop, list comprehension, or
                other iteration context.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Content is strings, not objects</span></dt><dd>
<p>Notice in Table 9-2 that
                data read from a file always comes back to your script as a
                string, so you’ll have to convert it to a different type of
                Python object if a string is not what you need. Similarly,
                unlike with the <code class="epub__literal">print</code>
                operation, Python does not add any formatting and does not
                convert objects to strings automatically when you write data
                to a file—you must send an already formatted string. Because
                of this, the tools we have already met to convert objects to
                and from strings (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">int</code>, <code class="epub__literal">float</code>, <code class="epub__literal">str</code>, and the string formatting
                expression and method) come in handy when dealing with files.
                Python also includes advanced standard library tools for
                handling generic object storage (such as the <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> module) and for dealing with
                packed binary data in files (such as the <code class="epub__literal">struct</code> module). We’ll see both of
                these at work later in this chapter.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">close</code> is usually
              optional</span></dt><dd>
<p>Calling the file <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm6_d1e24209"></a>close</code> method terminates your
                connection to the external file. As discussed in Chapter 6, in Python an
                object’s memory space is automatically reclaimed as soon as
                the object is no longer referenced anywhere in the program.
                When file objects are reclaimed, Python also automatically
                closes the files if they are still open (this also happens
                when a program shuts down). This means you don’t always need
                to manually close your files, especially in simple scripts
                that don’t run for long. On the other hand, including manual
                <code class="epub__literal">close</code> calls can’t hurt and
                is usually a good idea in larger systems. Also, strictly
                speaking, this auto-close-on-collection feature of files is
                not part of the language definition, and it may change over
                time. Consequently, manually issuing file <code class="epub__literal">close</code> method calls is a good habit
                to form. (For an alternative way to guarantee automatic file
                closes, also see this section’s later discussion of the file
                object’s <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>context manager</em></span>, used with the
                new <code class="epub__literal">with</code>/<code class="epub__literal">as</code> statement in Python 2.6 and
                3.0.)</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Files are buffered and seekable.</span></dt><dd>
<p>The prior paragraph’s notes about closing files are
                important, because closing both frees up operating system
                resources and flushes output buffers. By default, output files
                are always buffered, which means that text you write may not
                be transferred from memory to disk immediately—closing a file,
                or running its <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm6_d1e24239"></a>flush</code> method, forces the buffered data
                to disk. You can avoid buffering with extra <code class="epub__literal">open</code> arguments, but it may impede
                performance. Python files are also random-access on a byte
                offset basis—their <code class="epub__literal">seek</code>
                method allows your scripts to jump around to read and write at
                specific locations.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Files in Action"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="files_in_action"></a>Files in Action</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Let’s <a id="ch09filesexusage"></a>work through a simple example that demonstrates
          file-processing basics. The following code begins by opening a new
          text file for output, writing two lines (strings terminated with a
          newline marker, <code class="epub__literal">\n</code>), and closing
          the file. Later, the example opens the same file again in input mode
          and reads the lines back one at a time with <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm6_d1e24266"></a>readline</code>. Notice that the third
          <code class="epub__literal">readline</code> call returns an empty
          string; this is how Python file methods tell you that you’ve reached
          the end of the file (empty lines in the file come back as strings
          containing just a newline character, not as empty strings). Here’s
          the complete interaction:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e24274"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>myfile = open('myfile.txt', 'w')</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Open for text output: create/empty</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>myfile.write('hello text file\n')</code></strong>       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Write a line of text: string</span></em>
16
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>myfile.write('goodbye text file\n')</code></strong>
18
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>myfile.close()</code></strong>                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Flush output buffers to disk</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>myfile = open('myfile.txt')</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Open for text input: 'r' is default</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>myfile.readline()</code></strong>                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Read the lines back</span></em>
'hello text file\n'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>myfile.readline()</code></strong>
'goodbye text file\n'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>myfile.readline()</code></strong>                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Empty string: end of file</span></em>
''</pre>
<p>Notice that file <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm6_d1e24323"></a>write</code> calls return the number of characters
          written in Python 3.0; in 2.6 they don’t, so you won’t see these
          numbers echoed interactively. This example writes each line of text,
          including its end-of-line terminator, <code class="epub__literal">\n</code>, as a string; write methods don’t add the end-of-line
          character for us, so we must include it to properly terminate our
          lines (otherwise the next write will simply extend the current line
          in the file).</p>
<p>If you want to display the file’s content with end-of-line
          characters interpreted, read the entire file into a string
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>all at once</em></span> with the file object’s <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm6_d1e24340"></a>read</code> method and print it:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e24345"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('myfile.txt').read()</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Read all at once into string</span></em>
'hello text file\ngoodbye text file\n'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(open('myfile.txt').read())</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># User-friendly display</span></em>
hello text file
goodbye text file</pre>
<p>And if you want to scan a text file line by line, <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e24361"></a><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>file iterators</em></span> are often your
          best option:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e24369"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for line in open('myfile.txt'):</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Use file iterators, not reads</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(line, end='')</code></strong>
...
hello text file
goodbye text file</pre>
<p>When coded this way, the temporary file object created by
          <code class="epub__literal">open</code> will automatically read and
          return one line on each loop iteration. This form is usually easiest
          to code, good on memory use, and may be faster than some other
          options (depending on many variables, of course). Since we haven’t
          reached statements or iterators yet, though, you’ll have to wait
          until Chapter 14 for
          a more complete explanation of this code.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Text and binary files in Python 3.0"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="text_and_binary_files_in_python_3.0"></a>Text and binary files in Python 3.0</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Strictly <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e24392"></a>speaking, <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e24400"></a>the example in the prior section uses text files. In
            both Python 3.0 and 2.6, file type is determined by the second
            argument to <code class="epub__literal">open</code>, the mode
            string—an included “b” means binary. Python has always supported
            both text and binary files, but in Python 3.0 there is a sharper
            distinction between the two:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm6_d1e24413"></a>Text files</em></span> represent content as
                normal <code class="epub__literal">str</code> strings, perform
                Unicode encoding and decoding automatically, and perform
                end-of-line translation by default.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm6_d1e24424"></a>Binary files</em></span> represent content as a
                special <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> string type
                and allow programs to access file content unaltered.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>In contrast, Python 2.6 text files handle both 8-bit text
            and binary data, and a special string type and file interface
            (<code class="epub__literal">unicode</code> strings and <code class="epub__literal">codecs.open</code>) handles Unicode text. The
            differences in Python 3.0 stem from the fact that simple and
            Unicode text have been merged in the normal string type—which
            makes sense, given that all text is Unicode, including ASCII and
            other 8-bit encodings.</p>
<p>Because most programmers deal only with ASCII text, they can
            get by with the basic text file interface used in the prior
            example, and normal strings. All strings are technically Unicode
            in 3.0, but ASCII users will not generally notice. In fact, files
            and strings work the same in 3.0 and 2.6 if your script’s scope is
            limited to such simple forms of text.</p>
<p>If you need to handle internationalized applications or
            byte-oriented data, though, the distinction in 3.0 impacts your
            code (usually for the better). In general, you must use <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> strings for binary files, and
            normal <code class="epub__literal">str</code> strings for text
            files. Moreover, because text files implement Unicode encodings,
            you cannot open a binary data file in text mode—decoding its content to Unicode
            text will likely fail.</p>
<p>Let’s look at an example. When you read a binary data file
            you get back a <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> object—a sequence of small integers
            that represent absolute byte values (which may or may not
            correspond to characters), which looks and feels almost exactly
            like a normal string:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e24461"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>data = open('data.bin', 'rb').read()</code></strong>    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Open binary file: rb=read binary</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>data</code></strong>                                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># bytes string holds binary data</span></em>
b'\x00\x00\x00\x07spam\x00\x08'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>data[4:8]</code></strong>                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Act like strings</span></em>
b'spam'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>data[4:8][0]</code></strong>                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># But really are small 8-bit integers</span></em>
115
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bin(data[4:8][0])</code></strong>                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Python 3.0 bin() function</span></em>
'0b1110011'</pre>
<p>In addition, binary files do not perform any end-of-line
            translation on data; text files by default map all forms to and
            from <code class="epub__literal">\n</code> when written and read
            and implement Unicode encodings on transfers. Since Unicode and
            binary data is of marginal interest to many Python programmers,
            we’ll postpone the full story until Chapter 36. For now, let’s move on to
            some more substantial file examples.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Storing and parsing Python objects in files"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="storing_and_parsing_python_objects_in_f"></a>Storing and parsing Python objects in files</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Our next <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e24506"></a>example writes a variety of Python objects into a
            text file on multiple lines. Notice that it must convert objects
            to strings using conversion tools. Again, file data is always
            strings in our scripts, and write methods do not do any automatic
            to-string formatting for us (for space, I’m omitting byte-count
            return values from <code class="epub__literal">write</code>
            methods from here on):</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e24517"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X, Y, Z = 43, 44, 45</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Native Python objects</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S = 'Spam'</code></strong>                              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Must be strings to store in file</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D = {'a': 1, 'b': 2}</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = [1, 2, 3]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F = open('datafile.txt', 'w')</code></strong>           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Create output file</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F.write(S + '\n')</code></strong>                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Terminate lines with \n</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F.write('%s,%s,%s\n' % (X, Y, Z))</code></strong>       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Convert numbers to strings</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F.write(str(L) + '$' + str(D) + '\n')</code></strong>   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Convert and separate with $</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F.close()</code></strong></pre>
<p>Once we have created our file, we can inspect its contents
            by opening it and reading it into a string (a single operation).
            Notice that the interactive echo gives the exact byte contents,
            while the <code class="epub__literal">print</code> operation
            interprets embedded end-of-line characters to render a more
            user-friendly display:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e24570"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>chars = open('datafile.txt').read()</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Raw string display</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>chars</code></strong>
"Spam\n43,44,45\n[1, 2, 3]${'a': 1, 'b': 2}\n"
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(chars)</code></strong>                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># User-friendly display</span></em>
Spam
43,44,45
[1, 2, 3]${'a': 1, 'b': 2}</pre>
<p>We now have to use other conversion tools to translate from
            the strings in the text file to real Python objects. As Python
            never converts strings to numbers (or other types of objects)
            automatically, this is required if we need to gain access to
            normal object tools like indexing, addition, and so on:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e24589"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F = open('datafile.txt')</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Open again</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>line = F.readline()</code></strong>                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Read one line</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>line</code></strong>
'Spam\n'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>line.rstrip()</code></strong>                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Remove end-of-line</span></em>
'Spam'</pre>
<p>For this first line, we used the string <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm6_d1e24616"></a>rstrip</code> method to get rid of the trailing
            end-of-line character; a <code class="epub__literal">line[:−1]</code> slice would work, too, but
            only if we can be sure all lines end in the <code class="epub__literal">\n</code> character (the last line in a file
            sometimes does not).</p>
<p>So far, we’ve read the line containing the string. Now let’s
            grab the next line, which contains numbers, and parse out (that
            is, extract) the objects on that line:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e24629"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>line = F.readline()</code></strong>                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Next line from file</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>line</code></strong>                                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># It's a string here</span></em>
'43,44,45\n'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>parts = line.split(',')</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Split (parse) on commas</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>parts</code></strong>
['43', '44', '45\n']</pre>
<p>We used the string <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm6_d1e24656"></a>split</code> method here to chop up the line on
            its comma delimiters; the result is a list of substrings
            containing the individual numbers. We still must convert from
            strings to integers, though, if we wish to perform math on
            these:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e24662"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>int(parts[1])</code></strong>                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Convert from string to int</span></em>
44
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>numbers = [int(P) for P in parts]</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Convert all in list at once</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>numbers</code></strong>
[43, 44, 45]</pre>
<p>As we have learned, <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e24681"></a><code class="epub__literal">int</code> translates a
            string of digits into an integer object, and the list
            comprehension expression introduced in Chapter 4 can apply the call to
            each item in our list all at once (you’ll find more on list
            comprehensions later in this book). Notice that we didn’t have to
            run <code class="epub__literal">rstrip</code> to delete the
            <code class="epub__literal">\n</code> at the end of the last part;
            <code class="epub__literal">int</code> and some other converters
            quietly ignore whitespace around digits.</p>
<p>Finally, to convert the stored list and dictionary in the
            third line of the file, we can run them through <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm6_d1e24701"></a>eval</code>, a built-in function that treats a
            string as a piece of executable program code (technically, a
            string containing a Python expression):</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e24706"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>line = F.readline()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>line</code></strong>
"[1, 2, 3]${'a': 1, 'b': 2}\n"
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>parts = line.split('$')</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Split (parse) on $</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>parts</code></strong>
['[1, 2, 3]', "{'a': 1, 'b': 2}\n"]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>eval(parts[0])</code></strong>                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Convert to any object type</span></em>
[1, 2, 3]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>objects = [eval(P) for P in parts]</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Do same for all in list</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>objects</code></strong>
[[1, 2, 3], {'a': 1, 'b': 2}]</pre>
<p>Because the end result of all this parsing and converting is
            a list of normal Python objects instead of strings, we can now
            apply list and dictionary operations to them in our script.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Storing native Python objects with pickle"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="storing_native_python_objects_with_pick"></a>Storing native Python objects with pickle</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Using <code class="epub__literal">eval</code> <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e24750"></a>to convert from strings to objects, as demonstrated
            in the preceding code, is a powerful tool. In fact, sometimes it’s
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>too</em></span> powerful. <code class="epub__literal">eval</code> will happily run any Python
            expression—even one that might delete all the files on your
            computer, given the necessary permissions! If you really want to
            store native Python objects, but you can’t trust the source of the
            data in the file, Python’s standard library <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm6_d1e24763"></a>pickle</code> module is ideal.</p>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> module is an
            advanced tool that allows us to store almost any Python object in
            a file directly, with no to- or from-string conversion requirement
            on our part. It’s like a super-general data formatting and parsing
            utility. To store a dictionary in a file, for instance, we pickle
            it directly:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e24773"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D = {'a': 1, 'b': 2}</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F = open('datafile.pkl', 'wb')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import pickle</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pickle.dump(D, F)</code></strong>                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Pickle any object to file</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F.close()</code></strong></pre>
<p>Then, to get the dictionary back later, we simply use
            <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> again to re-create
            it:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e24798"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F = open('datafile.pkl', 'rb')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>E = pickle.load(F)</code></strong>                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Load any object from file</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>E</code></strong>
{'a': 1, 'b': 2}</pre>
<p>We get back an equivalent dictionary object, with no manual
            splitting or converting required. The <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> module performs what is known as
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>object serialization</em></span>—converting objects to
            and from strings of bytes—but requires very little work on our
            part. In fact, <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code>
            internally translates our dictionary to a string form, though it’s
            not much to look at (and may vary if we pickle in other data
            protocol modes):</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e24823"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('datafile.pkl', 'rb').read()</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Format is prone to change!</span></em>
b'\x80\x03}q\x00(X\x01\x00\x00\x00aq\x01K\x01X\x01\x00\x00\x00bq\x02K\x02u.'</pre>
<p>Because <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> can
            reconstruct the object from this format, we don’t have to deal
            with that ourselves. For more on the <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> module, see the Python standard
            library manual, or import <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> and pass it to <code class="epub__literal">help</code> interactively. While you’re
            exploring, also take a look at the <code class="epub__literal">shelve</code> module. <code class="epub__literal">shelve</code> is a tool that uses <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> to store Python objects in an
            access-by-key filesystem, which is beyond our scope here (though
            you will get to see an example of <code class="epub__literal">shelve</code> in action in Chapter 27, and other
            <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> examples in Chapters
            30 and 36).</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p>Note that I opened the file used to store the pickled
              object in <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>binary mode</em></span>; binary mode is
              always required in Python 3.0, because the pickler creates and
              uses a <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> string object,
              and these objects imply binary-mode files (text-mode files imply
              <code class="epub__literal">str</code> strings in 3.0). In
              earlier Pythons it’s OK to use text-mode files for protocol 0
              (the default, which creates ASCII text), as long as text mode is
              used consistently; higher protocols require binary-mode files.
              Python 3.0’s default protocol is 3 (binary), but it creates
              <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> even for protocol 0.
              See Chapter 36, Python’s
              library manual, or reference books for more details on
              this.</p>
<p>Python 2.6 also has a <code class="epub__literal">cPickle</code> module, which is an optimized
              version of <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> that can be
              imported directly for speed. Python 3.0 renames this module
              <code class="epub__literal">_pickle</code> and uses it
              automatically in <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code>—scripts simply import <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> and let Python optimize
              itself.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Storing and parsing packed binary data in files"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="storing_and_parsing_packed_binary_data"></a>Storing and parsing packed binary data in files</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>One <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e24907"></a>other file-related note before we move on: some
            advanced applications also need to deal with packed binary data,
            created perhaps by a C language program. Python’s standard library
            includes a tool to help in this domain—the <code class="epub__literal">struct</code> module knows how to both compose
            and parse packed binary data. In a sense, this is another
            data-conversion tool that
            interprets strings in files as binary data.</p>
<p>To create a packed binary data file, for example, open it in
            <code class="epub__literal">'wb'</code> (write binary) mode, and
            pass <code class="epub__literal">struct</code> a format string and
            some Python objects. The format string used here means pack as a
            4-byte integer, a 4-character string, and a 2-byte integer, all in
            big-endian form (other format codes handle padding bytes,
            floating-point numbers, and more):</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e24929"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F = open('data.bin', 'wb')</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Open binary output file</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import struct</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>data = struct.pack('&gt;i4sh', 7, 'spam', 8)</code></strong>      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Make packed binary data</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>data</code></strong>
b'\x00\x00\x00\x07spam\x00\x08'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F.write(data)</code></strong>                                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Write byte string</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F.close()</code></strong></pre>
<p>Python creates a binary <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> data string, which we write out to
            the file normally—this one consists mostly of nonprintable
            characters printed in hexadecimal escapes, and is the same binary
            file we met earlier. To parse the values out to normal Python
            objects, we simply read the string back and unpack it using the
            same format string. Python extracts the values into normal Python
            objects—integers and a string:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e24963"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F = open('data.bin', 'rb')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>data = F.read()</code></strong>                                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Get packed binary data</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>data</code></strong>
b'\x00\x00\x00\x07spam\x00\x08'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>values = struct.unpack('&gt;i4sh', data)</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Convert to Python objects</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>values</code></strong>
(7, b'spam', 8)</pre>
<p>Binary data files are advanced and somewhat low-level tools
            that we won’t cover in more detail here; for more help, see Chapter 36, consult the Python library
            manual, or import <code class="epub__literal">struct</code> and
            pass it to the <code class="epub__literal">help</code> function
            interactively. Also note that the binary file-processing modes
            <code class="epub__literal">'wb'</code> and <code class="epub__literal">'rb'</code> can be used to process a simpler
            binary file such as an image or audio file as a whole without
            having to unpack its contents.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="File context managers"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="file_context_managers"></a>File context managers</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>You’ll <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e25008"></a>also want to watch for Chapter 33’s discussion of the file’s
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>context manager</em></span> support, new in Python 3.0
            and 2.6. Though more a feature of exception processing than files
            themselves, it allows us to wrap file-processing code in a logic
            layer that ensures that the file will be closed automatically on
            exit, instead of relying on the auto-close on garbage
            collection:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e25021"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">with open(r'C:\misc\data.txt') as myfile:        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># See Chapter 33 for details</span></em>
    for line in myfile:
        <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...use line here...</code></em></pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">try/finally</code> statement
            we’ll look at in Chapter 33 can
            provide similar functionality, but at some cost in extra
            code—three extra lines, to be precise (though we can often avoid
            both options and let Python close files for us
            automatically):</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e25037"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">myfile = open(r'C:\misc\data.txt')
try:
    for line in myfile:
        <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...use line here...</code></em>
finally:
    myfile.close()</pre>
<p>Since both these options require more information than we
            have yet obtained, we’ll postpone details until later in this
            <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e25044"></a>book.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Other File Tools"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="other_file_tools"></a>Other File Tools</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>There are additional, <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e25052"></a>more advanced file methods shown in Table 9-2, and even more that are not in
          the table. For instance, as mentioned earlier, <code class="epub__literal">seek</code> resets your current position in a
          file (the next read or write happens at that position), <code class="epub__literal">flush</code> forces buffered output to be written
          out to disk (by default, files are always buffered), and so
          on.</p>
<p>The Python standard library manual and the reference books
          described in the Preface provide complete lists of file methods; for
          a quick look, run a <code class="epub__literal">dir</code> or
          <code class="epub__literal">help</code> call interactively, passing
          in an open file object (in Python 2.6 but not 3.0, you can pass in
          the name <code class="epub__literal">file</code> instead). For more
          file-processing examples, watch for the sidebar Why You Will Care: File Scanners. <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e26265"></a>It sketches common file-scanning loop code patterns
          with statements we have not covered enough yet to use here.</p>
<p>Also, note that although the <code class="epub__literal">open</code> function and the file objects it
          returns are your main interface to external files in a Python
          script, there are additional file-like tools in the Python toolset.
          Also available, to name a few, are:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Standard streams</span></dt><dd>
<p>Preopened file objects in the <code class="epub__literal">sys</code> module, such as <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code> (see Print Operations)</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Descriptor files in the <code class="epub__literal">os</code> module</span></dt><dd>
<p>Integer file handles that support lower-level tools such
                as file locking</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Sockets, pipes, and FIFOs</span></dt><dd>
<p>File-like objects used to synchronize processes or
                communicate over networks</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Access-by-key files known as “shelves”</span></dt><dd>
<p>Used to store unaltered Python objects directly, by key
                (used in Chapter 27)</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Shell command streams</span></dt><dd>
<p>Tools such as <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code> and <code class="epub__literal">subprocess.Popen</code> that support
                spawning shell commands and reading and writing to their
                standard streams</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>The third-party open source domain offers even more file-like
          tools, including support for communicating with serial ports in the
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>PySerial</em></span> extension and interactive programs in
          the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>pexpect</em></span> system. See more advanced Python
          texts and the Web at large for additional information on file-like
          tools.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Version skew note</em></span>: In Python 2.5 and
            earlier, the built-in name <code class="epub__literal">open</code>
            is essentially a synonym for the name <code class="epub__literal">file</code>, and files may technically be
            opened by calling either <code class="epub__literal">open</code>
            or <code class="epub__literal">file</code> (though <code class="epub__literal">open</code> is generally preferred for
            opening). In Python 3.0, the name <code class="epub__literal">file</code> is no longer available, because of
            its redundancy with <code class="epub__literal">open</code>.</p>
<p>Python 2.6 users may also use the name <code class="epub__literal">file</code> as the file object type, in order
            to customize files with object-oriented programming (described
            later in this book). In Python 3.0, files have changed radically.
            The classes used to implement file objects live in the standard
            library module <code class="epub__literal">io</code>. See this
            module’s documentation or code for the classes it makes available
            for customization, and run a <code class="epub__literal">type(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>F</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code> call on open files
            <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>F</code></em> for <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e25188"></a><a id="I_indexterm6_d1e25190"></a>hints.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Type Categories Revisited"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
