<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Type Categories Revisited</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="type_categories_revisited"></a>Type Categories Revisited</h1>
<p>Now <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e25198"></a>that we’ve seen all of Python’s core built-in types in
        action, let’s wrap up our object types tour by reviewing some of the
        properties they share. Table 9-3
        classifies all the major types we’ve seen so far according to the type
        categories introduced earlier. Here are some points to
        remember:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Objects share operations according to their category; for
            instance, strings, lists, and tuples all share sequence operations
            such as concatenation, length, and indexing.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Only mutable objects (lists, dictionaries, and sets) may be
            changed in-place; you cannot change numbers, strings, or tuples
            in-place.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Files export only methods, so mutability doesn’t really
            apply to them—their state may be changed when they are processed,
            but this isn’t quite the same as Python core type mutability
            constraints.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>“Numbers” in Table 9-3
            includes all number types: integer (and the distinct long integer
            in 2.6), floating-point, complex, decimal, and fraction.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>“Strings” in Table 9-3
            includes <code class="epub__literal">str</code>, as well as
            <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> in 3.0 and <code class="epub__literal">unicode</code> in 2.6; the <code class="epub__literal">bytearray</code> string type in 3.0 is
            mutable.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Sets are something like the keys of a valueless dictionary,
            but they don’t map to values and are not ordered, so sets are
            neither a mapping nor a sequence type; <code class="epub__literal">frozenset</code> is an immutable variant of
            <code class="epub__literal">set</code>.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In addition to type category operations, as of Python 2.6
            and 3.0 all the types in Table 9-3
            have callable methods, which are generally specific to their
            <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e25254"></a><a id="I_indexterm6_d1e25259"></a>type.</p></li></ul>
</div><div class="epub__table"><a id="object_classifications"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Table 9-3. Object classifications</p><div class="epub__table-contents">
<table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; " summary="Object classifications">
<colgroup><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Object
                type</p></th><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Category</p></th><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Mutable?</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Numbers
                (all)</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Numeric</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>No</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Strings</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Sequence</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>No</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Lists</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Sequence</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Yes</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Dictionaries</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Mapping</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Yes</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Tuples</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Sequence</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>No</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Files</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Extension</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>N/A</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Sets</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Set</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Yes</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">frozenset</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Set</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>No</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">bytearray</code> (3.0)</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Sequence</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Yes</p></td></tr></tbody>
</table>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="why_you_will_care_colon_operator_overlo"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Why You Will Care: Operator Overloading</p>
<p>In Part VI of this book, <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e25384"></a>we’ll see that objects we implement with classes can
          pick and choose from these categories arbitrarily. For instance, if
          we want to provide a new kind of specialized sequence object that is
          consistent with built-in sequences, we can code a class that
          overloads things like indexing and concatenation:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e25388"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class MySequence:
     def __getitem__(self, index):
         # Called on self[index], others
     def __add__(self, other):
         # Called on self + other</pre>
<p>and so on. We can also make the new object mutable or not by
          selectively implementing methods called for in-place change
          operations (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">__setitem__</code> is
          called on <code class="epub__literal">self[index]=value</code>
          assignments). Although it’s beyond this book’s scope, it’s also
          possible to implement new objects in an external language like C as
          C extension types. For these, we fill in C function pointer slots to
          choose between number, sequence, and mapping operation sets.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Object Flexibility"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
