<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Comparisons, Equality, and Truth</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="comparisons_comma_equality_comma_and_tr"></a>Comparisons, Equality, and Truth</h1>
<p>All Python <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e25703"></a>objects also respond to comparisons: tests for equality,
        relative magnitude, and so on. Python comparisons always inspect all
        parts of compound objects until a result can be determined. In fact,
        when nested objects are present, Python automatically traverses data
        structures to apply comparisons <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>recursively</em></span> from
        left to right, and as deeply as needed. The first difference found
        along the way determines the comparison result.</p>
<p>For instance, a comparison of list objects compares all their
        components automatically:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e25714"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L1 = [1, ('a', 3)]</code></strong>           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same value, unique objects</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L2 = [1, ('a', 3)]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L1 == L2, L1 is L2</code></strong>           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Equivalent? Same object?</span></em>
(True, False)</pre>
<p>Here, <code class="epub__literal">L1</code> and <code class="epub__literal">L2</code> are assigned lists that are equivalent
        but distinct objects. Because of the nature of Python references
        (studied in Chapter 6), there
        are two ways to test for <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e25741"></a><a id="I_indexterm6_d1e25744"></a><a id="I_indexterm6_d1e25747"></a>equality:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>The</strong></span> <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>==</code></strong> <span class="epub__strong"><strong>operator
            tests value equivalence</strong></span>. Python performs an equivalence
            test, comparing all nested objects recursively.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>The</strong></span> <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>is</code></strong> <span class="epub__strong"><strong>operator
            tests object identity</strong></span>. Python tests whether the two are
            really the same object (i.e., live at the same address in
            memory).</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>In the preceding example, <code class="epub__literal">L1</code>
        and <code class="epub__literal">L2</code> pass the <code class="epub__literal">==</code> test (they have equivalent values because
        all their components are equivalent) but fail the <code class="epub__literal">is</code> check (they reference two different
        objects, and hence two different pieces of memory). Notice what
        happens for short strings, though:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e25788"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S1 = 'spam'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S2 = 'spam'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S1 == S2, S1 is S2</code></strong>
(True, True)</pre>
<p>Here, we should again have two distinct objects that happen to
        have the same value: <code class="epub__literal">==</code> should be
        true, and <code class="epub__literal">is</code> should be false. But
        because Python internally caches and reuses some strings as an
        optimization, there really is just a single string <code class="epub__literal">'spam'</code> in memory, shared by <code class="epub__literal">S1</code> and <code class="epub__literal">S2</code>; hence, the <code class="epub__literal">is</code> identity test reports a true result. To
        trigger the normal behavior, we need to use longer strings:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e25820"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S1 = 'a longer string'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S2 = 'a longer string'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S1 == S2, S1 is S2</code></strong>
(True, False)</pre>
<p>Of course, because strings are immutable, the object caching
        mechanism is irrelevant to your code—strings can’t be changed
        in-place, regardless of how many variables refer to them. If identity
        tests seem confusing, see Chapter 6 for a refresher on object
        reference concepts.</p>
<p>As a rule of thumb, the <code class="epub__literal">==</code>
        operator is what you will want to use for almost all equality checks;
        <code class="epub__literal">is</code> is reserved for highly
        specialized roles. We’ll see cases where these operators are put to
        use later in the book.</p>
<p>Relative magnitude comparisons are also applied recursively to
        nested data structures:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e25846"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L1 = [1, ('a', 3)]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L2 = [1, ('a', 2)]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L1 &lt; L2, L1 == L2, L1 &gt; L2</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Less, equal, greater: tuple of results</span></em>
(False, False, True)</pre>
<p>Here, <code class="epub__literal">L1</code> is greater than
        <code class="epub__literal">L2</code> because the nested <code class="epub__literal">3</code> is greater than <code class="epub__literal">2</code>. The result of the last line is really a
        tuple of three objects—the results of the three expressions typed (an
        example of a tuple without its enclosing parentheses).</p>
<p>In general, Python compares types as follows:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Numbers are compared by relative magnitude.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Strings are compared lexicographically, character by
            character (<code class="epub__literal">"abc" &lt;
            "ac"</code>).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Lists and tuples are compared by comparing each component
            from left to right.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Dictionaries compare as equal if their sorted <code class="epub__literal">(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>key</code></em><code class="epub__literal">,</code>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>value</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code> lists are equal. Relative magnitude
            comparisons are not supported for dictionaries in Python 3.0, but
            they work in 2.6 and earlier as though comparing sorted <code class="epub__literal">(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>key</code></em><code class="epub__literal">,</code>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>value</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code> lists.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Nonnumeric mixed-type comparisons (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">1 &lt; 'spam'</code>) are errors in Python 3.0.
            They are allowed in Python 2.6, but use a fixed but arbitrary
            ordering rule. By proxy, this also applies to sorts, which use
            comparisons internally: nonnumeric mixed-type collections cannot
            be sorted in 3.0.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>In general, comparisons of structured objects proceed as though
        you had written the objects as literals and compared all their parts
        one at a time from left to right. In later chapters, we’ll see other
        object types that can change the way they get compared.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Python 3.0 Dictionary Comparisons"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="python_3.0_dictionary_comparisons"></a>Python 3.0 Dictionary Comparisons</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e25930"></a>second <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e25936"></a>to last point in the preceding section merits
          illustration. In Python 2.6 and earlier, dictionaries support
          magnitude comparisons, as though you were comparing sorted key/value
          lists:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e25942"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python26\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D1 = {'a':1, 'b':2}</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D2 = {'a':1, 'b':3}</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D1 == D2</code></strong>
False
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D1 &lt; D2</code></strong>
True</pre>
<p>In Python 3.0, magnitude comparisons for dictionaries are
          removed because they incur too much overhead when equality is
          desired (equality uses an optimized scheme in 3.0 that doesn’t
          literally compare sorted key/value lists). The alternative in 3.0 is
          to either write loops to compare values by key or compare the sorted
          key/value lists manually—the
          <code class="epub__literal">items</code> dictionary methods and
          <code class="epub__literal">sorted</code> built-in suffice:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e25970"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python30\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D1 = {'a':1, 'b':2}</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D2 = {'a':1, 'b':3}</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D1 == D2</code></strong>
False
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D1 &lt; D2</code></strong>
TypeError: unorderable types: dict() &lt; dict()

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(D1.items())</code></strong>
[('a', 1), ('b', 2)]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sorted(D1.items())</code></strong>
[('a', 1), ('b', 2)]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sorted(D1.items()) &lt; sorted(D2.items())</code></strong>
True
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sorted(D1.items()) &gt; sorted(D2.items())</code></strong>
False</pre>
<p>In practice, most programs requiring this behavior will
          develop more efficient ways to compare data in dictionaries than
          either this workaround or the original behavior in Python
          2.6.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The Meaning of True and False in Python"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_meaning_of_true_and_false_in_python"></a>The Meaning of True and False in Python</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Notice <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e26007"></a>that <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e26011"></a>the <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e26015"></a>test results returned in the last two examples
          represent true and false values. They print as the words <code class="epub__literal">True</code> and <code class="epub__literal">False</code>, but now that we’re using logical
          tests like these in earnest, I should be a bit more formal about
          what these names really mean.</p>
<p>In Python, as in most programming languages, an integer
          <code class="epub__literal">0</code> represents false, and an
          integer <code class="epub__literal">1</code> represents true. In
          addition, though, Python recognizes any empty data structure as
          false and any nonempty data structure as true. More generally, the
          notions of true and false are intrinsic properties of every object
          in Python—each object is either true or false, as follows:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Numbers are true if nonzero.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Other objects are true if nonempty.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Table 9-4 gives examples
          of true and false objects in Python.</p><div class="epub__table"><a id="example_object_truth_values"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Table 9-4. Example object truth values</p><div class="epub__table-contents">
<table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; " summary="Example object truth values">
<colgroup><col width="75pt"></col><col width="75pt"></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Object</p></th><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Value</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">"spam"</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">True</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">""</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">False</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">[]</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">False</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">{}</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">False</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">1</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">True</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">0.0</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">False</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">None</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">False</code></p></td></tr></tbody>
</table>
</div>
</div>
<p>As one application, because objects are true or false
          themselves, it’s common to see Python programmers code tests like
          <code class="epub__literal">if X:</code>, which, assuming <code class="epub__literal">X</code> is a string, is the same as <code class="epub__literal">if X != '':</code>. In other words, you can test
          the object itself, instead of comparing it to an empty object. (More
          on <code class="epub__literal">if</code> statements in Part III.)</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="The None object"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="the_none_object"></a>The None object</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e26144"></a>shown <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e26152"></a>in the last item in Table 9-4, Python also provides a
            special object called <code class="epub__literal">None</code>,
            which is always considered to be false. <code class="epub__literal">None</code> was introduced in Chapter 4; it is the only value
            of a special data type in Python and typically serves as an empty
            placeholder (much like a <code class="epub__literal">NULL</code>
            pointer in C).</p>
<p>For example, recall that for lists you cannot assign to an
            offset unless that offset already exists (the list does not
            magically grow if you make an out-of-bounds assignment). To
            preallocate a 100-item list such that you can add to any of the
            100 offsets, you can fill it with <code class="epub__literal">None</code> objects:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e26175"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = [None] * 100</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
[None, None, None, None, None, None, None, ... ]</pre>
<p>This doesn’t limit the size of the list (it can still grow
            and shrink later), but simply presets an initial size to allow for
            future index assignments. You could initialize a list with zeros
            the same way, of course, but best practice dictates using <code class="epub__literal">None</code> if the list’s contents are not yet
            known.</p>
<p>Keep in mind that <code class="epub__literal">None</code>
            does not mean “undefined.” That is, <code class="epub__literal">None</code> is something, not nothing (despite
            its name!)—it is a real object and piece of memory, given a
            built-in name by Python. Watch for other uses of this special
            object later in the book; it is also the default return value of
            functions, as we’ll see in Part IV.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="The bool type"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="the_bool_type"></a>The bool type</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Also <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e26203"></a>keep <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e26211"></a>in mind that the Python Boolean type <code class="epub__literal">bool</code>, introduced in Chapter 5, simply augments the notions of true
            and false in Python. As we learned in Chapter 5, the built-in words <code class="epub__literal">True</code> and <code class="epub__literal">False</code> are just customized versions of
            the integers <code class="epub__literal">1</code> and <code class="epub__literal">0</code>—it’s as if these two words have been
            preassigned to <code class="epub__literal">1</code> and <code class="epub__literal">0</code> everywhere in Python. Because of the
            way this new type is implemented, this is really just a minor
            extension to the notions of true and false already described,
            designed to make truth values more explicit:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>When used explicitly in truth test code, the words
                <code class="epub__literal">True</code> and <code class="epub__literal">False</code> are equivalent to <code class="epub__literal">1</code> and <code class="epub__literal">0</code>, but they make the programmer’s
                intent clearer.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Results of Boolean tests run interactively print as the
                words <code class="epub__literal">True</code> and <code class="epub__literal">False</code>, instead of as <code class="epub__literal">1</code> and <code class="epub__literal">0</code>, to make the type of result
                clearer.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>You are not required to use only Boolean types in logical
            statements such as <code class="epub__literal">if</code>; all
            objects are still inherently true or false, and all the Boolean
            concepts mentioned in this chapter still work as described if you
            use other types. Python also provides a <code class="epub__literal">bool</code> built-in function that can be used
            to test the Boolean value of an object (i.e., whether it is
            True—that is, nonzero or nonempty):</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e26280"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bool(1)</code></strong>
True
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bool('spam')</code></strong>
True
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bool({})</code></strong>
False</pre>
<p>In practice, though, you’ll rarely notice the Boolean type
            produced by logic tests, because Boolean results are used
            automatically by <code class="epub__literal">if</code> statements
            and other selection tools. We’ll explore Booleans further when we
            study logical statements <a id="ch09objcomparisons"></a>in Chapter 12.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Python’s Type Hierarchies"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
