<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Built-in Type Gotchas</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="built-in_type_gotchas"></a>Built-in Type Gotchas</h1>
<p>That’s <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e26489"></a>the end of our look at core data types. We’ll wrap up
        this part of the book with a discussion of common problems that seem
        to bite new users (and the occasional expert), along with their
        solutions. Some of this is a review of ideas we’ve already covered,
        but these issues are important enough to warn about again here.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Assignment Creates References, Not Copies"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="assignment_creates_references_comma_not"></a>Assignment Creates References, Not Copies</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Because <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e26500"></a>this is such a central concept, I’ll mention it again:
          you need to understand what’s going on with shared references in
          your program. For instance, in the following example, the list
          object assigned to the name <code class="epub__literal">L</code> is
          referenced from <code class="epub__literal">L</code> and from inside
          the list assigned to the name <code class="epub__literal">M</code>.
          Changing <code class="epub__literal">L</code> in-place changes what
          <code class="epub__literal">M</code> references, too:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e26524"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = [1, 2, 3]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>M = ['X', L, 'Y']</code></strong>           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Embed a reference to L</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>M</code></strong>
['X', [1, 2, 3], 'Y']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L[1] = 0</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Changes M too</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>M</code></strong>
['X', [1, 0, 3], 'Y']</pre>
<p>This effect usually becomes important only in larger programs,
          and shared references are often exactly what you want. If they’re
          not, you can avoid sharing objects by copying them explicitly. For
          lists, you can always make a top-level copy by using an empty-limits
          slice:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e26550"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = [1, 2, 3]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>M = ['X', L[:], 'Y']</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Embed a copy of L</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L[1] = 0</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Changes only L, not M</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
[1, 0, 3]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>M</code></strong>
['X', [1, 2, 3], 'Y']</pre>
<p>Remember, slice limits default to 0 and the length of the
          sequence being sliced; if both are omitted, the slice extracts every
          item in the sequence and so makes a top-level copy (a new, unshared
          object).</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Repetition Adds One Level Deep"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="repetition_adds_one_level_deep"></a>Repetition Adds One Level Deep</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Repeating <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e26581"></a>a sequence is like adding it to itself a number of
          times. However, when mutable sequences are nested, the effect might
          not always be what you expect. For instance, in the following
          example <code class="epub__literal">X</code> is assigned to <code class="epub__literal">L</code> repeated four times, whereas <code class="epub__literal">Y</code> is assigned to a list
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>containing</em></span> <code class="epub__literal">L</code>
          repeated four times:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e26605"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = [4, 5, 6]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = L * 4</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Like [4, 5, 6] + [4, 5, 6] + ...</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Y = [L] * 4</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># [L] + [L] + ... = [L, L,...]</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X</code></strong>
[4, 5, 6, 4, 5, 6, 4, 5, 6, 4, 5, 6]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Y</code></strong>
[[4, 5, 6], [4, 5, 6], [4, 5, 6], [4, 5, 6]]</pre>
<p>Because <code class="epub__literal">L</code> was nested in the
          second repetition, <code class="epub__literal">Y</code> winds up
          embedding references back to the original list assigned to <code class="epub__literal">L</code>, and so is open to the same sorts of
          side effects noted in the last section:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e26640"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L[1] = 0</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Impacts Y but not X</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X</code></strong>
[4, 5, 6, 4, 5, 6, 4, 5, 6, 4, 5, 6]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Y</code></strong>
[[4, 0, 6], [4, 0, 6], [4, 0, 6], [4, 0, 6]]</pre>
<p>The same solutions to this problem apply here as in the
          previous section, as this is really just another way to create the
          shared mutable object reference case. If you remember that
          repetition, concatenation, and slicing copy only the top level of
          their operand objects, these sorts of cases make much more
          sense.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Beware of Cyclic Data Structures"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="beware_of_cyclic_data_structures"></a>Beware of Cyclic Data Structures</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>We <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e26661"></a>actually encountered this concept in a prior exercise:
          if a collection object contains a reference to itself, it’s called a
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>cyclic object</em></span>. Python prints a <code class="epub__literal">[...]</code> whenever it detects a cycle in the
          object, rather than getting stuck in an infinite loop:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e26675"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = ['grail']</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Append reference to same object</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L.append(L)</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Generates cycle in object: [...]</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
['grail', [...]]</pre>
<p>Besides understanding that the three dots in square brackets
          represent a cycle in the object, this case is worth knowing about
          because it can lead to gotchas—cyclic structures may cause code of
          your own to fall into unexpected loops if you don’t anticipate them.
          For instance, some programs keep a list or dictionary of already
          visited items and check it to determine whether they’re in a cycle.
          See the solutions to the  in Appendix B for more on this
          problem, and check out the <em class="epub__filename">reloadall.py</em> program in Chapter 24 for a solution.</p>
<p>Don’t use cyclic references unless you really need to. There
          are good reasons to create cycles, but unless you have code that
          knows how to handle them, you probably won’t want to make your
          objects reference themselves very often in practice.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Immutable Types Can’t Be Changed In-Place"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="immutable_types_can_apostrophy_t_be_cha"></a>Immutable Types Can’t Be Changed In-Place</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>You <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e26710"></a>can’t change an <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e26718"></a>immutable object in-place. Instead, you construct a
          new object with slicing, concatenation, and so on, and assign it
          back to the original reference, if needed:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e26722"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">T = (1, 2, 3)

T[2] = 4              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Error!</span></em>

T = T[:2] + (4,)      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># OK: (1, 2, 4)</span></em></pre>
<p>That might seem like extra coding work, but the upside is that
          the previous gotchas can’t happen when you’re using immutable
          objects such as tuples and strings; because they can’t be changed
          in-place, they are not open to the sorts of side effects that lists
          are.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Chapter Summary"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
