<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="chapter_summary-id8"></a>Chapter Summary</h1>
<p>This chapter explored the last two major core object types—the
        tuple and the file. We learned that tuples support all the usual
        sequence operations, have just a few methods, and do not allow any
        in-place changes because they are immutable. We also learned that
        files are returned by the built-in <code class="epub__literal">open</code> function and provide methods for
        reading and writing data. We explored how to translate Python objects
        to and from strings for storing in files, and we looked at the
        <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> and <code class="epub__literal">struct</code> modules for advanced roles (object
        serialization and binary data). Finally, we wrapped up by reviewing
        some properties common to all object types (e.g., shared references)
        and went through a list of common mistakes (“gotchas”) in the object
        type domain.</p>
<p>In the next part, we’ll shift gears, turning to the topic of
        statement syntax in Python—we’ll explore all of Python’s basic
        procedural statements in the chapters that follow. The next chapter
        kicks off that part of the book with an introduction to Python’s
        general syntax model, which is applicable to all statement types.
        Before moving on, though, take the chapter quiz, and then work through
        the end-of-part lab exercises to review type concepts. Statements
        largely just create and process objects, so make sure you’ve mastered
        this domain by working through all the exercises before <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e26747"></a>reading on.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Test Your Knowledge: Quiz"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
