<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_answers-id8"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</h1>
<div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The built-in <code class="epub__literal">len</code> function
            returns the length (number of contained items) for any container
            object in Python, including tuples. It is a built-in function
            instead of a type method because it applies to many different
            types of objects. In general, built-in functions and expressions
            may span many object types; methods are specific to a single
            object type, though some may be available on more than one type
            (<code class="epub__literal">index</code>, for example, works on
            lists and tuples).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Because they are immutable, you can’t really change tuples
            in-place, but you can generate a new tuple with the desired value.
            Given <code class="epub__literal">T = (4, 5, 6)</code>, you can
            change the first item by making a new tuple from its parts by
            slicing and concatenating: <code class="epub__literal">T = (1,) + T[1:]</code>. (Recall that
            single-item tuples require a trailing comma.) You could also
            convert the tuple to a list, change it in-place, and convert it
            back to a tuple, but this is more expensive and is rarely required
            in practice—simply use a list if you know that the object will
            require in-place changes.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The default for the processing mode argument in a file
            <code class="epub__literal">open</code> call is <code class="epub__literal">'r'</code>, for reading text input. For input
            text files, simply pass in the external file’s name.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> module can be
            used to store Python objects in a file without explicitly
            converting them to strings. The <code class="epub__literal">struct</code> module is related, but it assumes
            the data is to be in packed binary format in the file.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Import the <code class="epub__literal">copy</code> module,
            and call <code class="epub__literal">copy.deepcopy(X)</code> if
            you need to copy all parts of a nested structure <code class="epub__literal">X</code>. This is also rarely seen in practice;
            references are usually the desired behavior, and shallow copies
            (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">aList[:]</code>, <code class="epub__literal">aDict.copy()</code>) usually suffice for most
            copies.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>An object is considered true if it is either a nonzero
            number or a nonempty collection object. The built-in words
            <code class="epub__literal">True</code> and <code class="epub__literal">False</code> are essentially predefined to have
            the same meanings as integer <code class="epub__literal">1</code>
            and <code class="epub__literal">0</code>, respectively.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Acceptable answers include “To learn Python,” “To move on to
            the next part of the book,” or “To seek the Holy Grail.”</p></li></ol>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Test Your Knowledge: Part II Exercises"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
