<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Test Your Knowledge: Part II Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_part_ii_exerc"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Part II Exercises</h1>
<p>This session asks you to get your feet wet with built-in object
        fundamentals. As before, a few new ideas may pop up along the way, so
        be sure to flip to the answers in Appendix B when you’re done (or
        when you’re not, if necessary). If you have limited time, I suggest
        starting with exercises 10 and 11 (the most practical of the bunch),
        and then working from first to last as time allows. This is all
        fundamental material, though, so try to do as many of these as you
        can<a id="I_indexterm6_d1e26872"></a><a id="I_indexterm6_d1e26874"></a>.</p><div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>The basics</em></span>. Experiment interactively
            with the common type operations found in the various operation
            tables in this part of the book. To get started, bring up the
            Python interactive interpreter, type each of the following
            expressions, and try to explain what’s happening in each case.
            Note that the semicolon in some of these is being used as a
            statement separator, to squeeze multiple statements onto a single
            line: for example, <code class="epub__literal">X=1;X</code>
            assigns and then prints a variable (more on statement syntax in
            the next part of the book). Also remember that a comma between
            expressions usually builds a tuple, even if there are no enclosing
            parentheses: <code class="epub__literal">X,Y,Z</code> is a
            three-item tuple, which Python prints back to you in
            parentheses.</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e26892"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">2 ** 16
2 / 5, 2 / 5.0

"spam" + "eggs"
S = "ham"
"eggs " + S
S * 5
S[:0]
"green %s and %s" % ("eggs", S)
'green {0} and {1}'.format('eggs', S)

('x',)[0]
('x', 'y')[1]

L = [1,2,3] + [4,5,6]
L, L[:], L[:0], L[−2], L[−2:]
([1,2,3] + [4,5,6])[2:4]
[L[2], L[3]]
L.reverse(); L
L.sort(); L
L.index(4)

{'a':1, 'b':2}['b']
D = {'x':1, 'y':2, 'z':3}
D['w'] = 0
D['x'] + D['w']
D[(1,2,3)] = 4
list(D.keys()), list(D.values()), (1,2,3) in D

[[]], ["",[],(),{},None]</pre></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Indexing and slicing</em></span>. At the
            interactive prompt, define a list named <code class="epub__literal">L</code> that contains four strings or numbers
            (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">L=[0,1,2,3]</code>). Then,
            experiment with some boundary cases; you may not ever see these
            cases in real programs, but they are intended to make you think
            about the underlying model, and some may be useful in less
            artificial forms:</p><div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>What happens when you try to index out of bounds (e.g.,
                <code class="epub__literal">L[4]</code>)?</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>What about slicing out of bounds (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">L[−1000:100]</code>)?</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Finally, how does Python handle it if you try to extract
                a sequence in reverse, with the lower bound greater than the
                higher bound (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">L[3:1]</code>)? Hint: try assigning to this
                slice (<code class="epub__literal">L[3:1]=['?']</code>), and
                see where the value is put. Do you think this may be the same
                phenomenon you saw when slicing out of bounds?</p></li></ol>
</div></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Indexing, slicing, and</em></span>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>del</code></em>. Define another list <code class="epub__literal">L</code> with four items, and assign an empty
            list to one of its offsets (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">L[2]=[]</code>). What happens? Then, assign an
            empty list to a slice (<code class="epub__literal">L[2:3]=[]</code>). What happens now? Recall
            that slice assignment deletes the slice and inserts the new value
            where it used to be.</p>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">del</code> statement deletes
            offsets, keys, attributes, and names. Use it on your list to
            delete an item (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">del
            L[0]</code>). What happens if you delete an entire slice
            (<code class="epub__literal">del
            L[1:]</code>)? What happens when you assign a
            nonsequence to a slice (<code class="epub__literal">L[1:2]=1</code>)?</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Tuple assignment</em></span>. Type the following
            lines:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e26966"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = 'spam'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Y = 'eggs'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X, Y = Y, X</code></strong></pre>
<p>What do you think is happening to <code class="epub__literal">X</code> and <code class="epub__literal">Y</code> when you type this sequence?</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Dictionary keys</em></span>. Consider the following
            code fragments:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e26989"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D = {}</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D[1] = 'a'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D[2] = 'b'</code></strong></pre>
<p>You’ve learned that dictionaries aren’t accessed by offsets,
            so what’s going on here? Does the following shed any light on the
            subject? (Hint: strings, integers, and tuples share which type
            category?)</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e27001"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D[(1, 2, 3)] = 'c'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D</code></strong>
{1: 'a', 2: 'b', (1, 2, 3): 'c'}</pre></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Dictionary indexing</em></span>. Create a
            dictionary named <code class="epub__literal">D</code> with three
            entries, for keys <code class="epub__literal">'a'</code>, <code class="epub__literal">'b'</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">'c'</code>. What happens if you try to index a
            nonexistent key (<code class="epub__literal">D['d']</code>)? What
            does Python do if you try to assign to a nonexistent key <code class="epub__literal">'d'</code> (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">D['d']='spam'</code>)? How does this compare to
            out-of-bounds assignments and references for lists? Does this
            sound like the rule for variable names?</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Generic operations</em></span>. Run interactive
            tests to answer the following questions:</p><div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>What happens when you try to use the <code class="epub__literal">+</code> operator on different/mixed types
                (e.g., string <code class="epub__literal">+</code> list, list
                <code class="epub__literal">+</code> tuple)?</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Does <code class="epub__literal">+</code> work when one
                of the operands is a dictionary?</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Does the <code class="epub__literal">append</code>
                method work for both lists and strings? How about using the
                <code class="epub__literal">keys</code> method on lists?
                (Hint: what does <code class="epub__literal">append</code>
                assume about its subject object?)</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Finally, what type of object do you get back when you
                slice or concatenate two lists or two strings?</p></li></ol>
</div></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>String indexing</em></span>. Define a string
            <code class="epub__literal">S</code> of four characters: <code class="epub__literal">S = "spam"</code>. Then type the following
            expression: <code class="epub__literal">S[0][0][0][0][0]</code>.
            Any clue as to what’s happening this time? (Hint: recall that a
            string is a collection of characters, but Python characters are
            one-character strings.) Does this indexing expression still work
            if you apply it to a list such as <code class="epub__literal">['s',
            'p', 'a', 'm']</code>? Why?</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Immutable types</em></span>. Define a string
            <code class="epub__literal">S</code> of four characters again:
            <code class="epub__literal">S = "spam"</code>. Write an assignment
            that changes the string to <code class="epub__literal">"slam"</code>, using only slicing and
            concatenation. Could you perform the same operation using just
            indexing and concatenation? How about index assignment?</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Nesting</em></span>. Write a data structure that
            represents your personal information: name (first, middle, last),
            age, job, address, email address, and phone number. You may build
            the data structure with any combination of built-in object types
            you like (lists, tuples, dictionaries, strings, numbers). Then,
            access the individual components of your data structures by
            indexing. Do some structures make more sense than others for this
            object?</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Files</em></span>. Write a script that creates a
            new output file called <em class="epub__filename">myfile.txt</em> and writes the string
            <code class="epub__literal">"Hello file world!"</code> into it.
            Then write another script that opens <em class="epub__filename">myfile.txt</em> and reads and
            prints its contents. Run your two scripts from the system command
            line. Does the new file show up in the directory where you ran
            your scripts? What if you add a different directory path to the
            filename passed to <code class="epub__literal">open</code>? Note:
            file <code class="epub__literal">write</code> methods do not add
            newline characters to your strings; add an explicit <code class="epub__literal">\n</code> at the end of the string if you want
            to fully terminate the line in the file.</p></li></ol>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
