<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>A Tale of Two ifs</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="a_tale_of_two_ifs"></a>A Tale of Two ifs</h1>
<p>Before we delve into the details of any of the concrete
        <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e27654"></a>statements in Table 10-1,
        I want to begin our look at Python statement syntax by showing you
        what you are <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>not</em></span> going to type in Python code so
        you can compare and contrast it with other syntax models you might
        have seen in the past<a id="ch10-syntax-rules"></a>.</p>
<p>Consider the following <code class="epub__literal">if</code>
        statement, coded in a C-like language:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e27674"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">if (x &gt; y) {
    x = 1;
    y = 2;
}</pre>
<p>This might be a statement in C, C++, Java, JavaScript, or Perl.
        Now, look at the equivalent statement in the Python language:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e27678"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">if x &gt; y:
    x = 1
    y = 2</pre>
<p>The first thing that may pop out at you is that the equivalent
        Python statement is less, well, cluttered—that is, there are fewer
        syntactic components. This is by design; as a scripting language, one
        of Python’s goals is to make programmers’ lives easier by requiring
        less typing.</p>
<p>More specifically, when you compare the two syntax models,
        you’ll notice that Python adds one new thing to the mix, and that
        three items that are present in the C-like language are not present in
        Python code.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="What Python Adds"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="what_python_adds"></a>What Python Adds</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e27689"></a>one new syntax <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e27697"></a>component in Python is the colon character (<code class="epub__literal">:</code>). All Python <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e27705"></a>compound statements</em></span> (i.e., statements that
          have statements nested inside them) follow the same general pattern
          of a header line terminated in a colon, followed by a nested block
          of code usually indented underneath the header line, like
          this:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e27710"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">Header line:
    Nested statement block</pre>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e27714"></a>colon is required, and omitting it is probably the
          most common coding mistake among new Python programmers—it’s
          certainly one I’ve witnessed thousands of times in Python training
          classes. In fact, if you are new to Python, you’ll almost certainly
          forget the colon character very soon. Most Python-friendly editors
          make this mistake easy to spot, and including it eventually becomes
          an unconscious habit (so much so that you may start typing colons in
          your C++ code, too, generating many entertaining error messages from
          your C++ compiler!).</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="What Python Removes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="what_python_removes"></a>What Python Removes</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Although <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e27725"></a>Python requires the extra colon character, there are
          three things programmers in C-like languages must include that you
          don’t generally have to in Python.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Parentheses are optional"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="parentheses_are_optional"></a>Parentheses are optional</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The first of these is the set of <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e27736"></a>parentheses<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e27740"></a> around the tests at the top of the
            statement:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e27744"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">if (x &lt; y)</pre>
<p>The parentheses here are required by the syntax of many
            C-like languages. In Python, though, they are not—we simply omit
            the parentheses, and the statement works the same way:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e27748"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">if x &lt; y</pre>
<p>Technically speaking, because every expression can be
            enclosed in parentheses, including them will not hurt in this
            Python code, and they are not treated as an error if present.
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>But don’t do that</em></span>: you’ll be wearing out your
            keyboard needlessly, and broadcasting to the world that you’re an
            ex-C programmer still learning Python (I was once, too). The
            Python way is to simply omit the parentheses in these kinds of
            statements altogether.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="End of line is end of statement"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="end_of_line_is_end_of_statement"></a>End of line is end of statement</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e27760"></a>second and more significant syntax component you
            won’t find in Python code is the <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e27766"></a>semicolon<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e27770"></a>. You don’t need to terminate statements with
            semicolons in Python the way you do in C-like languages:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e27774"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">x = 1;</pre>
<p>In Python, the general rule is that the end of a line
            automatically terminates the statement that appears on that line.
            In other words, you can leave off the semicolons, and it works the
            same way:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e27778"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">x = 1</pre>
<p>There are some ways to work around this rule, as you’ll see
            in a moment. But, in general, you write one statement per line for
            the vast majority of Python code, and no semicolon is
            required.</p>
<p>Here, too, if you are pining for your C programming days (if
            such a state is possible...) you can continue to use semicolons at
            the end of each statement—the language lets you get away with them
            if they are present. <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>But don’t do that either</em></span>
            (really!); again, doing so tells the world that you’re still a C
            programmer who hasn’t quite made the switch to Python coding. The
            Pythonic style is to leave off the semicolons altogether.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="End of indentation is end of block"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="end_of_indentation_is_end_of_block"></a>End of indentation is end of block</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e27792"></a>third and final syntax <a id="ch10.2.2.3indent"></a>component that Python removes, and the one that may
            seem the most unusual to soon-to-be-ex-C programmers (until
            they’ve used it for 10 minutes and realize it’s actually a
            feature), is that you do not type anything explicit in your code
            to syntactically mark the beginning and end of a nested block of
            code. You don’t need to include <code class="epub__literal">begin</code>/<code class="epub__literal">end</code>, <code class="epub__literal">then</code>/<code class="epub__literal">endif</code>, or braces around the nested
            block, as you do in C-like languages:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e27817"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">if (x &gt; y) {
    x = 1;
    y = 2;
}</pre>
<p>Instead, in Python, we consistently indent all the
            statements in a given single nested block the same distance to the
            right, and Python uses the statements’ physical indentation to
            determine where the block starts and stops:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e27821"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">if x &gt; y:
    x = 1
    y = 2</pre>
<p>By <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>indentation</em></span>, I mean the blank
            whitespace all the way to the left of the two nested statements
            here. Python doesn’t care how you indent (you may use either
            spaces or tabs), or how much you indent (you may use any number of
            spaces or tabs). In fact, the indentation of one nested block can
            be totally different from that of another. The syntax rule is only
            that for a given single nested block, all of its statements must
            be indented the same distance to the right. If this is not the
            case, you will get a syntax error, and your code will not run
            until you repair its indentation to be consistent.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Why Indentation Syntax?"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="why_indentation_syntax_question"></a>Why Indentation Syntax?</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e27833"></a>indentation rule may seem unusual at first glance to
          programmers accustomed to C-like languages, but it is a deliberate
          feature of Python, and it’s one of the main ways that Python almost
          forces programmers to produce uniform, regular, and readable code.
          It essentially means that you must line up your code vertically, in
          columns, according to its logical structure. The net effect is to
          make your code more consistent and readable (unlike much of the code
          written in C-like languages).</p>
<p>To put that more strongly, aligning your code according to its
          logical structure is a major part of making it readable, and thus
          reusable and maintainable, by yourself and others. In fact, even if
          you never use Python after reading this book, you should get into
          the habit of aligning your code for readability in any
          block-structured language. Python forces the issue by making this a
          part of its syntax, but it’s an important thing to do in any
          programming language, and it has a huge impact on the usefulness of
          your code.</p>
<p>Your experience may vary, but when I was still doing
          development on a full-time basis, I was mostly paid to work on large
          old C++ programs that had been worked on by many programmers over
          the years. Almost invariably, each programmer had his or her own
          style for indenting code. For example, I’d often be asked to change
          a <code class="epub__literal">while</code> loop coded in the C++
          language that began like this:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e27846"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">while (x &gt; 0) {</pre>
<p>Before we even get into indentation, there are three or four
          ways that programmers can arrange these braces in a C-like language,
          and organizations often have political debates and write standards
          manuals to address the options (which seems more than a little
          off-topic for the problem to be solved by programming). Ignoring
          that, here’s the scenario I often encountered in C++ code. The first
          person who worked on the code indented the loop four spaces:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e27850"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">while (x &gt; 0) {
    --------;
    --------;</pre>
<p>That person eventually moved on to management, only to be
          replaced by someone who liked to indent further to the right:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e27854"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">while (x &gt; 0) {
    --------;
    --------;
           --------;
           --------;</pre>
<p>That person later moved on to other opportunities, and someone
          else picked up the code who liked to indent less:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e27858"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">while (x &gt; 0) {
    --------;
    --------;
           --------;
           --------;
--------;
--------;
}</pre>
<p>And so on. Eventually, the block is terminated by a closing
          brace (<code class="epub__literal">}</code>), which of course makes
          this “block-structured code” (he says, sarcastically). In any
          block-structured language, Python or otherwise, if nested blocks are
          not indented consistently, they become very difficult for the reader
          to interpret, change, or reuse, because the code no longer visually
          reflects its logical meaning. Readability matters, and indentation
          is a major component of readability.</p>
<p>Here is another example that may have burned you in the past
          if you’ve done much programming in a C-like language. Consider the
          following statement in C:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e27868"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">if (x)
     if (y)
          statement1;
else
     statement2;</pre>
<p>Which <code class="epub__literal">if</code> does the <code class="epub__literal">else</code> here go with? Surprisingly, the
          <code class="epub__literal">else</code> is paired with the nested
          <code class="epub__literal">if</code> statement (<code class="epub__literal">if (y)</code>), even though it looks visually as
          though it is associated with the outer <code class="epub__literal">if
          (x)</code>. This is a classic pitfall in the C language, and it
          can lead to the reader completely misinterpreting the code and
          changing it incorrectly in ways that might not be uncovered until
          the Mars rover crashes into a giant rock!</p>
<p>This cannot happen in Python—because indentation is
          significant, the way the code looks is the way it will work.
          Consider an equivalent Python statement:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e27893"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">if x:
     if y:
          statement1
else:
     statement2</pre>
<p>In this example, the <code class="epub__literal">if</code>
          that the <code class="epub__literal">else</code> lines up with
          vertically is the one it is associated with logically (the outer
          <code class="epub__literal">if x</code>). In a sense, Python is a
          WYSIWYG language—what you see is what you get because the way code
          looks is the way it runs, regardless of who coded it.</p>
<p>If this still isn’t enough to underscore the benefits of
          Python’s syntax, here’s another anecdote. Early in my career, I
          worked at a successful company that developed systems software in
          the C language, where consistent indentation is not required. Even
          so, when we checked our code into source control at the end of the
          day, this company ran an automated script that analyzed the
          indentation used in the code. If the script noticed that we’d
          indented our code inconsistently, we received an automated email
          about it the next morning—and so did our managers!</p>
<p>The point is that even when a language doesn’t require it,
          good programmers know that consistent use of indentation has a huge
          impact on code readability and quality. The fact that Python
          promotes this to the level of syntax is seen by most as a feature of
          the language.</p>
<p>Also keep in mind that nearly every programmer-friendly text
          editor has built-in support for Python’s syntax model. In the IDLE
          Python GUI, for example, lines of code are automatically indented
          when you are typing a nested block; pressing the Backspace key backs
          up one level of indentation, and you can customize how far to the
          right IDLE indents statements in a nested block. There is no
          universal standard on this: four spaces or one tab per level is
          common, but it’s up to you to decide how and how much you wish to
          indent. Indent further to the right for further nested blocks, and
          less to close the prior block.</p>
<p>As a rule of thumb, you probably shouldn’t mix tabs and spaces
          in the same block in Python, unless you do so consistently; use tabs
          or spaces in a given block, but not both (in fact, Python 3.0 now
          issues an error for inconsistent use of tabs and spaces, as we’ll
          see in Chapter 12). But you
          probably shouldn’t mix tabs or spaces in indentation in
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>any</em></span> structured language—such code can cause
          major readability issues if the next programmer has his or her
          editor set to display tabs differently than yours. C-like languages
          might let coders get away with this, but they shouldn’t: the result
          can be a mangled mess.</p>
<p>I can’t stress enough that regardless of which language you
          code in, you should be indenting consistently for readability. In
          fact, if you weren’t taught to do this earlier in your career, your
          teachers did you a disservice. Most programmers—especially those who
          must read others’ code—consider it a major asset that Python
          elevates this to the level of syntax. Moreover, generating tabs
          instead of braces is no more difficult in practice for tools that
          must output Python code. In general, if you do what you should be
          doing in a C-like language anyhow, but get rid of the braces, your
          code will satisfy Python’s syntax <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e27922"></a>rules.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="A Few Special Cases"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="a_few_special_cases"></a>A Few Special Cases</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As mentioned previously, in Python’s syntax model:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The end of a line terminates the statement on that line
              (without semicolons).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Nested statements are blocked and associated by their
              physical indentation (without braces).</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Those rules cover almost all Python code you’ll write or see
          in practice. However, Python also provides some special-purpose
          rules that allow customization of both statements and nested
          statement blocks.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Statement rule special cases"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="statement_rule_special_cases"></a>Statement rule special cases</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e27944"></a>Although statements normally appear one per line, it
            is possible to squeeze more than one statement onto a single line
            in Python by separating them with <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e27952"></a>semicolons:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e27960"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">a = 1; b = 2; print(a + b)               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Three statements on one line</span></em></pre>
<p>This <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e27966"></a>is the only place in Python where semicolons are
            required: as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>statement separators</em></span>. This only
            works, though, if the statements thus combined are not themselves
            compound statements. In other words, you can chain together only
            simple statements, like assignments, <code class="epub__literal">print</code>s, and function calls. Compound
            statements must still appear on lines of their own (otherwise, you
            could squeeze an entire program onto one line, which probably
            would not make you very popular among your coworkers!).</p>
<p>The other special rule for statements is essentially the
            inverse: you can make a single statement span across multiple
            lines. To make this work, you simply have to enclose part of your
            statement in a bracketed pair—<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e27978"></a>parentheses<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e27982"></a> (<code class="epub__literal">()</code>), <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e27989"></a>square brackets<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e27993"></a> (<code class="epub__literal">[]</code>), or
            <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e28001"></a>curly braces<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e28005"></a> (<code class="epub__literal">{}</code>). Any code
            enclosed in these constructs can cross multiple lines: your
            statement doesn’t end until Python reaches the line containing the
            closing part of the pair. For instance, to continue a list
            literal:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e28012"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">mlist = [111,
         222,
         333]</pre>
<p>Because the code is enclosed in a square brackets pair,
            Python simply drops down to the next line until it encounters the
            closing bracket. The curly braces surrounding dictionaries (as
            well as set literals and dictionary and set comprehensions in 3.0)
            allow them to span lines this way too, and parentheses handle
            tuples, function calls, and expressions. The indentation of the
            continuation lines does not matter, though common sense dictates
            that the lines should be aligned somehow for readability.</p>
<p>Parentheses are the catchall device—because any expression
            can be wrapped up in them, simply inserting a left parenthesis
            allows you to drop down to the next line and continue your
            statement:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e28018"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">X = (A + B +
     C + D)</pre>
<p>This technique works with compound statements, too, by the
            way. Anywhere you need to code a large expression, simply wrap it
            in parentheses to continue it on the next line:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e28022"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">if (A == 1 and
    B == 2 and
    C == 3):
        print('spam' * 3)</pre>
<p>An <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e28027"></a>older rule also allows for continuation lines when
            the prior line ends in a backslash:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e28031"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">X = A + B + \                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># An error-prone alternative</span></em>
      C + D</pre>
<p>This alternative technique is dated, though, and is frowned
            on today because it’s difficult to notice and maintain the
            backslashes, and it’s fairly brittle—there can be no spaces after
            the backslash, and omitting it can have unexpected effects if the
            next line is mistaken to be a new statement. It’s also another
            throwback to the C language, where it is commonly used in
            “#define” macros; again, when in Pythonland, do as Pythonistas do,
            not as C programmers do.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Block rule special case"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="block_rule_special_case"></a>Block rule special case</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As mentioned previously, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e28043"></a>statements in a nested block of code are normally
            associated by being indented the same amount to the right. As one
            special case here, the body of a compound statement can instead
            appear on the same line as the header in Python, after the
            colon:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e28051"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">if x &gt; y: print(x)</pre>
<p>This allows us to code single-line <code class="epub__literal">if</code> statements, single-line loops, and so
            on. Here again, though, this will work only if the body of the
            compound statement itself does not contain any compound
            statements. That is, only simple statements—assignments, <code class="epub__literal">print</code>s, function calls, and the like—are
            allowed after the colon. Larger statements must still appear on
            lines by themselves. Extra parts of compound statements (such as
            the <code class="epub__literal">else</code> part of an <code class="epub__literal">if</code>, which we’ll meet later) must also be
            on separate lines of their own. The body can consist of multiple
            simple statements separated by semicolons, but this tends to be
            frowned upon.</p>
<p>In general, even though it’s not always required, if you
            keep all your statements on individual lines and always indent
            your nested blocks, your code will be easier to read and change in
            the future. Moreover, some code profiling and coverage tools may
            not be able to distinguish between multiple statements squeezed
            onto a single line or the header and body of a one-line compound
            statement. It is almost always to your advantage to keep things
            simple in Python<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e28069"></a>.</p>
<p>To see a prime and common exception to one of these rules in
            action, however (the use of a single-line <code class="epub__literal">if</code> statement to break out of a loop),
            let’s move on to the next section and write some real code.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="A Quick Example: Interactive Loops"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
