<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>A Quick Example: Interactive Loops</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="a_quick_example_colon_interactive_loops"></a>A Quick Example: Interactive Loops</h1>
<p>We’ll <a id="ch10statementssyninteractiveloops"></a>see all <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e28089"></a>these syntax rules in action <a id="ch10interactiveloops"></a>when we tour Python’s specific compound statements in
        the next few chapters, but they work the same everywhere in the Python
        language. To get started, let’s work through a brief, realistic
        example that demonstrates the way that statement syntax and statement
        nesting come together in practice, and introduces a few statements
        along the way.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="A Simple Interactive Loop"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="a_simple_interactive_loop"></a>A Simple Interactive Loop</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Suppose <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e28106"></a>you’re asked to write a Python program that interacts
          with a user in a console window. Maybe you’re accepting inputs to
          send to a database, or reading numbers to be used in a calculation.
          Regardless of the purpose, you need to code a loop that reads one or
          more inputs from a user typing on a keyboard, and prints back a
          result for each. In other words, you need to write a classic
          read/evaluate/print loop program.</p>
<p>In Python, typical boilerplate code for such an interactive
          loop might look like this:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e28114"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">while True:
    reply = input('Enter text:')
    if reply == 'stop': break
    print(reply.upper())</pre>
<p>This code makes use of a few new ideas:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The code leverages the Python <code class="epub__literal">while</code> loop, Python’s most general
              looping statement. We’ll study the <code class="epub__literal">while</code> statement in more detail later,
              but in short, it consists of the word <code class="epub__literal">while</code>, followed by an expression that
              is interpreted as a true or false result, followed by a nested
              block of code that is repeated while the test at the top is true
              (the word <code class="epub__literal">True</code> here is
              considered always true).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">input</code> built-in
              function we met earlier in the book is used here for general
              console input—it prints its optional argument string as a prompt
              and returns the user’s typed reply as a string.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>A single-line <code class="epub__literal">if</code>
              statement that makes use of the special rule for nested blocks
              also appears here: the body of the <code class="epub__literal">if</code> appears on the header line after
              the colon instead of being indented on a new line underneath it.
              This would work either way, but as it’s coded, we’ve saved an
              extra line.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Finally, the Python <code class="epub__literal">break</code> statement is used to exit the
              loop immediately—it simply jumps out of the loop statement
              altogether, and the program continues after the loop. Without
              this exit statement, the <code class="epub__literal">while</code> would loop forever, as its test
              is always true.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>In effect, this combination of statements essentially means
          “read a line from the user and print it in uppercase until the user
          enters the word ‘stop.’” There are other ways to code such a loop,
          but the form used here is very common in Python code.</p>
<p>Notice that all three lines nested under the <code class="epub__literal">while</code> header line are indented the same
          amount—because they line up vertically in a column this way, they
          are the block of code that is associated with the <code class="epub__literal">while</code> test and repeated. Either the end of
          the source file or a lesser-indented statement will terminate the
          loop body block.</p>
<p>When run, here is the sort of interaction we get from this
          code:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e28170"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">Enter text:<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>spam</code></strong>
SPAM
Enter text:<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>42</code></strong>
42
Enter text:<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>stop</code></strong></pre><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Version skew note</em></span>: This example is
            coded for Python 3.0. If you are working in Python 2.6 or earlier,
            the code works the same, but you should use <code class="epub__literal">raw_input</code> instead of <code class="epub__literal">input</code>, and you can omit the outer
            parentheses in <code class="epub__literal">print</code>
            statements. In 3.0 the former was renamed, and the latter is a
            built-in function instead of a statement (more on <code class="epub__literal">print</code>s in the next chapter).</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Doing Math on User Inputs"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="doing_math_on_user_inputs"></a>Doing Math on User Inputs</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Our <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e28202"></a>script works, but now suppose that instead of
          converting a text string to uppercase, we want to do some math with
          numeric input—squaring it, for example, perhaps in some misguided
          effort to discourage users who happen to be obsessed with youth. We
          might try statements like these to achieve the desired
          effect:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e28208"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>reply = '20'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>reply ** 2</code></strong>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...error text omitted...</code></em>
TypeError: unsupported operand type(s) for ** or pow(): 'str' and 'int'</pre>
<p>This won’t quite work in our script, though, because (as
          discussed in the prior part of the book) Python won’t convert object
          types in expressions unless they are all numeric, and input from a
          user is always returned to our script as a string. We cannot raise a
          string of digits to a power unless we convert it manually to an
          integer:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e28221"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>int(reply) ** 2</code></strong>
400</pre>
<p>Armed with this information, we can now recode our loop to
          perform the necessary math. Type the following in a file to test
          it:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e28228"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">while True:
    reply = input('Enter text:')
    if reply == 'stop': break
    print(int(reply) ** 2)
print('Bye')</pre>
<p>This script uses a single-line <code class="epub__literal">if</code> statement to exit on “stop” as before,
          but it also converts inputs to perform the required math. This
          version also adds an exit message at the bottom. Because the
          <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statement in the last line
          is not indented as much as the nested block of code, it is not
          considered part of the loop body and will run only once, after the
          loop is exited:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e28238"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">Enter text:<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>2</code></strong>
4
Enter text:<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>40</code></strong>
1600
Enter text:<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>stop</code></strong>
Bye</pre>
<p>One note here: I’m assuming that this code is stored in and
          run from a script file. If you are entering this code interactively,
          be sure to include a blank line (i.e., press Enter twice) before the
          final <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statement, to
          terminate the loop. The final <code class="epub__literal">print</code> doesn’t quite make sense in
          interactive mode, though (you’ll have to code it after interacting
          with the loop!).</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Handling Errors by Testing Inputs"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="handling_errors_by_testing_inputs"></a>Handling Errors by Testing Inputs</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>So <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e28262"></a>far so good, but notice what happens when the input is
          invalid:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e28268"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">Enter text:<strong class="epub__userinput"><code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>xxx</code></em></code></strong>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...error text omitted...</code></em>
ValueError: invalid literal for int() with base 10: 'xxx'</pre>
<p>The built-in <code class="epub__literal">int</code> function
          raises an exception here in the face of a mistake. If we want our
          script to be robust, we can check the string’s content ahead of time
          with the string object’s <code class="epub__literal">isdigit</code>
          method:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e28285"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S = '123'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>T = 'xxx'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S.isdigit(), T.isdigit()</code></strong>
(True, False)</pre>
<p>This also gives us an excuse to further nest the statements in
          our example. The following new version of our interactive script
          uses a full-blown <code class="epub__literal">if</code> statement to
          work around the exception on errors:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e28301"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">while True:
    reply = input('Enter text:')
    if reply == 'stop':
        break
    elif not reply.isdigit():
        print('Bad!' * 8)
    else:
        print(int(reply) ** 2)
print('Bye')</pre>
<p>We’ll study the <code class="epub__literal">if</code>
          statement in more detail in Chapter 12, but it’s a fairly
          lightweight tool for coding logic in scripts. In its full form, it
          consists of the word <code class="epub__literal">if</code> followed
          by a test and an associated block of code, one or more optional
          <code class="epub__literal">elif</code> (“else if”) tests and code
          blocks, and an optional <code class="epub__literal">else</code>
          part, with an associated block of code at the bottom to serve as a
          default. Python runs the block of code associated with the first
          test that is true, working from top to bottom, or the <code class="epub__literal">else</code> part if all tests are false.</p>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">if</code>, <code class="epub__literal">elif</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">else</code> parts in the preceding example are
          associated as part of the same statement because they all line up
          vertically (i.e., share the same level of indentation). The <code class="epub__literal">if</code> statement spans from the word <code class="epub__literal">if</code> to the start of the <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statement on the last line of the
          script. In turn, the entire <code class="epub__literal">if</code>
          block is part of the <code class="epub__literal">while</code> loop
          because all of it is indented under the loop’s header line.
          Statement nesting is natural once you get the hang of it.</p>
<p>When we run our new script, its code catches errors before
          they occur and prints an (arguably silly) error message to
          demonstrate:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e28352"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">Enter text:<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>5</code></strong>
25
Enter text:<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>xyz</code></strong>
Bad!Bad!Bad!Bad!Bad!Bad!Bad!Bad!
Enter text:<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>10</code></strong>
100
Enter text:<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>stop</code></strong></pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Handling Errors with try Statements"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="handling_errors_with_try_statements"></a>Handling Errors with try Statements</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e28370"></a>preceding solution works, but as you’ll see later in
          the book, the most general way to handle errors in Python is to
          catch and recover from them completely using the Python <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement. We’ll explore this
          statement in depth in Part VII of
          this book, but as a preview, using a <code class="epub__literal">try</code> here can lead to code that some would
          claim is simpler than the prior version:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e28384"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">while True:
    reply = input('Enter text:')
    if reply == 'stop': break
    try:
        num = int(reply)
    except:
        print('Bad!' * 8)
    else:
        print(int(reply) ** 2)
print('Bye')</pre>
<p>This version works exactly like the previous one, but we’ve
          replaced the explicit error check with code that assumes the
          conversion will work and wraps it up in an exception handler for
          cases when it doesn’t. This <code class="epub__literal">try</code>
          statement is composed of the word <code class="epub__literal">try</code>, followed by the main block of code
          (the action we are trying to run), followed by an <code class="epub__literal">except</code> part that gives the exception
          handler code and an <code class="epub__literal">else</code> part to
          be run if no exception is raised in the <code class="epub__literal">try</code> part. Python first runs the <code class="epub__literal">try</code> part, then runs either the <code class="epub__literal">except</code> part (if an exception occurs) or
          the <code class="epub__literal">else</code> part (if no exception
          occurs).</p>
<p>In terms of statement nesting, because the words <code class="epub__literal">try</code>, <code class="epub__literal">except</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">else</code> are all indented to the same level,
          they are all considered part of the same single <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement. Notice that the <code class="epub__literal">else</code> part is associated with the <code class="epub__literal">try</code> here, not the <code class="epub__literal">if</code>. As we’ve seen, <code class="epub__literal">else</code> can appear in <code class="epub__literal">if</code> statements in Python, but it can also
          appear in <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statements and
          loops—its indentation tells
          you what statement it is a part of. In this case, the <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement spans from the word <code class="epub__literal">try</code> through the code indented under the
          word <code class="epub__literal">else</code>, because the <code class="epub__literal">else</code> is indented to the same level as
          <code class="epub__literal">try</code>. The <code class="epub__literal">if</code> statement in this code is a one-liner
          and ends after the <code class="epub__literal">break</code>.</p>
<p>Again, we’ll come back to the <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement later in this book. For now,
          be aware that because <code class="epub__literal">try</code> can be
          used to intercept any error, it reduces the amount of error-checking
          code you have to write, and it’s a very general approach to dealing
          with unusual cases. If we wanted to support input of floating-point
          numbers instead of just integers, for example, using <code class="epub__literal">try</code> would be much easier than manual error
          testing—we could simply run a <code class="epub__literal">float</code> call and catch its exceptions,
          instead of trying to analyze all possible floating-point
          syntax.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Nesting Code Three Levels Deep"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="nesting_code_three_levels_deep"></a>Nesting Code Three Levels Deep</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Let’s <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e28491"></a>look at one last mutation of our script. Nesting can
          take us even further if we need it to—we could, for example, branch
          to one of a set of alternatives based on the relative magnitude of a
          valid input:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e28497"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">while True:
    reply = input('Enter text:')
    if reply == 'stop':
        break
    elif not reply.isdigit():
        print('Bad!' * 8)
    else:
        num = int(reply)
        if num &lt; 20:
            print('low')
        else:
            print(num ** 2)
print('Bye')</pre>
<p>This version includes an <code class="epub__literal">if</code> statement nested in the <code class="epub__literal">else</code> clause of another <code class="epub__literal">if</code> statement, which is in turn nested in
          the <code class="epub__literal">while</code> loop. When code is
          conditional, or repeated like this, we simply indent it further to
          the right. The net effect is like that of the prior versions, but
          we’ll now print “low” for numbers less <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e28514"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e28517"></a>than 20:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e28520"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">Enter text:<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>19</code></strong>
low
Enter text:<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>20</code></strong>
400
Enter text:<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>spam</code></strong>
Bad!Bad!Bad!Bad!Bad!Bad!Bad!Bad!
Enter text:<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>stop</code></strong>
Bye</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Chapter Summary"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
