<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_answers-id9"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</h1>
<div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>C-like languages require parentheses around the tests in
            some statements, semicolons at the end of each statement, and
            braces around a nested block of code.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The end of a line terminates the statement that appears on
            that line. Alternatively, if more than one statement appears on
            the same line, they can be terminated with semicolons; similarly,
            if a statement spans many lines, you must terminate it by closing
            a bracketed syntactic pair.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The statements in a nested block are all indented the same
            number of tabs or spaces.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>A statement can be made to span many lines by enclosing part
            of it in parentheses, square brackets, or curly braces; the
            statement ends when Python sees a line that contains the closing
            part of the pair.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The body of a compound statement can be moved to the header
            line after the colon, but only if the body consists of only
            noncompound statements.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Only when you need to squeeze more than one statement onto a
            single line of code. Even then, this only works if all the
            statements are noncompound, and it’s discouraged because it can
            lead to code that is difficult to read.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement is used
            to catch and recover from exceptions (errors) in a Python script.
            It’s usually an alternative to manually checking for errors in
            your code.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Forgetting to type the colon character at the end of the
            header line in a compound statement is the most common beginner’s
            mistake. If you haven’t made it yet, you probably will
            soon!</p></li></ol>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
