<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Assignment Statements</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="assignment_statements"></a>Assignment Statements</h1>
<p>We’ve <a id="ch11assignmentstatements"></a>been using the Python assignment statement for a while
        to assign objects to names. In its basic form, you write the
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>target</em></span> of an assignment on the left of an equals
        sign, and the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>object</em></span> to be assigned on the right.
        The target on the left may be a name or object component, and the
        object on the right can be an arbitrary expression that computes an
        object. For the most part, assignments are straightforward, but here
        are a few properties to keep in mind:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Assignments create object
            references</strong></span>. As discussed in Chapter 6, Python assignments
            store references to objects in names or data structure components.
            They always create references to objects instead of copying the
            objects. Because of that, Python variables are more like pointers
            than data storage areas.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Names are created when first
            assigned</strong></span>. Python creates a variable name the first time
            you assign it a value (i.e., an object reference), so there’s no
            need to predeclare names ahead of time. Some (but not all) data
            structure slots are created when assigned, too (e.g., dictionary
            entries, some object attributes). Once assigned, a name is
            replaced with the value it references whenever it appears in an
            expression.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Names must be assigned before being
            referenced</strong></span>. It’s an error to use a name to which you
            haven’t yet assigned a value. Python raises an exception if you
            try, rather than returning some sort of ambiguous default value;
            if it returned a default instead, it would be more difficult for
            you to spot typos in your code.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Some operations perform assignments
            implicitly</strong></span>. In this section we’re concerned with the
            <code class="epub__literal">=</code> statement, but assignment
            occurs in many contexts in Python. For instance, we’ll see later
            that module imports, function and class definitions, <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop variables, and function
            arguments are all implicit assignments. Because assignment works
            the same everywhere it pops up, all these contexts simply bind
            names to object references at runtime.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Assignment Statement Forms"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="assignment_statement_forms"></a>Assignment Statement Forms</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Although <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e28668"></a>assignment is a general and pervasive concept in
          Python, we are primarily interested in assignment
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>statements</em></span> in this chapter. Table 11-1 illustrates the
          different assignment statement forms in Python.</p><div class="epub__table"><a id="assignment_statement_forms-id1"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Table 11-1. Assignment statement forms</p><div class="epub__table-contents">
<table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; " summary="Assignment statement forms">
<colgroup><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Operation</p></th><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Interpretation</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">spam = 'Spam'</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Basic
                  form</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">spam, ham = 'yum',
                  'YUM'</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Tuple assignment
                  (positional)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">[spam, ham] = ['yum',
                  'YUM']</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>List assignment
                  (positional)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">a, b, c, d = 'spam'</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Sequence assignment,
                  generalized</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">a, *b = 'spam'</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Extended sequence
                  unpacking (Python 3.0)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">spam = ham =
                  'lunch'</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Multiple-target
                  assignment</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">spams += 42</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Augmented assignment
                  (equivalent to <code class="epub__literal">spams = spams +
                  42</code>)</p></td></tr></tbody>
</table>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e28755"></a>first form in Table 11-1 is by far the most
          common: binding a name (or data structure component) to a single
          object. In fact, you could get all your work done with this basic
          form alone. The other table entries represent special forms that are
          all optional, but that programmers often find convenient in
          practice:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Tuple- and list-unpacking assignments</span></dt><dd>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e28768"></a>second and third forms in the <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e28772"></a>table are related. When you code a tuple or list
                on the left side of the <code class="epub__literal">=</code>,
                Python pairs objects on the right side with targets on the
                left by position and assigns them from left to right. For
                example, in the second line of Table 11-1, the name <code class="epub__literal">spam</code> is assigned the string <code class="epub__literal">'yum'</code>, and the name <code class="epub__literal">ham</code> is bound to the string <code class="epub__literal">'YUM'</code>. In this case Python
                internally makes a tuple of the items on the right, which is
                why this is called tuple-unpacking assignment.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Sequence assignments</span></dt><dd>
<p>In <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e28800"></a>recent versions of Python, tuple and list
                assignments have been generalized into instances of what we
                now call <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>sequence assignment</em></span>—any sequence
                of names can be assigned to any sequence of values, and Python
                assigns the items one at a time by position. We can even mix
                and match the types of the sequences involved. The fourth line
                in Table 11-1, for
                example, pairs a tuple of names with a string of characters:
                <code class="epub__literal">a</code> is assigned <code class="epub__literal">'s'</code>, <code class="epub__literal">b</code> is assigned <code class="epub__literal">'p'</code>, and so on.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Extended sequence unpacking</span></dt><dd>
<p>In <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e28828"></a>Python 3.0, a new form of sequence assignment
                allows us to be more flexible in how we select portions of a
                sequence to assign. The fifth line in Table 11-1, for example,
                matches <code class="epub__literal">a</code> with the first
                character in the string on the right and <code class="epub__literal">b</code> with the rest: <code class="epub__literal">a</code> is assigned <code class="epub__literal">'s'</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">b</code> is assigned <code class="epub__literal">'pam'</code>. This provides a simpler
                alternative to assigning the results of manual slicing
                operations.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Multiple-target assignments</span></dt><dd>
<p>The sixth line in Table 11-1 shows the
                multiple-target form of assignment. In this form, Python
                assigns a reference to the same object (the object farthest to
                the right) to all the targets on the left. In the table, the
                names <code class="epub__literal">spam</code> and <code class="epub__literal">ham</code> are both assigned references to
                the same string object, <code class="epub__literal">'lunch'</code>. The effect is the same as
                if we had coded <code class="epub__literal">ham =
                'lunch'</code> followed by <code class="epub__literal">spam =
                ham</code>, as <code class="epub__literal">ham</code>
                evaluates to the original string object (i.e., not a separate
                copy of that object).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Augmented assignments</span></dt><dd>
<p>The last line in Table 11-1 is an example of
                <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>augmented assignment</em></span>—a shorthand that
                combines an expression and an assignment in a concise way.
                Saying <code class="epub__literal">spam += 42</code>, for
                example, has the same effect as <code class="epub__literal">spam
                = spam + 42</code>, but the augmented form requires less
                typing and is generally quicker to run. In addition, if the
                subject is mutable and supports the operation, an augmented
                assignment may run even quicker by choosing an in-place update
                operation instead of an object copy. There is one augmented
                assignment statement for every binary expression operator in
                Python.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Sequence Assignments"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="sequence_assignments"></a>Sequence Assignments</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>We’ve <a id="ch11assgnstmntsseqassgnmnts"></a>already used basic assignments <a id="ch11sequenceassgn"></a>in this book. Here are a few simple examples of
          sequence-unpacking assignments in action:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e28914"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>nudge = 1</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>wink  = 2</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>A, B = nudge, wink</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Tuple assignment</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>A, B</code></strong>                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Like A = nudge; B = wink</span></em>
(1, 2)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[C, D] = [nudge, wink]</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># List assignment</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>C, D</code></strong>
(1, 2)</pre>
<p>Notice that we really are coding two tuples in the third line
          in this interaction—we’ve just omitted their enclosing parentheses.
          Python pairs the values in the tuple on the right side of the
          assignment operator with the variables in the tuple on the left side
          and assigns the values one at a time.</p>
<p>Tuple assignment leads to a common coding trick in Python that
          was introduced in a solution to the exercises at the end of Part II. Because Python creates a
          temporary tuple that saves the original values of the variables on
          the right while the statement runs, unpacking assignments are also a
          way to <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>swap</em></span> two variables’ values without
          creating a temporary variable of your own—the tuple on the right
          remembers the prior values of the variables automatically:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e28956"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>nudge = 1</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>wink  = 2</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>nudge, wink = wink, nudge</code></strong>      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Tuples: swaps values</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>nudge, wink</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Like T = nudge; nudge = wink; wink = T</span></em>
(2, 1)</pre>
<p>In fact, the original tuple and list assignment forms in
          Python have been generalized to accept any type of sequence on the
          right as long as it is of the same length as the sequence on the
          left. You can assign a tuple of values to a list of variables, a
          string of characters to a tuple of variables, and so on. In all
          cases, Python assigns items in the sequence on the right to
          variables in the sequence on the left by position, from left to
          right:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e28979"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[a, b, c] = (1, 2, 3)</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Assign tuple of values to list of names</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, c</code></strong>
(1, 3)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>(a, b, c) = "ABC"</code></strong>              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Assign string of characters to tuple</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, c</code></strong>
('A', 'C')</pre>
<p>Technically speaking, sequence assignment actually supports
          any <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>iterable</em></span> object on the right, not just any
          sequence. This is a more general concept that we will explore in
          Chapters 14 and 20.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Advanced sequence assignment patterns"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="advanced_sequence_assignment_patterns"></a>Advanced sequence assignment patterns</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Although we can mix and match sequence types around the
            <code class="epub__literal">=</code> symbol, we must have the
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>same number</em></span> of items on the right as we have
            variables on the left, or we’ll get an error. Python 3.0 allows us
            to be more general with extended unpacking syntax, described in
            the next section. But normally, and always in Python 2.X, the
            number of items in the assignment target and subject must
            match:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e29020"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>string = 'SPAM'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, b, c, d = string</code></strong>                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same number on both sides</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, d</code></strong>
('S', 'M')

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, b, c = string</code></strong>                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Error if not</span></em>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...error text omitted...</code></em>
ValueError: too many values to unpack</pre>
<p>To be more general, we can slice. There are a variety of
            ways to employ slicing to make this last case work:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e29046"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, b, c = string[0], string[1], string[2:]</code></strong>     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Index and slice</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, b, c</code></strong>
('S', 'P', 'AM')

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, b, c = list(string[:2]) + [string[2:]]</code></strong>      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Slice and concatenate</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, b, c</code></strong>
('S', 'P', 'AM')

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, b = string[:2]</code></strong>                              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same, but simpler</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c = string[2:]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, b, c</code></strong>
('S', 'P', 'AM')

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>(a, b), c = string[:2], string[2:]</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Nested sequences</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, b, c</code></strong>
('S', 'P', 'AM')</pre>
<p>As the last example in this interaction demonstrates, we can
            even assign <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>nested</em></span> sequences, and Python
            unpacks their parts according to their shape, as expected. In this
            case, we are assigning a tuple of two items, where the first item
            is a nested sequence (a string), exactly as though we had coded it
            this way:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e29094"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>((a, b), c) = ('SP', 'AM')</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Paired by shape and position</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, b, c</code></strong>
('S', 'P', 'AM')</pre>
<p>Python pairs the first string on the right (<code class="epub__literal">'SP'</code>) with the first tuple on the left
            (<code class="epub__literal">(a, b)</code>) and assigns one
            character at a time, before assigning the entire second string
            (<code class="epub__literal">'AM'</code>) to the variable <code class="epub__literal">c</code> all at once. In this event, the
            sequence-nesting shape of the object on the left must match that
            of the object on the right. Nested sequence assignment like this
            is somewhat advanced, and rare to see, but it can be convenient
            for picking out the parts of data structures with known
            shapes.</p>
<p>For example, we’ll see in Chapter 13 that this technique also works in
            <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops, because loop items
            are assigned to the target given in the loop header:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e29126"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">for (a, b, c) in [(1, 2, 3), (4, 5, 6)]: ...          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Simple tuple assignment</span></em>

for ((a, b), c) in [((1, 2), 3), ((4, 5), 6)]: ...    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Nested tuple assignment</span></em></pre>
<p>In a note in Chapter 18, we’ll also see
            that this nested tuple (really, sequence) unpacking assignment
            form works for function argument lists in Python 2.6 (though not
            in 3.0), because function arguments are passed by assignment as
            well:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e29138"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def f(((a, b), c)):              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># For arguments too in Python 2.6, but not 3.0</span></em>
f(((1, 2), 3))</pre>
<p>Sequence-unpacking assignments also give rise to another
            common coding idiom in Python—assigning an integer series to a set
            of variables:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e29145"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>red, green, blue = range(3)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>red, blue</code></strong>
(0, 2)</pre>
<p>This initializes the three names to the integer codes
            <code class="epub__literal">0</code>, <code class="epub__literal">1</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">2</code>, respectively (it’s Python’s
            equivalent of the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>enumerated</em></span> data types you
            may have seen in other languages). To make sense of this, you need
            to know that the <code class="epub__literal">range</code> built-in
            function generates a list of successive integers:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e29170"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>range(3)</code></strong>                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Use list(range(3)) in Python 3.0</span></em>
[0, 1, 2]</pre>
<p>Because <code class="epub__literal">range</code> is commonly
            used in <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops, we’ll say
            more about it in Chapter 13.</p>
<p>Another place you may see a tuple assignment at work is for
            splitting a sequence into its front and the rest in loops like
            this:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e29190"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = [1, 2, 3, 4]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>while L:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>front, L = L[0], L[1:]</code></strong>           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># See next section for 3.0 alternative</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(front, L)</code></strong>
...
1 [2, 3, 4]
2 [3, 4]
3 [4]
4 []</pre>
<p>The tuple assignment in the loop here could be coded as the
            following two lines instead, but it’s often more convenient to
            string them together:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e29209"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>front = L[0]</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = L[1:]</code></strong></pre>
<p>Notice that this code is using the list as a sort of stack
            data structure, which can often also be achieved with the <code class="epub__literal">append</code> and <code class="epub__literal">pop</code> methods of list objects; here,
            <code class="epub__literal">front = L.pop(0)</code> would have
            much the same effect as the tuple assignment statement, but it
            would be an in-place change. We’ll learn more about <code class="epub__literal">while</code> loops, and other (often better)
            ways to step through a sequence with <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops, <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e29234"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e29236"></a>in Chapter 13.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Extended Sequence Unpacking in Python 3.0"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="extended_sequence_unpacking_in_python_3"></a>Extended Sequence Unpacking in Python 3.0</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e29246"></a>prior <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e29252"></a>section demonstrated how to use manual slicing to make
          sequence assignments more general. In Python 3.0 (but not 2.6),
          sequence assignment has been generalized to make this easier. In
          short, a single <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>starred name</em></span>, <code class="epub__literal">*X</code>, can be used in the assignment target
          in order to specify a more general matching against the sequence—the
          starred name is assigned a list, which collects all items in the
          sequence not assigned to other names. This is especially handy for
          common coding patterns such as splitting a sequence into its “front”
          and “rest”, as in the preceding section’s last example.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Extended unpacking in action"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="extended_unpacking_in_action"></a>Extended unpacking in action</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Let’s look at an example. As we’ve seen, sequence
            assignments normally require exactly as many names in the target
            on the left as there are items in the subject on the right. We get
            an error if the lengths disagree (unless we manually sliced on the
            right, as shown in the prior section):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e29271"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python30\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>seq = [1, 2, 3, 4]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, b, c, d = seq</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(a, b, c, d)</code></strong>
1 2 3 4

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, b = seq</code></strong>
ValueError: too many values to unpack</pre>
<p>In Python 3.0, though, we can use a single starred name in
            the target to match more generally. In the following continuation
            of our interactive session, <code class="epub__literal">a</code>
            matches the first item in the sequence, and <code class="epub__literal">b</code> matches the rest:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e29296"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, *b = seq</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a</code></strong>
1
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>b</code></strong>
[2, 3, 4]</pre>
<p>When a starred name is used, the number of items in the
            target on the left need not match the length of the subject
            sequence. In fact, the starred name can appear anywhere in the
            target. For instance, in the next interaction <code class="epub__literal">b</code> matches the last item in the sequence,
            and <code class="epub__literal">a</code> matches everything before
            the last:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e29315"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>*a, b = seq</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a</code></strong>
[1, 2, 3]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>b</code></strong>
4</pre>
<p>When the starred name appears in the middle, it collects
            everything between the other names listed. Thus, in the following
            interaction <code class="epub__literal">a</code> and <code class="epub__literal">c</code> are assigned the first and last items,
            and <code class="epub__literal">b</code> gets everything in
            between them:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e29337"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, *b, c = seq</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a</code></strong>
1
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>b</code></strong>
[2, 3]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c</code></strong>
4</pre>
<p>More generally, wherever the starred name shows up, it will
            be assigned a list that collects every unassigned name at that
            position:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e29353"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, b, *c = seq</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a</code></strong>
1
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>b</code></strong>
2
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c</code></strong>
[3, 4]</pre>
<p>Naturally, like normal sequence assignment, extended
            sequence unpacking syntax works for any sequence types, not just
            lists. Here it is unpacking characters in a string:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e29370"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, *b = 'spam'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, b</code></strong>
('s', ['p', 'a', 'm'])

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, *b, c = 'spam'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, b, c</code></strong>
('s', ['p', 'a'], 'm')</pre>
<p>This is similar in spirit to slicing, but not exactly the
            same—a sequence unpacking assignment always returns a
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>list</em></span> for multiple matched items, whereas
            slicing returns a sequence of the same type as the object
            sliced:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e29389"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S = 'spam'</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S[0], S[1:]</code></strong>    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Slices are type-specific, * assignment always returns a list</span></em>
('s', 'pam')

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S[0], S[1:3], S[3]</code></strong>
('s', 'pa', 'm')</pre>
<p>Given this extension in 3.0, as long as we’re processing a
            list the last example of the prior section becomes even simpler,
            since we don’t have to manually slice to get the first and rest of
            the items:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e29405"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = [1, 2, 3, 4]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>while L:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>front, *L = L</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Get first, rest without slicing</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(front, L)</code></strong>
...
1 [2, 3, 4]
2 [3, 4]
3 [4]
4 []</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Boundary cases"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="boundary_cases"></a>Boundary cases</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Although extended sequence unpacking is flexible, some
            boundary cases are worth noting. First, the starred name may match
            just a single item, but is always assigned a list:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e29427"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>seq</code></strong>
[1, 2, 3, 4]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, b, c, *d = seq</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(a, b, c, d)</code></strong>
1 2 3 [4]</pre>
<p>Second, if there is nothing left to match the starred name,
            it is assigned an empty list, regardless of where it appears. In
            the following, <code class="epub__literal">a</code>, <code class="epub__literal">b</code>, <code class="epub__literal">c</code>,
            and <code class="epub__literal">d</code> have matched every item
            in the sequence, but Python assigns <code class="epub__literal">e</code> an empty list instead of treating this
            as an error case:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e29455"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, b, c, d, *e = seq</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(a, b, c, d, e)</code></strong>
1 2 3 4 []

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, b, *e, c, d = seq</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(a, b, c, d, e)</code></strong>
1 2 3 4 []</pre>
<p>Finally, errors can still be triggered if there is more than
            one starred name, if there are too few values and no star (as
            before), and if the starred name is not itself coded inside a
            sequence:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e29471"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, *b, c, *d = seq</code></strong>
SyntaxError: two starred expressions in assignment

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, b = seq</code></strong>
ValueError: too many values to unpack

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>*a = seq</code></strong>
SyntaxError: starred assignment target must be in a list or tuple

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>*a, = seq</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a</code></strong>
[1, 2, 3, 4]</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="A useful convenience"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="a_useful_convenience"></a>A useful convenience</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Keep in mind that extended sequence unpacking assignment is
            just a convenience. We can usually achieve the same effects with
            explicit indexing and slicing (and in fact must in Python 2.X),
            but extended unpacking is simpler to code. The common “first,
            rest” splitting coding pattern, for example, can be coded either
            way, but slicing involves extra work:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e29493"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>seq</code></strong>
[1, 2, 3, 4]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, *b = seq</code></strong>                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># First, rest</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, b</code></strong>
(1, [2, 3, 4])

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, b = seq[0], seq[1:]</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># First, rest: traditional</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; a, b
(1, [2, 3, 4])</pre>
<p>The also common “rest, last” splitting pattern can similarly
            be coded either way, but the new extended unpacking syntax
            requires noticeably fewer keystrokes:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e29516"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>*a, b = seq</code></strong>                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Rest, last</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; a, b
([1, 2, 3], 4)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, b = seq[:-1], seq[-1]</code></strong>           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Rest, last: traditional</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; a, b
([1, 2, 3], 4)</pre>
<p>Because it is not only simpler but, arguably, more natural,
            extended sequence unpacking syntax will likely become widespread
            in Python code over time.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Application to for loops"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="application_to_for_loops"></a>Application to for loops</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Because the loop variable in the <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop statement can be any assignment
            target, extended sequence assignment works here too. We met the
            <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop iteration tool briefly
            in Part II and will study it
            formally in Chapter 13. In Python 3.0,
            extended assignments may show up after the word <code class="epub__literal">for</code>, where a simple variable name is
            more commonly used:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e29550"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">for (a, *b, c) in [(1, 2, 3, 4), (5, 6, 7, 8)]:
    ...</pre>
<p>When used in this context, on each iteration Python simply
            assigns the next tuple of values to the tuple of names. On the
            first loop, for example, it’s as if we’d run the following
            assignment statement:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e29554"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">a, *b, c = (1, 2, 3, 4)                            # b gets [2, 3]</pre>
<p>The names <code class="epub__literal">a</code>, <code class="epub__literal">b</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">c</code> can be used within the loop’s code to
            reference the extracted components. In fact, this is really not a
            special case at all, but just an instance of general assignment at
            work. As we saw earlier in this chapter, we can do the same thing
            with simple tuple assignment in both Python 2.X and 3.X:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e29567"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">for (a, b, c) in [(1, 2, 3), (4, 5, 6)]:           # a, b, c = (1, 2, 3), ...</pre>
<p>And we can always emulate 3.0’s extended assignment behavior
            in 2.6 by manually slicing:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e29571"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">for all in [(1, 2, 3, 4), (5, 6, 7, 8)]:
    a, b, c = all[0], all[1:3], all[3]</pre>
<p>Since we haven’t learned enough to get more detailed about
            the syntax of <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops, we’ll
            return to this topic in Chapter 13.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Multiple-Target Assignments"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="multiple-target_assignments"></a>Multiple-Target Assignments</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>A <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e29585"></a>multiple-target assignment simply assigns all the
          given names to the object all the way to the right. The following,
          for example, assigns the three variables <code class="epub__literal">a</code>, <code class="epub__literal">b</code>,
          and <code class="epub__literal">c</code> to the string <code class="epub__literal">'spam'</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e29605"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a = b = c = 'spam'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, b, c</code></strong>
('spam', 'spam', 'spam')</pre>
<p>This form is equivalent to (but easier to code than) these
          three assignments:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e29615"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c = 'spam'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>b = c</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a = b</code></strong></pre>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Multiple-target assignment and shared references"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="multiple-target_assignment_and_shared_r"></a>Multiple-target assignment and shared references</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Keep in mind that there is just one object here, shared by
            all three variables (they all wind up pointing to the same object
            in memory). This behavior is fine for immutable types—for example,
            when initializing a set of counters to zero (recall that variables
            must be assigned before they can be used in Python, so you must
            initialize counters to zero before you can start adding to
            them):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e29630"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a = b = 0</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>b = b + 1</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, b</code></strong>
(0, 1)</pre>
<p>Here, changing <code class="epub__literal">b</code> only
            changes <code class="epub__literal">b</code> because numbers do
            not support in-place changes. As long as the object assigned is
            immutable, it’s irrelevant if more than one name references
            it.</p>
<p>As usual, though, we have to be more cautious when
            initializing variables to an empty mutable object such as a list
            or dictionary:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e29651"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a = b = []</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>b.append(42)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, b</code></strong>
([42], [42])</pre>
<p>This time, because <code class="epub__literal">a</code> and
            <code class="epub__literal">b</code> reference the same object,
            appending to it in-place through <code class="epub__literal">b</code> will impact what we see through
            <code class="epub__literal">a</code> as well. This is really just
            another example of the shared reference phenomenon we first met in
            Chapter 6. To avoid the
            issue, initialize mutable objects in separate statements instead,
            so that each creates a distinct empty object by running a distinct
            literal expression:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e29678"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a = []</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>b = []</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>b.append(42)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, b</code></strong>
([], [42])</pre>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Augmented Assignments"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="augmented_assignments"></a>Augmented Assignments</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Beginning <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e29697"></a>with Python 2.0, the set of additional assignment
          statement formats listed in Table 11-2 became available. Known
          as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>augmented assignments</em></span>, and borrowed from the
          C language, these formats are mostly just shorthand. They imply the
          combination of a binary expression and an assignment. For instance,
          the following two formats are now roughly equivalent:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e29708"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">X = X + Y                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Traditional form</span></em>
X += Y                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Newer augmented form</span></em></pre><div class="epub__table"><a id="augmented_assignment_statements"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Table 11-2. Augmented assignment statements</p><div class="epub__table-contents">
<table style="border: none;" summary="Augmented assignment statements">
<colgroup><col></col><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><tbody><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">X += Y</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">X &amp;= Y</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">X -= Y</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">X |= Y</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">X *= Y</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">X ^= Y</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">X /= Y</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">X &gt;&gt;= Y</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">X %= Y</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">X &lt;&lt;= Y</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">X **= Y</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">X //= Y</code></p></td></tr></tbody>
</table>
</div>
</div>
<p>Augmented assignment works on any type that supports the
          implied binary expression. For example, here are two ways to add 1
          to a name:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e29777"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = 1</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = x + 1</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Traditional</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x</code></strong>
2
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x += 1</code></strong>                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Augmented</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x</code></strong>
3</pre>
<p>When applied to a string, the augmented form performs
          concatenation instead. Thus, the second line here is equivalent to
          typing the longer <code class="epub__literal">S = S +
          "SPAM"</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e29806"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S = "spam"</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S += "SPAM"</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Implied concatenation</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S</code></strong>
'spamSPAM'</pre>
<p>As shown in Table 11-2, there are analogous
          augmented assignment forms for every Python binary expression
          operator (i.e., each operator with values on the left and right
          side). For instance, <code class="epub__literal">X *= Y</code>
          multiplies and assigns, <code class="epub__literal">X &gt;&gt;=
          Y</code> shifts right and assigns, and so on. <code class="epub__literal">X //= Y</code> (for floor division) was added in
          version 2.2.</p>
<p>Augmented assignments have three advantages:<sup>[25]</sup></p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>There’s less for you to type. Need I say more?</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The left side only has to be evaluated once. In <code class="epub__literal">X += Y</code>, <code class="epub__literal">X</code> may be a complicated object
              expression. In the augmented form, it only has to be evaluated
              once. However, in the long form, <code class="epub__literal">X = X
              + Y</code>, <code class="epub__literal">X</code> appears
              twice and must be run twice. Because of this, augmented
              assignments usually run faster.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The optimal technique is automatically chosen. That is,
              for objects that support in-place changes, the augmented forms
              automatically perform in-place change operations instead of
              slower copies.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>The last point here requires a bit more explanation. For
          augmented assignments, in-place operations may be applied for
          mutable objects as an optimization. Recall that lists can be
          extended in a variety of ways. To add a single item to the end of a
          list, we can concatenate or call <code class="epub__literal">append</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e29875"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = [1, 2]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = L + [3]</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Concatenate: slower</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
[1, 2, 3]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L.append(4)</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Faster, but in-place</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
[1, 2, 3, 4]</pre>
<p>And to add a set of items to the
          end, we can either concatenate again or call the list <code class="epub__literal">extend</code> method:<sup>[26]</sup></p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e29916"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = L + [5, 6]</code></strong>              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Concatenate: slower</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L.extend([7, 8])</code></strong>            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Faster, but in-place</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]</pre>
<p>In both cases, concatenation is less prone to the side effects
          of shared object references but will generally run slower than the
          in-place equivalent. Concatenation operations must create a new
          object, copy in the list on the left, and then copy in the list on
          the right. By contrast, in-place method calls simply add items at
          the end of a memory block.</p>
<p>When we use augmented assignment to extend a list, we can
          forget these details—for example, Python automatically calls the
          quicker <code class="epub__literal">extend</code> method instead of
          using the slower concatenation operation implied by <code class="epub__literal">+</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e29947"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L += [9, 10]</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Mapped to L.extend([9, 10])</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]</pre>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Augmented assignment and shared references"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="augmented_assignment_and_shared_referen"></a>Augmented assignment and shared references</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>This behavior is usually what we want, but notice that it
            implies that the <code class="epub__literal">+=</code> is an
            in-place change for lists; thus, it is not exactly like <code class="epub__literal">+</code> concatenation, which always makes a
            new object. As for all shared reference cases, this difference
            might matter if other names reference the object being
            changed:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e29969"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = [1, 2]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>M = L</code></strong>                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># L and M reference the same object</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = L + [3, 4]</code></strong>              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Concatenation makes a new object</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L, M</code></strong>                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Changes L but not M</span></em>
([1, 2, 3, 4], [1, 2])

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = [1, 2]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>M = L</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L += [3, 4]</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># But += really means extend</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L, M</code></strong>                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># M sees the in-place change too!</span></em>
([1, 2, 3, 4], [1, 2, 3, 4])</pre>
<p>This only matters for mutables like lists and dictionaries,
            and it is a fairly obscure case (at least, until it impacts your
            code!). As always, make copies of your mutable objects if you need
            to break the shared reference <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e30014"></a>structure.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Variable Name Rules"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="variable_name_rules"></a>Variable Name Rules</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Now <a id="ch11variablevarnamerules"></a>that we’ve explored assignment statements, it’s time
          to get more formal about the use of variable names. In Python, names
          come into existence when you assign values to them, but there are a
          few rules to follow when picking names for things in your
          programs:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Syntax: (underscore or letter) + (any number of letters,
              digits, or underscores)</span></dt><dd>
<p>Variable names must start with an underscore or letter,
                which can be followed by any number of letters, digits, or
                underscores. <code class="epub__literal">_spam</code>,
                <code class="epub__literal">spam</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">Spam_1</code> are legal names, but <code class="epub__literal">1_Spam</code>, <code class="epub__literal">spam$</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">@#!</code> are not.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Case matters: <code class="epub__literal">SPAM</code> is
              not the same as <code class="epub__literal">spam</code></span></dt><dd>
<p>Python always pays attention to case in programs, both
                in names you create and in reserved words. For instance, the
                names <code class="epub__literal">X</code> and <code class="epub__literal">x</code> refer to two different variables.
                For portability, case also matters in the names of imported
                module files, even on platforms where the filesystems are
                case-insensitive.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Reserved words are off-limits</span></dt><dd>
<p>Names you define cannot be the same as words that mean
                special things in the Python language. For instance, if you
                try to use a variable name like <code class="epub__literal">class</code>, Python will raise a syntax
                error, but <code class="epub__literal">klass</code> and
                <code class="epub__literal">Class</code> work fine. Table 11-3 lists the words that
                are currently reserved (and hence off-limits for names of your
                own) in Python.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<div class="epub__table"><a id="python_3.0_reserved_words"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Table 11-3. Python 3.0 reserved words</p><div class="epub__table-contents">
<table style="border: none;" summary="Python 3.0 reserved words">
<colgroup><col></col><col></col><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><tbody><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">False</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">class</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">finally</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">is</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">return</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">None</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">continue</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">for</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">lambda</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">try</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">True</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">def</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">from</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">while</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">and</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">del</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">global</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">not</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">with</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">as</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">elif</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">if</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">or</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">yield</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">assert</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">else</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">import</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">pass</code></p></td><td style="border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; "> </td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">break</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">except</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">in</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">raise</code></p></td><td style=""> </td></tr></tbody>
</table>
</div>
</div>
<p>Table 11-3 is specific to
          Python 3.0. In Python 2.6, the set of reserved words differs
          slightly:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">print</code> is a reserved
              word, because printing is a statement, not a built-in (more on
              this later in this chapter).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">exec</code> is a reserved
              word, because it is a statement, not a built-in function.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code> is not a
              reserved word because this statement is not available.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>In older Pythons the story is also more or less the same, with
          a few variations:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">with</code> and <code class="epub__literal">as</code> were not reserved until 2.6, when
              context managers were officially enabled.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">yield</code> was not reserved
              until Python 2.3, when generator functions were enabled.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">yield</code> morphed from
              statement to expression in 2.5, but it’s still a reserved word,
              not a built-in function.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>As you can see, most of Python’s reserved words are all
          lowercase. They are also all truly reserved—unlike names in the
          built-in scope that you will meet in the next part of this book, you
          cannot redefine reserved words by assignment (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">and = 1</code> results in a syntax
          error).<sup>[27]</sup></p>
<p>Besides being of mixed case, the first three entries in Table 11-3, <code class="epub__literal">True</code>, <code class="epub__literal">False</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">None</code>, are somewhat unusual in meaning—they
          also appear in the built-in scope of Python described in Chapter 17, and they are technically names assigned to
          objects. They are truly reserved in all other senses, though, and
          cannot be used for any other purpose in your script other than that
          of the objects they represent. All the other reserved words are
          hardwired into Python’s syntax and can appear only in the specific
          contexts for which they are intended.</p>
<p>Furthermore, because module names in <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statements become variables in your
          scripts, variable name constraints extend to your <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>module
          filenames</em></span> too. For instance, you can code files called
          <em class="epub__filename">and.py</em> and <em class="epub__filename">my-code.py</em> and run them as top-level
          scripts, but you cannot import them: their names without the “.py”
          extension become <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>variables</em></span> in your code and so
          must follow all the variable rules just outlined. Reserved words are
          off-limits, and dashes won’t work, though underscores will. We’ll
          revisit this idea in Part V of this book.</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="python_apostrophy_s_deprecation_protoco"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Python’s Deprecation Protocol</p>
<p>It is interesting to note how reserved word changes are
            gradually phased into the language. When a new feature might break
            existing code, Python normally makes it an option and begins
            issuing “deprecation” warnings one or more releases before the
            feature is officially enabled. The idea is that you should have
            ample time to notice the warnings and update your code before
            migrating to the new release. This is not true for major new
            releases like 3.0 (which breaks existing code freely), but it is
            generally true in other cases.</p>
<p>For example, <code class="epub__literal">yield</code> was an
            optional extension in Python 2.2, but is a standard keyword as of
            2.3. It is used in conjunction with generator functions. This was
            one of a small handful of instances where Python broke with
            backward compatibility. Still, <code class="epub__literal">yield</code> was phased in over time: it began
            generating deprecation warnings in 2.2 and was not enabled until
            2.3.</p>
<p>Similarly, in Python 2.6, the words <code class="epub__literal">with</code> and <code class="epub__literal">as</code> become new reserved words for use in
            context managers (a newer form of exception handling). These two
            words are not reserved in 2.5, unless the context manager feature
            is turned on manually with a <code class="epub__literal">from__future__</code>import (discussed
            later in this book). When used in 2.5, <code class="epub__literal">with</code> and <code class="epub__literal">as</code> generate warnings about the upcoming
            change—except in the version of IDLE in Python 2.5, which appears
            to have enabled this feature for you (that is, using these words
            as variable names does generate errors in 2.5, but only in its
            version of the IDLE GUI).</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Naming conventions"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="naming_conventions"></a>Naming conventions</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Besides these rules, there is also a set of naming
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>conventions</em></span>—rules that are not required but
            are followed in normal practice. For instance, because names with
            two leading and trailing underscores (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">__name__</code>) generally have special meaning
            to the Python interpreter, you should avoid this pattern for your
            own names. Here is a list of the conventions Python
            follows:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Names that begin with a single underscore (<code class="epub__literal">_X</code>) are not imported by a <code class="epub__literal">from module import *</code> statement
                (described in Chapter 22).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Names that have two leading and trailing underscores
                (<code class="epub__literal">__X__</code>) are system-defined
                names that have special meaning to the interpreter.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Names that begin with two underscores and do not end
                with two more (<code class="epub__literal">__X</code>) are
                localized (“mangled”) to enclosing classes (see the discussion
                of pseudoprivate attributes in Chapter 30).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The name that is just a single underscore (<code class="epub__literal">_</code>) retains the result of the last
                expression when working interactively.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>In addition to these Python interpreter conventions, there
            are various other conventions that Python programmers usually
            follow. For instance, later in the book we’ll see that class names
            commonly start with an uppercase letter and module names with a
            lowercase letter, and that the name <code class="epub__literal">self</code>, though not reserved, usually has a
            special role in classes. In Chapter 17 we’ll also
            study another, larger category of names known as the
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>built-ins</em></span>, which are predefined but not
            reserved (and so can be reassigned: <code class="epub__literal">open
            = 42</code> works, though sometimes you might wish it
            didn’t!).</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Names have no type, but objects do"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="names_have_no_type_comma_but_objects_do"></a>Names have no type, but objects do</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>This is mostly review, but remember that it’s crucial to
            keep Python’s distinction between names and objects clear. As
            described in Chapter 6,
            objects have a type (e.g., integer, list) and may be mutable or
            not. Names (a.k.a. variables), on the other hand, are always just
            references to objects; they have no notion of mutability and have
            no associated type information, apart from the type of the object
            they happen to reference at a given point in time.</p>
<p>Thus, it’s OK to assign the same name to different kinds of
            objects at different times:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e30424"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = 0</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># x bound to an integer object</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = "Hello"</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Now it's a string</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = [1, 2, 3]</code></strong>       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># And now it's a list</span></em></pre>
<p>In later examples, you’ll see that this generic nature of
            names can be a decided advantage in Python programming. In Chapter 17, you’ll also learn that names also live in
            something called a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>scope</em></span>, which defines where
            they can be used; the place where you assign a name determines
            where it is visible.<sup>[28]</sup></p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p>For additional naming suggestions, see the discussion of
              naming conventions in Python’s semi-official style guide, known
              as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>PEP 8</em></span>. This guide is available at http://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008, or via a
              web search for “Python PEP 8.” Technically, this document
              formalizes coding standards for Python library code.</p>
<p>Though useful, the usual caveats about coding standards
              apply here. For one thing, PEP 8 comes with more detail than you
              are probably ready for at this point in the book. And frankly,
              it has become more complex, rigid, and subjective than it needs
              to be—some of its suggestions are not at all universally
              accepted or followed by Python programmers doing real work.
              Moreover, some of the most prominent companies using Python
              today have adopted coding standards of their own that
              differ.</p>
<p>PEP 8 does codify useful rule-of-thumb Python knowledge,
              though, and it’s a great read for Python beginners, as long as
              you take its recommendations as guidelines, not <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e30487"></a>gospel.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Expression Statements"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
