<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Expression Statements</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="expression_statements"></a>Expression Statements</h1>
<p>In <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e30495"></a>Python, <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e30499"></a>you can use an expression as a statement, too—that is,
        on a line by itself. But because the result of the expression won’t be
        saved, it usually makes sense to do so only if the expression does
        something useful as a side effect. Expressions are commonly used as
        statements in two situations:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">For calls to functions and methods</span></dt><dd>
<p>Some functions and methods do lots of work without
              returning a value. Such functions are sometimes called
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>procedures</em></span> in other languages. Because they
              don’t return values that you might be interested in retaining,
              you can call these functions with expression statements.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">For printing values at the interactive prompt</span></dt><dd>
<p>Python echoes back the results of expressions typed at the
              interactive command line. Technically, these are expression
              statements, too; they serve as a shorthand for typing <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statements.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Table 11-4 lists
        some common expression statement forms in Python. Calls to functions
        and methods are coded with zero or more argument objects (really,
        expressions that evaluate to objects) in parentheses, after the
        function/method name.</p><div class="epub__table"><a id="common_python_expression_statements"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Table 11-4. Common Python expression statements</p><div class="epub__table-contents">
<table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; " summary="Common Python expression statements">
<colgroup><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Operation</p></th><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Interpretation</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">spam(eggs, ham)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Function
                calls</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">spam.ham(eggs)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Method
                calls</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">spam</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Printing variables in
                the interactive interpreter</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">print(a, b, c,
                sep='')</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Printing operations in
                Python 3.0</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">yield x ** 2</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Yielding expression
                statements</p></td></tr></tbody>
</table>
</div>
</div>
<p>The last two entries in Table 11-4 are somewhat special
        cases—as we’ll see later in this chapter, printing in Python 3.0 is a
        function call usually coded on a line by itself, and the <code class="epub__literal">yield</code> operation in generator functions
        (discussed in Chapter 20) is often coded as
        a statement as well. Both are really just instances of expression
        statements.</p>
<p>For instance, though you normally run a <code class="epub__literal">print</code> call on a line by itself as an
        expression statement, it returns a value like any other function call
        (its return value is <code class="epub__literal">None</code>, the
        default return value for functions that don’t return anything
        meaningful):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e30599"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = print('spam')</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># print is a function call expression in 3.0</span></em>
spam
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(x)</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># But it is coded as an expression statement</span></em>
None</pre>
<p>Also keep in mind that although expressions can appear as
        statements in Python, statements cannot be used as expressions. For
        example, Python doesn’t allow you to embed assignment statements
        (<code class="epub__literal">=</code>) in other expressions. The
        rationale for this is that it avoids common coding mistakes; you can’t
        accidentally change a variable by typing <code class="epub__literal">=</code> when you really mean to use the <code class="epub__literal">==</code> equality test. You’ll see how to code
        around this when you meet the Python <code class="epub__literal">while</code> loop in Chapter 13.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Expression Statements and In-Place Changes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="expression_statements_and_in-place_chan"></a>Expression Statements and In-Place Changes</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>This <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e30634"></a>brings <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e30642"></a>up a mistake that is common in Python work. Expression
          statements are often used to run list methods that change a list
          in-place:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e30648"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = [1, 2]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L.append(3)</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Append is an in-place change</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
[1, 2, 3]</pre>
<p>However, it’s not unusual for Python newcomers to code such an
          operation as an assignment statement instead, intending to assign
          <code class="epub__literal">L</code> to the larger list:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e30667"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = L.append(4)</code></strong>           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># But append returns None, not L</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(L)</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># So we lose our list!</span></em>
None</pre>
<p>This doesn’t quite work, though. Calling an in-place change
          operation such as <code class="epub__literal">append</code>,
          <code class="epub__literal">sort</code>, or <code class="epub__literal">reverse</code> on a list always changes the list
          in-place, but these methods do not return the list they have
          changed; instead, they return the <code class="epub__literal">None</code> object. Thus, if you assign such an
          operation’s result back to the variable name, you effectively lose
          the list (and it is probably garbage collected in the
          process!).</p>
<p>The moral of the story is, don’t do this. We’ll revisit this
          phenomenon in the section Common Coding Gotchas
          at the end of this part of the book because it can also appear in
          the context of some looping statements we’ll meet in later
          chapters.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Print Operations"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
