<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Print Operations</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="print_operations"></a>Print Operations</h1>
<p>In Python, <code class="epub__literal"><a id="ch11printoperations"></a>print</code> prints things—it’s simply a
        programmer-friendly interface to the standard output stream.</p>
<p>Technically, printing converts one or more objects to their
        textual representations, adds some minor formatting, and sends the
        resulting text to either standard output or another file-like stream.
        In a bit more detail, <code class="epub__literal">print</code> is
        strongly bound up with the notions of files and streams in
        Python:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">File object methods</span></dt><dd>
<p>In Chapter 9, we learned
              about <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e30724"></a>file object methods that write text (e.g.,
              <code class="epub__literal">file.write(str)</code>). Printing
              operations are similar, but more focused—whereas file write
              methods write strings to arbitrary files, <code class="epub__literal">print</code> writes objects to the <code class="epub__literal">stdout</code> stream by default, with some
              automatic formatting added. Unlike with file methods, there is
              no need to convert objects to strings when using print
              operations.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Standard output stream</span></dt><dd>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e30743"></a>standard output stream (often known as <code class="epub__literal">stdout</code>) is simply a default place to
              send a program’s text output. Along with the standard input and
              error streams, it’s one of three data connections created when
              your script starts. The standard output stream is usually mapped
              to the window where you started your Python program, unless it’s
              been redirected to a file or pipe in your operating system’s
              shell.</p>
<p>Because the standard output stream is available in Python
              as the <code class="epub__literal">stdout</code> file object in
              the built-in <code class="epub__literal">sys</code> module
              (i.e., <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code>), it’s
              possible to emulate <code class="epub__literal">print</code>
              with file write method calls. However, <code class="epub__literal">print</code> is noticeably easier to use and
              makes it easy to print text to other files and streams.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Printing is also one of the most
        visible places where Python 3.0 and 2.6 have diverged. In fact, this
        divergence is usually the first reason that most 2.X code won’t run
        unchanged under 3.X. Specifically, the way you code print operations
        depends on which version of Python you use:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In Python 3.X, printing is a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>built-in
            function</em></span>, with keyword arguments for special
            modes.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In Python 2.X, printing is a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>statement</em></span>
            with specific syntax all its own.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Because this book covers both 3.0 and 2.6, we will look at each
        form in turn here. If you are fortunate enough to be able to work with
        code written for just one version of Python, feel free to pick the
        section that is relevant to you; however, as your circumstances may
        change, it probably won’t hurt to be familiar with both cases.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The Python 3.0 print Function"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_python_3.0_print_function"></a>The Python 3.0 print Function</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e30789"></a>Strictly speaking, printing is not a separate
          statement form in 3.0. Instead, it is simply an instance of the
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>expression statement</em></span> we studied in the
          preceding section.</p>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">print</code> built-in function
          is normally called on a line of its own, because it doesn’t return
          any value we care about (technically, it returns <code class="epub__literal">None</code>). Because it is a normal function,
          though, printing in 3.0 uses <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>standard function-call
          syntax</em></span>, rather than a special statement form. Because it
          provides special operation modes with keyword arguments, this form
          is both more general and supports future enhancements better.</p>
<p>By comparison, Python 2.6 <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statements have somewhat ad-hoc
          syntax to support extensions such as end-of-line suppression and
          target files. Further, the 2.6 statement does not support separator
          specification at all; in 2.6, you wind up building strings ahead of
          time more often than you do in 3.0.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Call format"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="call_format"></a>Call format</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Syntactically, calls to the 3.0 <code class="epub__literal">print</code> function have the following
            form:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e30822"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">print([object, ...][, sep=' '][, end='\n'][, file=sys.stdout])</pre>
<p>In this formal notation, items in square brackets are
            optional and may be omitted in a given call, and values after
            <code class="epub__literal">=</code> give argument defaults. In
            English, this built-in function prints the textual representation
            of one or more <code class="epub__literal">object</code>s
            separated by the string <code class="epub__literal">sep</code> and
            followed by the string <code class="epub__literal">end</code> to
            the stream <code class="epub__literal">file</code>.</p>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">sep</code>, <code class="epub__literal">end</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">file</code> parts, if present, must be given as
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>keyword arguments</em></span>—that is, you must use a
            special “name=value” syntax to pass the arguments by name instead
            of position. Keyword arguments are covered in depth in Chapter 18, but they’re straightforward to use. The
            keyword arguments sent to this call may appear in any
            left-to-right order following the objects to be printed, and they
            control the <code class="epub__literal">print</code>
            operation:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">sep</code> is a string
                inserted between each object’s text, which defaults to a
                single space if not passed; passing an empty string suppresses
                separators altogether.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">end</code> is a string added
                at the end of the printed text, which defaults to a <code class="epub__literal">\n</code> newline character if not passed.
                Passing an empty string avoids dropping down to the next
                output line at the end of the printed text—the next <code class="epub__literal">print</code> will keep adding to the end of
                the current output line.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">file</code> specifies the
                file, standard stream, or other file-like object to which the
                text will be sent; it defaults to the <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code> standard output stream if
                not passed. Any object with a file-like <code class="epub__literal">write(string)</code> method may be passed,
                but real files should be already opened for output.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>The textual representation of each <code class="epub__literal">object</code> to be printed is obtained by
            passing the object to the <code class="epub__literal">str</code>
            built-in call; as we’ve seen, this built-in returns a “user
            friendly” display string for any object.<sup>[29]</sup> With no arguments at all, the <code class="epub__literal">print</code> function simply prints a newline
            character to the standard output stream, which usually displays a
            blank line.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="The 3.0 print function in action"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="the_3.0_print_function_in_action"></a>The 3.0 print function in action</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Printing in 3.0 is probably simpler than some of its details
            may imply. To illustrate, let’s run some quick examples. The
            following prints a variety of object types to the default standard
            output stream, with the default separator and end-of-line
            formatting added (these are the defaults because they are the most
            common use case):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e30917"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python30\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print()</code></strong>                                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Display a blank line</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = 'spam'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y = 99</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>z = ['eggs']</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(x, y, z)</code></strong>                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Print 3 objects per defaults</span></em>
spam 99 ['eggs']</pre>
<p>There’s no need to convert objects to strings here, as would
            be required for file write methods. By default, <code class="epub__literal">print</code> calls add a space between the
            objects printed. To suppress this, send an empty string to the
            <code class="epub__literal">sep</code> keyword argument, or send
            an alternative separator of your choosing:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e30952"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(x, y, z, sep='')</code></strong>                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Suppress separator</span></em>
spam99['eggs']
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(x, y, z, sep=', ')</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Custom separator</span></em>
spam, 99, ['eggs']</pre>
<p>Also by default, <code class="epub__literal">print</code>
            adds an end-of-line character to terminate the output line. You
            can suppress this and avoid the line break altogether by passing
            an empty string to the <code class="epub__literal">end</code>
            keyword argument, or you can pass a different terminator of your
            own (include a <code class="epub__literal">\n</code> character to
            break the line manually):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e30977"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(x, y, z, end='')</code></strong>                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Suppress line break</span></em>
spam 99 ['eggs']&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(x, y, z, end=''); print(x, y, z)</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Two prints, same output line</span></em>
spam 99 ['eggs']spam 99 ['eggs']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(x, y, z, end='...\n')</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Custom line end</span></em>
spam 99 ['eggs']...
&gt;&gt;&gt;</pre>
<p>You can also combine keyword arguments to specify both
            separators and end-of-line strings—they may appear in any order
            but must appear after all the objects being printed:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e31003"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(x, y, z, sep='...', end='!\n')</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Multiple keywords</span></em>
spam...99...['eggs']!
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(x, y, z, end='!\n', sep='...')</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Order doesn't matter</span></em>
spam...99...['eggs']!</pre>
<p>Here is how the <code class="epub__literal">file</code>
            keyword argument is used—it directs the printed text to an open
            output file or other compatible object for the duration of the
            single <code class="epub__literal">print</code> (this is really a
            form of stream redirection, a topic we will revisit later in this
            section):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e31025"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(x, y, z, sep='...', file=open('data.txt', 'w'))</code></strong>      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Print to a file</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(x, y, z)</code></strong>                                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Back to stdout</span></em>
spam 99 ['eggs']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(open('data.txt').read())</code></strong>                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Display file text</span></em>
spam...99...['eggs']</pre>
<p>Finally, keep in mind that the separator and end-of-line
            options provided by print operations are just conveniences. If you
            need to display more specific formatting, don’t print this way,
            Instead, build up a more complex string ahead of time or within
            the <code class="epub__literal">print</code> itself using the
            string tools we met in Chapter 7, and print
            the string all at once:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e31054"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>text = '%s: %-.4f, %05d' % ('Result', 3.14159, 42)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(text)</code></strong>
Result: 3.1416, 00042
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('%s: %-.4f, %05d' % ('Result', 3.14159, 42))</code></strong>
Result: 3.1416, 00042</pre>
<p>As we’ll see in the next section, almost everything we’ve
            just seen about the 3.0 <code class="epub__literal">print</code>
            function also applies directly to 2.6 <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statements—which makes sense,
            given that the function was intended to both emulate and improve
            upon 2.6 printing support.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The Python 2.6 print Statement"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_python_2.6_print_statement"></a>The Python 2.6 print Statement</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e31078"></a>mentioned earlier, printing in Python 2.6 uses a
          statement with unique and specific syntax, rather than a built-in
          function. In practice, though, 2.6 printing is mostly a variation on
          a theme; with the exception of separator strings (which are
          supported in 3.0 but not 2.6), everything we can do with the 3.0
          <code class="epub__literal">print</code> function has a direct
          translation to the 2.6 <code class="epub__literal">print</code>
          statement.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Statement forms"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="statement_forms"></a>Statement forms</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Table 11-5 lists
            the <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statement’s forms in
            Python 2.6 and gives their Python 3.0 <code class="epub__literal">print</code> function equivalents for
            reference. Notice that the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>comma</em></span> is
            significant in <code class="epub__literal">print</code>
            statements—it separates objects to be printed, and a trailing
            comma suppresses the end-of-line character normally added at the
            end of the printed text (not to be confused with tuple syntax!).
            The <code class="epub__literal">&gt;&gt;</code> syntax, normally
            used as a bitwise right-shift operation, is used here as well, to
            specify a target output stream other than the <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code> default.</p><div class="epub__table"><a id="python_2.6_print_statement_forms"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Table 11-5. Python 2.6 print statement forms</p><div class="epub__table-contents">
<table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; " summary="Python 2.6 print statement forms">
<colgroup><col width="100pt"></col><col width="120pt"></col><col width="80pt"></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Python 2.6
                    statement</p></th><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Python 3.0
                    equivalent</p></th><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Interpretation</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">print x, y</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">print(x, y)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Print objects’
                    textual forms to <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code>; add a space between
                    the items and an end-of-line at the end</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">print x, y,</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">print(x, y,
                    end='')</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Same, but don’t add
                    end-of-line at end
                    of text</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">print &gt;&gt; afile, x,
                    y</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">print(x, y,
                    file=afile)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Send text to
                    <code class="epub__literal">afile.write</code>, not to
                    <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout.write</code></p></td></tr></tbody>
</table>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="The 2.6 print statement in action"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="the_2.6_print_statement_in_action"></a>The 2.6 print statement in action</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Although the 2.6 <code class="epub__literal">print</code>
            statement has more unique syntax than the 3.0 function, it’s
            similarly easy to use. Let’s turn to some basic examples again. By
            default, the 2.6 <code class="epub__literal">print</code>
            statement adds a space between the items separated by commas and
            adds a line break at the end of the current output line:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e31192"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python26\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = 'a'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y = 'b'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print x, y</code></strong>
a b</pre>
<p>This formatting is just a default; you can choose to use it
            or not. To suppress the line break so you can add more text to the
            current line later, end your <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statement with a comma, as shown
            in the second line of Table 11-5 (the following is
            two statements on one line, separated by a semicolon):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e31213"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print x, y,; print x, y</code></strong>
a b a b</pre>
<p>To suppress the space between items, again, don’t print this
            way. Instead, build up an output string using the string
            concatenation and formatting tools covered in Chapter 7, and print the string all at once:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e31222"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print x + y</code></strong>
ab
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print '%s...%s' % (x, y)</code></strong>
a...b</pre>
<p>As you can see, apart from their special syntax for usage
            modes, 2.6 <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statements are
            roughly as simple to use as 3.0’s function. The next section
            uncovers the way that files are specified in 2.6 <code class="epub__literal">print</code>s.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Print Stream Redirection"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="print_stream_redirection"></a>Print Stream Redirection</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e31243"></a>both Python 3.0 and 2.6, printing sends text to the
          standard output stream by default. However, it’s often useful to
          send it elsewhere—to a text file, for example, to save results for
          later use or testing purposes. Although such redirection can be
          accomplished in system shells outside Python itself, it turns out to
          be just as easy to redirect a script’s streams from within the
          script.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="The Python “hello world” program"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="the_python_quotation_mark_hello_world"></a>The Python “hello world” program</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Let’s start off with the usual (and largely pointless)
            language benchmark—the “hello world” program. To print a “hello
            world” message in Python, simply print the string per your
            version’s print operation:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e31254"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('hello world')</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Print a string object in 3.0</span></em>
hello world

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print 'hello world'</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Print a string object in 2.6</span></em>
hello world</pre>
<p>Because expression results are echoed on the interactive
            command line, you often don’t even need to use a <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statement there—simply type the
            expressions you’d like to have printed, and their results are
            echoed back:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e31273"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'hello world'</code></strong>                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Interactive echoes</span></em>
'hello world'</pre>
<p>This code isn’t exactly an earth-shattering piece of
            software mastery, but it serves to illustrate printing behavior.
            Really, the <code class="epub__literal">print</code> operation is
            just an ergonomic feature of Python—it provides a simple interface
            to the <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code> object, with
            a bit of default formatting. In fact, if you enjoy working harder
            than you must, you can also code print operations this way:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e31289"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import sys</code></strong>                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Printing the hard way</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sys.stdout.write('hello world\n')</code></strong>
hello world</pre>
<p>This code explicitly calls the <code class="epub__literal">write</code> method of <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code>—an attribute preset when
            Python starts up to an open file object connected to the output
            stream. The <code class="epub__literal">print</code> operation
            hides most of those details, providing a simple tool for simple
            printing tasks.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Manual stream redirection"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="manual_stream_redirection"></a>Manual stream redirection</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>So, why did I just show you the hard way to print? The
            <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code> print equivalent
            turns out to be the basis of a common technique in Python. In
            general, <code class="epub__literal">print</code> and <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code> are directly related as
            follows. This statement:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e31325"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">print(X, Y)                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Or, in 2.6: print X, Y</span></em></pre>
<p>is equivalent to the longer:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e31331"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import sys
sys.stdout.write(str(X) + ' ' + str(Y) + '\n')</pre>
<p>which manually performs a string conversion with <code class="epub__literal">str</code>, adds a separator and newline with
            <code class="epub__literal">+</code>, and calls the output
            stream’s <code class="epub__literal">write</code> method. Which
            would you rather code? (He says, hoping to underscore the
            programmer-friendly nature of prints....)</p>
<p>Obviously, the long form isn’t all that useful for printing
            by itself. However, it is useful to know that this is exactly what
            <code class="epub__literal">print</code> operations do because it
            is possible to <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>reassign</em></span> <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code> to something different from
            the standard output stream. In other words, this equivalence
            provides a way of making your <code class="epub__literal">print</code> operations send their text to
            other places. For example:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e31358"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import sys
sys.stdout = open('log.txt', 'a')       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Redirects prints to a file</span></em>
...
print(x, y, x)                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Shows up in log.txt</span></em></pre>
<p>Here, we reset <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code>
            to a manually opened file named <em class="epub__filename">log.txt</em>, located in the script’s
            working directory and opened in append mode (so we add to its
            current content). After the reset, every <code class="epub__literal">print</code> operation anywhere in the program
            will write its text to the end of the file <em class="epub__filename">log.txt</em> instead of to the original
            output stream. The <code class="epub__literal">print</code>
            operations are happy to keep calling <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code>’s <code class="epub__literal">write</code> method, no matter what <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code> happens to refer to. Because
            there is just one <code class="epub__literal">sys</code> module in
            your process, assigning <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code> this way will redirect every
            <code class="epub__literal">print</code> anywhere in your
            program.</p>
<p>In fact, as this chapter’s upcoming sidebar about <code class="epub__literal">print</code> and <code class="epub__literal">stdout</code> will explain, you can even reset
            <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code> to an object that
            isn’t a file at all, as long as it has the expected interface: a
            method named <code class="epub__literal">write</code> to receive
            the printed text string argument. When that object is a
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>class</em></span>, printed text can be routed and
            processed arbitrarily per a <code class="epub__literal">write</code> method you code yourself.</p>
<p>This trick of resetting the output stream is primarily
            useful for programs originally coded with <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statements. If you know that
            output should go to a file to begin with, you can always call file
            write methods instead. To redirect the output of a <code class="epub__literal">print</code>-based program, though, resetting
            <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code> provides a
            convenient alternative to changing every <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statement or using system
            shell-based redirection syntax.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Automatic stream redirection"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="automatic_stream_redirection"></a>Automatic stream redirection</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>This technique of redirecting printed text by assigning
            <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code> is commonly used in
            practice. One potential problem with the last section’s code,
            though, is that there is no direct way to restore the original
            output stream should you need to switch back after printing to a
            file. Because <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code> is
            just a normal file object, you can always save it and restore it
            if needed:<sup>[30]</sup></p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e31469"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python30\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import sys</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>temp = sys.stdout</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Save for restoring later</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sys.stdout = open('log.txt', 'a')</code></strong>   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Redirect prints to a file</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('spam')</code></strong>                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Prints go to file, not here</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(1, 2, 3)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sys.stdout.close()</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Flush output to disk</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sys.stdout = temp</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Restore original stream</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('back here')</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Prints show up here again</span></em>
back here
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(open('log.txt').read())</code></strong>       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Result of earlier prints</span></em>
spam
1 2 3</pre>
<p>As you can see, though, manual saving and restoring of the
            original output stream like this involves quite a bit of extra
            work. Because this crops up fairly often, a <code class="epub__literal">print</code> extension is available to make it
            unnecessary.</p>
<p>In 3.0, the <code class="epub__literal">file</code> keyword
            allows a single <code class="epub__literal">print</code> call to
            send its text to a file’s <code class="epub__literal">write</code>
            method, without actually resetting <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code>. Because the redirection is
            temporary, normal <code class="epub__literal">print</code> calls
            keep printing to the original output stream. In 2.6, a <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statement that begins with a
            <code class="epub__literal">&gt;&gt;</code> followed by an output
            file object (or other compatible object) has the same effect. For
            example, the following again sends printed text to a file named
            <em class="epub__filename">log.txt</em>:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e31556"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">log =  open('log.txt', 'a')             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 3.0</span></em>
print(x, y, z, file=log)                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Print to a file-like object</span></em>
print(a, b, c)                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Print to original stdout</span></em>

log =  open('log.txt', 'a')             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 2.6</span></em>
print &gt;&gt; log, x, y, z                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Print to a file-like object</span></em>
print a, b, c                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Print to original stdout</span></em></pre>
<p>These redirected forms of <code class="epub__literal">print</code> are handy if you need to print to
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>both</em></span> files and the standard output stream in
            the same program. If you use these forms, however, be sure to give
            them a file object (or an object that has the same <code class="epub__literal">write</code> method as a file object), not a
            file’s name string. Here is the technique in action:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e31587"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python30\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>log = open('log.txt', 'w')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(1, 2, 3, file=log)</code></strong>            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 2.6: print &gt;&gt; log, 1, 2, 3</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(4, 5, 6, file=log)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>log.close()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(7, 8, 9)</code></strong>                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 2.6: print 7, 8, 9</span></em>
7 8 9
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(open('log.txt').read())</code></strong>
1 2 3
4 5 6</pre>
<p>These extended forms of <code class="epub__literal">print</code> are also commonly used to print
            error messages to the standard error stream, available to your
            script as the preopened file object <code class="epub__literal">sys.stderr</code>. You can either use its file
            <code class="epub__literal">write</code> methods and format the
            output manually, or print with redirection syntax:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e31628"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import sys</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sys.stderr.write(('Bad!' * 8) + '\n')</code></strong>
Bad!Bad!Bad!Bad!Bad!Bad!Bad!Bad!

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('Bad!' * 8, file=sys.stderr)</code></strong>     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 2.6: print &gt;&gt; sys.stderr, 'Bad!' * 8</span></em>
Bad!Bad!Bad!Bad!Bad!Bad!Bad!Bad!</pre>
<p>Now that you know all about print redirections, the
            equivalence between printing and file <code class="epub__literal">write</code> methods should be fairly obvious.
            The following interaction prints both ways in 3.0, then redirects
            the output to an external file to verify that the same text is
            printed:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e31648"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = 1; Y = 2</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(X, Y)</code></strong>                                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Print: the easy way</span></em>
1 2
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import sys</code></strong>                                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Print: the hard way</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sys.stdout.write(str(X) + ' ' + str(Y) + '\n')</code></strong>
1 2
4
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(X, Y, file=open('temp1', 'w'))</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Redirect text to file</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('temp2', 'w').write(str(X) + ' ' + str(Y) + '\n')</code></strong> <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Send to file manually</span></em>
4
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(open('temp1', 'rb').read())</code></strong>                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Binary mode for bytes</span></em>
b'1 2\r\n'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(open('temp2', 'rb').read())</code></strong>
b'1 2\r\n'</pre>
<p>As you can see, unless you happen to enjoy typing, print
            operations are usually the best option for displaying text. For
            another example of the equivalence between prints and file writes,
            watch for a 3.0 <code class="epub__literal">print</code> function
            emulation example in Chapter 18; it uses this
            code pattern to provide a general 3.0 <code class="epub__literal">print</code> function equivalent for use in
            Python 2.6.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Version-Neutral Printing"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="version-neutral_printing"></a>Version-Neutral Printing</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Finally, <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e31706"></a>if you cannot restrict your work to Python 3.0 but
          still want your prints to be compatible with 3.0, you have some
          options. For one, you can code 2.6 <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statements and let 3.0’s <code class="epub__literal">2to3</code> conversion script translate them to
          3.0 function calls automatically. See the Python 3.0 documentation
          for more details about this script; it attempts to translate 2.X code to run
          under 3.0.</p>
<p>Alternatively, you can code 3.0 <code class="epub__literal">print</code> function calls in your 2.6 code, by
          enabling the function call variant with a statement like the
          following:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e31726"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from __future__ import print_function</pre>
<p>This statement changes 2.6 to support 3.0’s <code class="epub__literal">print</code> functions exactly. This way, you can
          use 3.0 print features and won’t have to change your prints if you
          later migrate to 3.0.</p>
<p>Also keep in mind that simple prints, like those in the first
          row of Table 11-5, work in
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>either</em></span> version of Python—because any expression
          may be enclosed in parentheses, we can always pretend to be calling
          a 3.0 <code class="epub__literal">print</code> function in 2.6 by
          adding outer parentheses. The only downside to this is that it makes
          a tuple out of your printed objects if there are more than one—they
          will print with extra enclosing parentheses. In 3.0, for example,
          any number of objects may be listed in the call’s
          parentheses:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e31743"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python30\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('spam')</code></strong>                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 3.0 print function call syntax</span></em>
spam
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('spam', 'ham', 'eggs')</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># These are mutiple argments</span></em>
spam ham eggs</pre>
<p>The first of these works the same in 2.6, but the second
          generates a tuple in the output:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e31762"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python26\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('spam')</code></strong>                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 2.6 print statement, enclosing parens</span></em>
spam
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('spam', 'ham', 'eggs')</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># This is really a tuple object!</span></em>
('spam', 'ham', 'eggs')</pre>
<p>To be truly portable, you can format the print string as a
          single object, using the string formatting expression or method
          call, or other string tools that we studied in Chapter 7:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e31783"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('%s %s %s' % ('spam', 'ham', 'eggs'))</code></strong>
spam ham eggs
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('{0} {1} {2}'.format('spam', 'ham', 'eggs'))</code></strong>
spam ham eggs</pre>
<p>Of course, if you can use 3.0 exclusively you can forget such
          mappings entirely, but many Python programmers will at least
          encounter, if not write, 2.X code and systems for some time to
          come.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p>I use Python 3.0 <code class="epub__literal">print</code>
            function calls throughout this book. I’ll usually warn you that
            the results may have extra enclosing parentheses in 2.6 because
            multiple items are a tuple, but I sometimes don’t, so please
            consider this note a blanket warning—if you see extra parentheses
            in your printed text in 2.6, either drop the parentheses in your
            <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statements, recode your
            prints using the version-neutral scheme outlined here, or learn to
            love superfluous <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e31803"></a>text.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="why_you_will_care_colon_print_and_stdou"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Why You Will Care: print and stdout</p>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e31811"></a>equivalence between the <code class="epub__literal">print</code> operation and writing to <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code> is important. It makes it
            possible to reassign <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code>
            to any user-defined object that provides the same <code class="epub__literal">write</code> method as files. Because the
            <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statement just sends text
            to the <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout.write</code> method,
            you can capture printed text in your programs by assigning
            <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code> to an object whose
            <code class="epub__literal">write</code> method processes the text
            in arbitrary ways.</p>
<p>For instance, you can send printed text to a GUI window, or
            tee it off to multiple destinations, by defining an object with a
            <code class="epub__literal">write</code> method that does the
            required routing. You’ll see an example of this trick when we
            study classes in Part VI of this book,
            but abstractly, it looks like this:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e31849"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class FileFaker:
    def write(self, string):
        # Do something with printed text in string

import sys
sys.stdout = FileFaker()
print(someObjects)              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Sends to class write method</span></em></pre>
<p>This works because <code class="epub__literal">print</code>
            is what we will call in the next part of this book a
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>polymorphic</em></span> operation—it doesn’t care what
            <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code> is, only that it has
            a method (i.e., interface) called <code class="epub__literal">write</code>. This redirection to objects is
            made even simpler with the <code class="epub__literal">file</code>
            keyword argument in 3.0 and the <code class="epub__literal">&gt;&gt;</code> extended form of <code class="epub__literal">print</code> in 2.6, because we don’t need to
            reset <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code>
            explicitly—normal prints will still be routed to the <code class="epub__literal">stdout</code> stream:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e31883"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">myobj = FileFaker()             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 3.0: Redirect to object for one print</span></em>
print(someObjects, file=myobj)  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Does not reset sys.stdout</span></em>

myobj = FileFaker()             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 2.6: same effect</span></em>
print &gt;&gt; myobj, someObjects     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Does not reset sys.stdout</span></em></pre>
<p>Python’s built-in <code class="epub__literal">input</code>
            function reads from the <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdin</code> file, so you can intercept
            read requests in a similar way, using classes that implement
            file-like <code class="epub__literal">read</code> methods instead.
            See the <code class="epub__literal">input</code> and <code class="epub__literal">while</code> loop example in Chapter 10 for more background on
            this.</p>
<p>Notice that because printed text goes to the <code class="epub__literal">stdout</code> stream, it’s the way to print
            HTML in CGI scripts used on the Web. It also enables you to
            redirect Python script input and output at the operating system’s
            shell command line, as usual:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e31922"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">python script.py &lt; inputfile &gt; outputfile
python script.py | filterProgram</pre>
<p>Python’s print operation redirection tools are essentially
            pure-Python alternatives to these shell syntax forms.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Chapter Summary"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
