<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_answers-id10"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</h1>
<div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>You can use multiple-target assignments (<code class="epub__literal">A = B = C = 0</code>), sequence assignment
            (<code class="epub__literal">A, B, C = 0, 0, 0</code>), or
            multiple assignment statements on three separate lines (<code class="epub__literal">A =
            0</code>, <code class="epub__literal">B = 0</code>,
            and <code class="epub__literal">C = 0</code>). With the latter
            technique, as introduced in Chapter 10, you can also string
            the three separate statements together on the same line by
            separating them with semicolons (<code class="epub__literal">A = 0; B
            = 0; C = 0</code>).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>If you assign them this way:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e32007"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">A = B = C = []</pre>
<p>all three names reference the same object, so changing it
            in-place from one (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">A.append(99)</code>) will affect the others.
            This is true only for in-place changes to mutable objects like
            lists and dictionaries; for immutable objects such as numbers and
            strings, this issue is irrelevant.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The list <code class="epub__literal">sort</code> method is
            like <code class="epub__literal">append</code> in that it makes an
            in-place change to the subject list—it returns <code class="epub__literal">None</code>, not the list it changes. The
            assignment back to <code class="epub__literal">L</code> sets
            <code class="epub__literal">L</code> to <code class="epub__literal">None</code>, not to the sorted list. As we’ll
            see later in this part of the book, a newer built-in function,
            <code class="epub__literal">sorted</code>, sorts any sequence and
            returns a new list with the sorting result; because this is not an
            in-place change, its result can be meaningfully assigned to a
            name.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>To print to a file for a single <code class="epub__literal">print</code> operation, you can use 3.0’s
            <code class="epub__literal">print(X, file=F)</code> call form, use
            2.6’s extended <code class="epub__literal">print &gt;&gt; file,
            X</code> statement form, or assign <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code> to a manually opened file
            before the <code class="epub__literal">print</code> and restore
            the original after. You can also redirect all of a program’s
            printed text to a file with special syntax in the system shell,
            but this is outside Python’s scope.</p></li></ol>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[25] </sup>C/C++ programmers take note: although Python now supports
              statements like <code class="epub__literal">X += Y</code>, it
              still does not have C’s auto-increment/decrement operators
              (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">X++</code>, <code class="epub__literal">−−X</code>). These don’t quite map to the
              Python object model because Python has no notion of in-place
              changes to immutable objects like numbers.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[26] </sup>As suggested in Chapter 6, we can also use slice
              assignment (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">L[len(L):] =
              [11,12,13]</code>), but this works roughly the same as the
              simpler list <code class="epub__literal">extend</code>
              method.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[27] </sup>In the Jython Java-based implementation of Python, though,
              user-defined variable names can sometimes be the same as Python
              reserved words. See Chapter 2
              for an overview of the Jython system.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[28] </sup>If you’ve used a more restrictive language like C++, you
                may be interested to know that there is no notion of C++’s
                <code class="epub__literal">const</code> declaration in
                Python; certain objects may be <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>immutable</em></span>,
                but names can always be assigned. Python also has ways to hide
                names in classes and modules, but they’re not the same as
                C++’s declarations (if hiding attributes matters to you, see
                the coverage of <code class="epub__literal">_X</code> module
                names in Chapter 24, <code class="epub__literal">__X</code> class names in Chapter 30, and the Private and
                Public class decorators example in Chapter 38).</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[29] </sup>Technically, printing uses the equivalent of <code class="epub__literal">str</code> in the internal implementation
                of Python, but the effect is the same. Besides this to-string
                conversion role, <code class="epub__literal">str</code> is
                also the name of the string data type and can be used to
                decode Unicode strings from raw bytes with an extra encoding
                argument, as we’ll learn in Chapter 36; this latter role is an
                advanced usage that we can safely ignore here.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[30] </sup>In both 2.6 and 3.0 you may also be able to use the
                <code class="epub__literal">__stdout__</code> attribute in the
                <code class="epub__literal">sys</code> module, which refers to
                the original value <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code> had at program startup
                time. You still need to restore <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout</code> to <code class="epub__literal">sys.__stdout__</code> to go back to this
                original stream value, though. See the <code class="epub__literal">sys</code> module documentation for more
                details.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
