<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>if Statements</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="if_statements"></a>if Statements</h1>
<p>In simple terms, the Python <code class="epub__literal">if</code> statement selects actions to perform.
        It’s the primary selection tool in Python and represents much of the
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>logic</em></span> a Python program possesses. It’s also our
        first compound statement. Like all compound Python statements, the
        <code class="epub__literal">if</code> statement may contain other
        statements, including other <code class="epub__literal">if</code>s. In
        fact, Python lets you combine statements in a program sequentially (so
        that they execute one after another), and in an arbitrarily nested
        fashion (so that they execute only under certain conditions).</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="General Format"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="general_format"></a>General Format</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The Python <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e32103"></a>if</code> statement is typical of <code class="epub__literal">if</code> statements in most procedural
          languages. It takes the form of an <code class="epub__literal">if</code> test, followed by one or more optional
          <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e32117"></a>elif</code> (“else if”) tests and a final optional
          <code class="epub__literal">else</code> block. The tests and the
          <code class="epub__literal">else</code> part each have an associated
          block of nested statements, indented under a header line. When the
          <code class="epub__literal">if</code> statement runs, Python
          executes the block of code associated with the first test that
          evaluates to true, or the <code class="epub__literal">else</code>
          block if all tests prove false. The general form of an <code class="epub__literal">if</code> statement looks like this:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e32138"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">if &lt;test1&gt;:               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># if test</span></em>
    &lt;statements1&gt;         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Associated block</span></em>
elif &lt;test2&gt;:             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Optional elifs</span></em>
    &lt;statements2&gt;
else:                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Optional else</span></em>
    &lt;statements3&gt;</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Basic Examples"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="basic_examples"></a>Basic Examples</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To demonstrate, <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e32157"></a>let’s look at a few simple examples of the <code class="epub__literal">if</code> statement at work. All parts are
          optional, except the initial <code class="epub__literal">if</code>
          test and its associated statements. Thus, in the simplest case, the
          other parts are omitted:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e32169"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if 1:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('true')</code></strong>
...
true</pre>
<p>Notice how the prompt changes to <code class="epub__literal">...</code> for continuation lines when typing
          interactively in the basic interface used here; in IDLE, you’ll
          simply drop down to an indented line instead (hit Backspace to back
          up). A blank line (which you can get by pressing Enter twice)
          terminates and runs the entire statement. Remember that <code class="epub__literal">1</code> is Boolean true, so this statement’s
          test always succeeds. To handle a false result, code the <code class="epub__literal">else</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e32188"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if not 1:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('true')</code></strong>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>else:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('false')</code></strong>
...
false</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Multiway Branching"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="multiway_branching"></a>Multiway Branching</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Now here’s an example of a more complex <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e32207"></a><code class="epub__literal">if</code> statement, with
          all its optional parts present:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e32215"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = 'killer rabbit'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if x == 'roger':</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print("how's jessica?")</code></strong>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>elif x == 'bugs':</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print("what's up doc?")</code></strong>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>else:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('Run away! Run away!')</code></strong>
...
Run away! Run away!</pre>
<p>This multiline statement extends from the <code class="epub__literal">if</code> line through the <code class="epub__literal">else</code> block. When it’s run, Python executes
          the statements nested under the first test that is true, or the
          <code class="epub__literal">else</code> part if all tests are false
          (in this example, they are). In practice, both the <code class="epub__literal">elif</code> and <code class="epub__literal">else</code> parts may be omitted, and there may
          be more than one statement nested in each section. Note that the
          words <code class="epub__literal">if</code>, <code class="epub__literal">elif</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">else</code> are associated by the fact that they
          line up vertically, with the same indentation.</p>
<p>If you’ve used languages like C or Pascal, you might be
          interested to know that there is no <code class="epub__literal">switch</code> or <code class="epub__literal">case</code> statement in Python that selects an
          action based on a variable’s value. Instead, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e32275"></a>multiway branching</em></span> is coded either as a
          series of <code class="epub__literal">if</code>/<code class="epub__literal">elif</code> tests, as in the prior example, or by
          indexing dictionaries or searching lists. Because dictionaries and
          lists can be built at runtime, they’re sometimes more flexible than
          hardcoded <code class="epub__literal">if</code> logic:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e32290"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>choice = 'ham'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print({'spam':  1.25,</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># A dictionary-based 'switch'</span></em>
...        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'ham':   1.99,</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Use has_key or get for default</span></em>
...        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'eggs':  0.99,</code></strong>
...        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'bacon': 1.10}[choice])</code></strong>
1.99</pre>
<p>Although it may take a few moments for this to sink in the
          first time you see it, this dictionary is a multiway branch—indexing
          on the key <code class="epub__literal">choice</code> branches to one
          of a set of values, much like a <code class="epub__literal">switch</code> in C. An almost equivalent but more
          verbose Python <code class="epub__literal">if</code> statement might
          look like this:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e32325"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if choice == 'spam':</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(1.25)</code></strong>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>elif choice == 'ham':</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(1.99)</code></strong>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>elif choice == 'eggs':</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(0.99)</code></strong>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>elif choice == 'bacon':</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(1.10)</code></strong>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>else:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('Bad choice')</code></strong>
...
1.99</pre>
<p>Notice the <code class="epub__literal">else</code> clause on
          the <code class="epub__literal">if</code> here to handle the default
          case when no key matches. As we saw in Chapter 8, dictionary defaults can be
          coded with <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e32369"></a>in</code> expressions, <code class="epub__literal">get</code> method calls, or exception catching.
          All of the same techniques can be used here to code a default action
          in a dictionary-based multiway branch. Here’s the <code class="epub__literal">get</code> scheme at work with defaults:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e32381"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>branch = {'spam': 1.25,</code></strong>
...           <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'ham':  1.99,</code></strong>
...           <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'eggs': 0.99}</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(branch.get('spam', 'Bad choice'))</code></strong>
1.25
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(branch.get('bacon', 'Bad choice'))</code></strong>
Bad choice</pre>
<p>An <code class="epub__literal">in</code> membership test in an
          <code class="epub__literal">if</code> statement can have the same
          default effect:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e32407"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>choice = 'bacon'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if choice in branch:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(branch[choice])</code></strong>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>else:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('Bad choice')</code></strong>
...
Bad choice</pre>
<p>Dictionaries are good for associating values with keys, but
          what about the more complicated actions you can code in the
          statement blocks associated with <code class="epub__literal">if</code> statements? In Part IV, you’ll learn that dictionaries can also
          contain <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>functions</em></span> to represent more complex
          branch actions and implement general jump tables. Such functions
          appear as dictionary values, may be coded as function names or
          <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>s, and are called by adding
          parentheses to trigger their actions; stay tuned for more on this
          topic in Chapter 19.</p>
<p>Although dictionary-based multiway branching is useful in
          programs that deal with more dynamic data, most programmers will
          probably find that coding an <code class="epub__literal">if</code>
          statement is the most straightforward way to perform multiway
          branching. As a rule of thumb in coding, when in doubt, err on the
          side of simplicity and readability; it’s the “Pythonic”
          way<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e32444"></a>.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Python Syntax Rules"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
