<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Truth Tests</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="truth_tests"></a>Truth Tests</h1>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e32886"></a>notions of comparison, equality, and truth values were
        introduced in Chapter 9. Because the
        <code class="epub__literal">if</code> statement is the first statement
        we’ve looked at that actually uses test results, we’ll expand on some
        of these ideas here. In particular, Python’s <a id="ch12Booleanoperators"></a>Boolean operators are a bit different from their
        counterparts in languages like C. In Python:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Any nonzero number or nonempty object is true.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Zero numbers, empty objects, and the special object <code class="epub__literal">None</code> are considered false.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Comparisons and equality tests are applied recursively to
            data structures.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Comparisons and equality tests return <code class="epub__literal">True</code> or <code class="epub__literal">False</code> (custom versions of <code class="epub__literal">1</code> and <code class="epub__literal">0</code>).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Boolean <code class="epub__literal">and</code> and <code class="epub__literal">or</code> operators return a true or false
            operand object.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>In short, Boolean operators are used to combine the results of
        other tests. There are three Boolean expression operators in
        Python:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">X and Y</code></span>
</dt><dd>
<p>Is true if both <code class="epub__literal">X</code> and
              <code class="epub__literal">Y</code> are true</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">X or Y</code></span>
</dt><dd>
<p>Is true if either <code class="epub__literal">X</code> or
              <code class="epub__literal">Y</code> is true</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">not X</code></span>
</dt><dd>
<p>Is true if <code class="epub__literal">X</code> is false
              (the expression returns <code class="epub__literal">True</code>
              or <code class="epub__literal">False</code>)</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Here, <code class="epub__literal">X</code> and <code class="epub__literal">Y</code> may be any truth value, or any expression
        that returns a truth value (e.g., an equality test, range comparison,
        and so on). Boolean operators are typed out as words in Python
        (instead of C’s <code class="epub__literal">&amp;&amp;</code>,
        <code class="epub__literal">||</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">!</code>). Also, Boolean <code class="epub__literal">and</code> and <code class="epub__literal">or</code> operators return a true or false
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>object</em></span> in Python, not the values <code class="epub__literal">True</code> or <code class="epub__literal">False</code>. Let’s look at a few examples to see
        how this works:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e33014"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>2 &lt; 3, 3 &lt; 2</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Less-than: return True or False (1 or 0)</span></em>
(True, False)</pre>
<p>Magnitude comparisons such as these return <code class="epub__literal">True</code> or <code class="epub__literal">False</code> as their truth results, which, as we
        learned in Chapters 5 and 9, are really just custom versions of
        the integers <code class="epub__literal">1</code> and <code class="epub__literal">0</code> (they print themselves differently but are
        otherwise the same).</p>
<p>On the other hand, the <code class="epub__literal">and</code>
        and <code class="epub__literal">or</code> operators always return an
        object—either the object on the left side of the operator or the
        object on the right. If we test their results in <code class="epub__literal">if</code> or other statements, they will be as
        expected (remember, every object is inherently true or false), but we
        won’t get back a simple <code class="epub__literal">True</code> or
        <code class="epub__literal">False</code>.</p>
<p>For <code class="epub__literal">or</code> tests, Python evaluates the operand
        objects from left to right and returns the first one that is true.
        Moreover, Python stops at the first true operand it finds. This is
        usually called <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>short-circuit evaluation</em></span>, as
        determining a result short-circuits (terminates) the rest of the
        expression:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e33067"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>2 or 3, 3 or 2</code></strong>      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Return left operand if true</span></em>
(2, 3)                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Else, return right operand (true or false)</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[] or 3</code></strong>
3
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[] or {}</code></strong>
{}</pre>
<p>In the first line of the preceding example, both operands
        (<code class="epub__literal">2</code> and <code class="epub__literal">3</code>) are true (i.e., are nonzero), so Python
        always stops and returns the one on the left. In the other two tests,
        the left operand is false (an empty object), so Python simply
        evaluates and returns the object on the right (which may happen to
        have either a true or a false value when tested).</p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">and</code> operations also stop as
        soon as the result is known; however, in this case Python evaluates
        the operands from left to right and stops at the first
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>false</em></span> object:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e33100"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>2 and 3, 3 and 2</code></strong>    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Return left operand if false</span></em>
(3, 2)                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Else, return right operand (true or false)</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[] and {}</code></strong>
[]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>3 and []</code></strong>
[]</pre>
<p>Here, both operands are true in the first line, so Python
        evaluates both sides and returns the object on the right. In the
        second test, the left operand is false (<code class="epub__literal">[]</code>), so Python stops and returns it as the
        test result. In the last test, the left side is true (<code class="epub__literal">3</code>), so Python evaluates and returns the
        object on the right (which happens to be a false <code class="epub__literal">[]</code>).</p>
<p>The end result of all this is the same as in C and most other
        languages—you get a value that is logically true or false if tested in
        an <code class="epub__literal">if</code> or <code class="epub__literal">while</code>. However, in Python Booleans return
        either the left or the right object, not a simple integer flag.</p>
<p>This behavior of <code class="epub__literal">and</code> and
        <code class="epub__literal">or</code> may seem esoteric at first
        glance, but see this chapter’s sidebar Why You Will Care: Booleans for examples of how it
        is sometimes used to advantage in coding by Python programmers. The
        next section also shows a common way to leverage this behavior, and
        its replacement in more recent versions of Python.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="The if/else Ternary Expression"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
