<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>The if/else Ternary Expression</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="the_if_solidus_else_ternary_expression"></a>The if/else Ternary Expression</h1>
<p>One <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e33151"></a>common role for the prior section’s Boolean operators is
        to code an expression that runs the same as an <code class="epub__literal">if</code> statement. Consider the following
        statement, which sets <code class="epub__literal">A</code> to either
        <code class="epub__literal">Y</code> or <code class="epub__literal">Z</code>, based on the truth value of <code class="epub__literal">X</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e33172"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">if X:
    A = Y
else:
    A = Z</pre>
<p>Sometimes, though, the items involved in such a statement are so
        simple that it seems like overkill to spread them across four lines.
        At other times, we may want to nest such a construct in a larger
        statement instead of assigning its result to a variable. For these
        reasons (and, frankly, because the C language has a similar
        tool<sup>[32]</sup>), Python 2.5 introduced a new expression format that
        allows us to say the same thing in one expression:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e33186"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">A = Y if X else Z</pre>
<p>This expression has the exact same effect as the preceding
        four-line <code class="epub__literal">if</code> statement, but it’s
        simpler to code. As in the statement equivalent, Python runs
        expression <code class="epub__literal">Y</code> only if <code class="epub__literal">X</code> turns out to be true, and runs expression
        <code class="epub__literal">Z</code> only if <code class="epub__literal">X</code> turns out to be false. That is, it
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>short-circuits</em></span>, just like the Boolean operators
        described in the prior section. Here are some examples of it in
        action:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e33209"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>A = 't' if 'spam' else 'f'</code></strong>      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Nonempty is true</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>A</code></strong>
't'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>A = 't' if '' else 'f'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>A</code></strong>
'f'</pre>
<p>Prior to Python 2.5 (and after 2.5, if you insist), the same
        effect can often be achieved by a careful combination of the <code class="epub__literal">and</code> and <code class="epub__literal">or</code> operators, because they return either the
        object on the left side or the object on the right:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e33234"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">A = ((X and Y) or Z)</pre>
<p>This works, but there is a catch—you have to be able to assume
        that <code class="epub__literal">Y</code> will be Boolean true. If
        that is the case, the effect is the same: the <code class="epub__literal">and</code> runs first and returns <code class="epub__literal">Y</code> if <code class="epub__literal">X</code> is
        true; if it’s not, the <code class="epub__literal">or</code> simply
        returns <code class="epub__literal">Z</code>. In other words, we get
        “if <code class="epub__literal">X</code> then <code class="epub__literal">Y</code> else <code class="epub__literal">Z</code>.”</p>
<p>This <code class="epub__literal">and</code>/<code class="epub__literal">or</code> combination also seems to require a
        “moment of great clarity” to understand the first time you see it, and
        it’s no longer required as of 2.5—use the equivalent and more robust
        and mnemonic <code class="epub__literal">Y if X else Z</code> instead
        if you need this as an expression, or use a full <code class="epub__literal">if</code> statement if the parts are
        nontrivial.</p>
<p><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e34913"></a>As a side note, using the following expression in Python
        is similar because the <code class="epub__literal">bool</code>
        function will translate <code class="epub__literal">X</code> into the
        equivalent of integer <code class="epub__literal">1</code> or <code class="epub__literal">0</code>, which can then be used to pick true and
        false values from a list:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e33295"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">A = [Z, Y][bool(X)]</pre>
<p>For example:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e33300"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>['f', 't'][bool('')]</code></strong>
'f'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>['f', 't'][bool('spam')]</code></strong>
't'</pre>
<p>However, this isn’t exactly the same, because Python will not
        short-circuit—it will always run both <code class="epub__literal">Z</code> and <code class="epub__literal">Y</code>,
        regardless of the value of <code class="epub__literal">X</code>.
        Because of such complexities, you’re better off using the simpler and
        more easily understood <code class="epub__literal">if</code>/<code class="epub__literal">else</code> expression as of Python 2.5 and later.
        Again, though, you should use even that sparingly, and only if its
        parts are all fairly simple; otherwise, you’re better off coding the
        full <code class="epub__literal">if</code> statement form to make
        changes easier in the future. Your coworkers will be happy you
        did.</p>
<p>Still, you may see the <code class="epub__literal">and</code>/<code class="epub__literal">or</code>
        version in code written prior to 2.5 (and in code written by C
        programmers who haven’t quite let go of their dark coding
        pasts...).</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="why_you_will_care_colon_booleans"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Why You Will Care: Booleans</p>
<p>One common way to use the somewhat unusual behavior of Python
          Boolean operators is to select from a set of objects with an
          <code class="epub__literal">or</code>. A statement such as
          this:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e33345"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">X = A or B or C or None</pre>
<p>sets <code class="epub__literal">X</code> to the first
          nonempty (that is, true) object among <code class="epub__literal">A</code>, <code class="epub__literal">B</code>,
          and <code class="epub__literal">C</code>, or to <code class="epub__literal">None</code> if all of them are empty. This works
          because the <code class="epub__literal">or</code> operator returns
          one of its two objects, and it turns out to be a fairly common
          coding paradigm in Python: to select a nonempty object from among a
          fixed-size set, simply string them together in an <code class="epub__literal">or</code> expression. In simpler form, this is
          also commonly used to designate a default—the following sets
          <code class="epub__literal">X</code> to <code class="epub__literal">A</code> if <code class="epub__literal">A</code>
          is true (or nonempty), and to <code class="epub__literal">default</code> otherwise:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e33383"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">X = A or default</pre>
<p>It’s also important to understand short-circuit evaluation
          because expressions on the right of a Boolean operator might call
          functions that perform substantial or important work, or have side
          effects that won’t happen if the short-circuit rule takes
          effect:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e33387"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">if f1() or f2(): ...</pre>
<p>Here, if <code class="epub__literal">f1</code> returns a true
          (or nonempty) value, Python will never run <code class="epub__literal">f2</code>. To guarantee that both functions will
          be run, call them before the <code class="epub__literal">or</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e33400"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">tmp1, tmp2 = f1(), f2()
if tmp1 or tmp2: ...</pre>
<p>You’ve already seen another application of this behavior in
          this chapter: because of the way Booleans work, the expression
          <code class="epub__literal">((A and B) or C)</code> can be used to
          emulate an <code class="epub__literal">if</code>/<code class="epub__literal">else</code> statement—almost (see this chapter’s
          discussion of this form for details).</p>
<p>We met additional Boolean use cases in prior chapters. As we
          saw in Chapter 9,
          because all objects are inherently true or false, it’s common and
          easier in Python to test an object directly (<code class="epub__literal">if X:</code>) than to compare it to an empty
          value (<code class="epub__literal">if X != '':</code>). For a
          string, the two tests are equivalent. As we also saw in Chapter 5, the preset Booleans values <code class="epub__literal">True</code> and <code class="epub__literal">False</code> are the same as the integers
          <code class="epub__literal">1</code> and <code class="epub__literal">0</code> and are useful for initializing
          variables (<code class="epub__literal">X = False</code>), for loop
          tests (<code class="epub__literal">while True:</code>), and for
          displaying results at the interactive prompt.</p>
<p>Also watch for the discussion of operator overloading in Part VI: when we define new object types with
          classes, we can specify their Boolean nature with either the
          <code class="epub__literal">__bool__</code> or <code class="epub__literal">__len__</code> methods (<code class="epub__literal">__bool__</code> is named <code class="epub__literal">__nonzero__</code> in 2.6). The latter of these
          is tried if the former is absent and designates false by returning a
          length of zero—an empty object is considered <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e33462"></a>false.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Chapter Summary"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
