<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_answers-id11"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</h1>
<div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>An <code class="epub__literal">if</code> statement with
            multiple <code class="epub__literal">elif</code> clauses is often
            the most straightforward way to code a multiway branch, though not
            necessarily the most concise. Dictionary indexing can often
            achieve the same result, especially if the dictionary contains
            callable functions coded with <code class="epub__literal">def</code> statements or <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code> expressions.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In Python 2.5 and later, the expression form <code class="epub__literal">Y if X else Z</code> returns <code class="epub__literal">Y</code> if <code class="epub__literal">X</code> is true, or <code class="epub__literal">Z</code> otherwise; it’s the same as a
            four-line <code class="epub__literal">if</code> statement. The
            <code class="epub__literal">and</code>/<code class="epub__literal">or</code> combination (<code class="epub__literal">((X and Y) or Z)</code>) can work the same way,
            but it’s more obscure and requires that the <code class="epub__literal">Y</code> part be true.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Wrap up the statement in an open syntactic pair (<code class="epub__literal">()</code>, <code class="epub__literal">[]</code>, or <code class="epub__literal">{}</code>), and it can span as many lines as
            you like; the statement ends when Python sees the closing (right)
            half of the pair, and lines 2 and beyond of the statement can
            begin at any indentation level.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">True</code> and <code class="epub__literal">False</code> are just custom versions of the
            integers <code class="epub__literal">1</code> and <code class="epub__literal">0</code>, respectively: they always stand for
            Boolean true and false values in Python. They’re available for use
            in truth tests and variable initialization and are printed for
            expression results at the interactive prompt.</p></li></ol>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[31] </sup>Frankly, it’s surprising that this wasn’t removed in
              Python 3.0, given some of its other changes! (See Table 2 of the
              Preface for a list of 3.0 removals; some seem fairly innocuous
              in comparison with the dangers inherent in backslash
              continuations.) Then again, this book’s goal is Python
              instruction, not populist outrage, so the best advice I can give
              is simply: don’t do this.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[32] </sup>In fact, Python’s <code class="epub__literal">X if Y else
            Z</code> has a slightly different order than C’s <code class="epub__literal">Y ? X : Z</code>. This was reportedly done in
            response to analysis of common use patterns in Python code.
            According to rumor, this order was also chosen in part to
            discourage ex-C programmers from overusing it! Remember, simple is
            better than complex, in Python and elsewhere.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
