<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 13. while and for Loops</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 13. while and for Loops"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h1 class="epub__title"><a id="while_and_for_loops"></a>Chapter 13. while and for Loops</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>This chapter concludes our tour of Python procedural statements by
      presenting the language’s two main <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="ch13loops"></a>looping</em></span> constructs—statements that repeat an
      action over and over. The first of these, the <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e33610"></a>while</code> statement, provides a way to code general
      loops. The second, the <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e33616"></a>for</code> statement, is designed for stepping through
      the items in a sequence object and running a block of code for
      each.</p>
<p>We’ve seen both of these informally already, but we’ll fill in
      additional usage details here. While we’re at it, we’ll also study a few
      less prominent statements used within loops, such as <code class="epub__literal">break</code> and <code class="epub__literal">continue</code>, and cover some built-ins commonly
      used with loops, such as <code class="epub__literal">range</code>,
      <code class="epub__literal">zip</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">map</code>.</p>
<p>Although the <code class="epub__literal">while</code> and <code class="epub__literal">for</code> statements covered here are the primary
      syntax provided for coding repeated actions, there are additional
      looping operations and concepts in Python. Because of that, the
      iteration story is continued in the next chapter, where we’ll explore
      the related ideas of Python’s <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>iteration protocol</em></span>
      (used by the <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop) and
      <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>list comprehensions</em></span> (a close cousin to the <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop). Later chapters explore even more
      exotic iteration tools such as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>generators</em></span>, <code class="epub__literal">filter</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">reduce</code>. For now, though, let’s keep things
      simple.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="while Loops"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
