<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>while Loops</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="while_loops"></a>while Loops</h1>
<p>Python’s <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e33674"></a>while</code> statement is the most general iteration
        construct in the language. In simple terms, it repeatedly executes a
        block of (normally indented) statements as long as a test at the top
        keeps evaluating to a true value. It is called a “loop” because
        control keeps looping back to the start of the statement until the
        test becomes false. When the test becomes false, control passes to the
        statement that follows the <code class="epub__literal">while</code>
        block. The net effect is that the loop’s body is executed repeatedly
        while the test at the top is true; if the test is false to begin with,
        the body never runs.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="General Format"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="general_format-id1"></a>General Format</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In its most complex form, the <code class="epub__literal">while</code> statement consists of a header line
          with a test expression, a body of one or more indented statements,
          and an optional <code class="epub__literal">else</code> part that is
          executed if control exits the loop without a <code class="epub__literal">break</code> statement being encountered. Python
          keeps evaluating the test at the top and executing the statements
          nested in the loop body until the test returns a false value:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e33698"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">while &lt;test&gt;:                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Loop test</span></em>
    &lt;statements1&gt;               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Loop body</span></em>
else:                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Optional else</span></em>
    &lt;statements2&gt;               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Run if didn't exit loop with break</span></em></pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Examples"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="examples"></a>Examples</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To illustrate, let’s look at a few simple <code class="epub__literal">while</code> loops in action. The first, which
          consists of a <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statement
          nested in a <code class="epub__literal">while</code> loop, just
          prints a message forever. Recall that <code class="epub__literal">True</code> is just a custom version of the
          integer 1 and always stands for a Boolean true value; because the
          test is always true, Python keeps executing the body forever, or
          until you stop its execution. This sort of behavior is usually
          called an <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e33729"></a>infinite loop</em></span>:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e33734"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>while True:</code></strong>
...    <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('Type Ctrl-C to stop me!')</code></strong></pre>
<p>The next example keeps slicing off the first character of a
          string until the string is empty and hence false. It’s typical to
          test an object directly like this instead of using the more verbose
          equivalent (<code class="epub__literal">while x != '':</code>).
          Later in this chapter, we’ll see other ways to step more directly
          through the items in a string with a <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop.</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e33749"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = 'spam'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>while x:</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># While x is not empty</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(x, end=' ')</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = x[1:]</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Strip first character off x</span></em>
...
spam pam am m</pre>
<p>Note the <code class="epub__literal">end=' '</code> keyword
          argument used here to place all outputs on the same line separated
          by a space; see Chapter 11 if you’ve
          forgotten why this works as it does. The following code counts from
          the value of <code class="epub__literal">a</code> up to, but not
          including, <code class="epub__literal">b</code>. We’ll see an easier
          way to do this with a Python <code class="epub__literal">for</code>
          loop and the built-in <code class="epub__literal">range</code>
          function later:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e33790"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a=0; b=10</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>while a &lt; b:</code></strong>              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># One way to code counter loops</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(a, end=' ')</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a += 1</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Or, a = a + 1</span></em>
...
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9</pre>
<p>Finally, notice that Python doesn’t have what some languages
          call a “do until” loop statement. However, we can simulate one with
          a test and <code class="epub__literal">break</code> at the bottom of
          the loop body:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e33816"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">while True:
    ...<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>loop body</code></em>...
    if exitTest(): break</pre>
<p>To fully understand how this structure works, we need to move
          on to the next section and learn more about the <code class="epub__literal">break</code> statement.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="break, continue, pass, and the Loop else"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
