<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>break, continue, pass, and the Loop else</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="break_comma_continue_comma_pass_comma_a"></a>break, continue, pass, and the Loop else</h1>
<p>Now <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e33831"></a>that we’ve seen a few Python loops in action, it’s time
        to take a look at two simple statements that have a purpose only when
        nested inside loops—the <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e33838"></a>break</code> and continue<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e33845"></a> statements. While we’re looking at oddballs, we will
        also study the loop <code class="epub__literal">else</code> clause
        here, because it is intertwined with <code class="epub__literal">break</code>, and Python’s empty placeholder
        statement, the <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e33857"></a>pass</code> (which is not tied to loops per se, but
        falls into the general category of simple one-word statements). In
        Python:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">break</code></span>
</dt><dd>
<p>Jumps out of the closest enclosing loop (past the entire
              loop statement)</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">continue</code></span>
</dt><dd>
<p>Jumps to the top of the closest enclosing loop (to the
              loop’s header line)</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">pass</code></span>
</dt><dd>
<p>Does nothing at all: it’s an empty statement
              placeholder</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">Loop <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e33888"></a>else block</code></span>
</dt><dd>
<p>Runs if and only if the loop is exited normally (i.e.,
              without hitting a <code class="epub__literal">break</code>)</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="General Loop Format"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="general_loop_format"></a>General Loop Format</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Factoring <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e33903"></a>in <code class="epub__literal">break</code> and
          <code class="epub__literal">continue</code> statements, the general
          format of the <code class="epub__literal">while</code> loop looks
          like this:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e33918"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">while &lt;test1&gt;:
    &lt;statements1&gt;
    if &lt;test2&gt;: break              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Exit loop now, skip else</span></em>
    if &lt;test3&gt;: continue           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Go to top of loop now, to test1</span></em>
else:
    &lt;statements2&gt;                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Run if we didn't hit a 'break'</span></em></pre>
<p><code class="epub__literal">break</code> and <code class="epub__literal">continue</code> statements can appear anywhere
          inside the <code class="epub__literal">while</code> (or <code class="epub__literal">for</code>) loop’s body, but they are usually
          coded further nested in an <code class="epub__literal">if</code>
          test to take action in response to some condition.</p>
<p>Let’s turn to a few simple examples to see how these
          statements come together in practice.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="pass"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="pass"></a>pass</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Simple things first: the <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e33952"></a>pass</code> statement is a no-operation placeholder
          that is used when the syntax requires a statement, but you have
          nothing useful to say. It is often used to code an empty body for a
          compound statement. For instance, if you want to code an infinite
          loop that does nothing each time through, do it with a <code class="epub__literal">pass</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e33960"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">while True: pass                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Type Ctrl-C to stop me!</span></em></pre>
<p>Because the body is just an empty statement, Python gets stuck
          in this loop. <code class="epub__literal">pass</code> is roughly to
          statements as <code class="epub__literal">None</code> is to
          objects—an explicit nothing. Notice that here the <code class="epub__literal">while</code> loop’s body is on the same line as
          the header, after the colon; as with <code class="epub__literal">if</code> statements, this only works if the body
          isn’t a compound statement.</p>
<p>This example does nothing forever. It probably isn’t the most
          useful Python program ever written (unless you want to warm up your
          laptop computer on a cold winter’s day!); frankly, though, I
          couldn’t think of a better <code class="epub__literal">pass</code>
          example at this point in the book.</p>
<p>We’ll see other places where <code class="epub__literal">pass</code> makes more sense later—for instance,
          to ignore exceptions caught by <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statements, and to define empty
          <code class="epub__literal">class</code> objects with attributes
          that behave like “structs” and “records” in other languages. A
          <code class="epub__literal">pass</code> is also sometimes coded to
          mean “to be filled in later,” to stub out the bodies of functions
          temporarily:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e33997"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def func1():
    pass                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Add real code here later</span></em>

def func2():
    pass</pre>
<p>We can’t leave the body empty without getting a syntax error,
          so we say <code class="epub__literal">pass</code> instead.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Version skew note</em></span>: Python 3.0 (but not
            2.6) allows <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>ellipses</em></span> <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e34015"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e34018"></a>coded as <code class="epub__literal">...</code>
            (literally, three consecutive dots) to appear any place an
            expression can. Because ellipses do nothing by themselves, this
            can serve as an alternative to the <code class="epub__literal">pass</code> statement, especially for code to
            be filled in later—a sort of Python “TBD”:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e34028"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def func1():
    ...                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Alternative to pass</span></em>

def func2():
    ...

func1()                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Does nothing if called</span></em></pre>
<p>Ellipses can also appear on the same line as a statement
            header and may be used to initialize variable names if no specific
            type is required:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e34037"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def func1(): ...          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Works on same line too</span></em>
def func2(): ...

&gt;&gt;&gt; X = ...               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Alternative to None</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; X
Ellipsis</pre>
<p>This notation is new in Python 3.0 (and goes well beyond the
            original intent of <code class="epub__literal">...</code> in
            slicing extensions), so time will tell if it becomes widespread
            enough to challenge <code class="epub__literal">pass</code> and
            <code class="epub__literal">None</code> in these roles.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="continue"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="continue"></a>continue</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e34062"></a>continue</code> statement causes an immediate jump
          to the top of a loop. It also sometimes lets you avoid statement
          nesting. The next example uses <code class="epub__literal">continue</code> to skip odd numbers. This code
          prints all even numbers less than 10 and greater than or equal to 0.
          Remember, 0 means false and <code class="epub__literal">%</code> is
          the remainder of division operator, so this loop counts down to 0,
          skipping numbers that aren’t multiples of 2 (it prints <code class="epub__literal">8 6 4 2 0</code>):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e34076"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">x = 10
while x:
    x = x−1                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Or, x -= 1</span></em>
    if x % 2 != 0: continue        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Odd? -- skip print</span></em>
    print(x, end=' ')</pre>
<p>Because <code class="epub__literal">continue</code> jumps to
          the top of the loop, you don’t need to nest the <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statement inside an <code class="epub__literal">if</code> test; the <code class="epub__literal">print</code> is only reached if the <code class="epub__literal">continue</code> is not run. If this sounds
          similar to a “goto” in other languages, it should. Python has no
          “goto” statement, but because <code class="epub__literal">continue</code> lets you jump about in a program,
          many of the warnings about readability and maintainability you may
          have heard about goto apply. <code class="epub__literal">continue</code> should probably be used
          sparingly, especially when you’re first getting started with Python.
          For instance, the last example might be clearer if the <code class="epub__literal">print</code> were nested under the <code class="epub__literal">if</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e34114"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">x = 10
while x:
    x = x−1
    if x % 2 == 0:                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Even? -- print</span></em>
        print(x, end=' ')</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="break"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="break"></a>break</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">break</code> <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e34127"></a>statement causes an immediate exit from a loop.
          Because the code that follows it in the loop is not executed if the
          <code class="epub__literal">break</code> is reached, you can also
          sometimes avoid nesting by including a <code class="epub__literal">break</code>. For example, here is a simple
          interactive loop (a variant of a larger example we studied in Chapter 10) that inputs data with
          <code class="epub__literal">input</code> (known as <code class="epub__literal">raw_input</code> in Python 2.6) and exits when
          the user enters “stop” for the name request:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e34146"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>while True:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>name = input('Enter name:')</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if name == 'stop': break</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>age  = input('Enter age: ')</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('Hello', name, '=&gt;', int(age) ** 2)</code></strong>
...
Enter name:<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mel</code></strong>
Enter age: <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>40</code></strong>
Hello mel =&gt; 1600
Enter name:<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bob</code></strong>
Enter age: <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>30</code></strong>
Hello bob =&gt; 900
Enter name:<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>stop</code></strong></pre>
<p>Notice how this code converts the <code class="epub__literal">age</code> input to an integer with <code class="epub__literal">int</code> before raising it to the second power;
          as you’ll recall, this is necessary because <code class="epub__literal">input</code> returns user input as a string. In
          Chapter 35, you’ll see that
          <code class="epub__literal">input</code> also raises an exception at
          end-of-file (e.g., if the user types Ctrl-Z or Ctrl-D); if this
          matters, wrap <code class="epub__literal">input</code> in <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statements.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Loop else"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="loop_else"></a>Loop else</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>When combined with the <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e34206"></a>loop <code class="epub__literal">else</code> clause,
          the <code class="epub__literal">break</code> statement can often
          eliminate the need for the search status flags used in other
          languages. For instance, the following piece of code determines
          whether a positive integer <code class="epub__literal">y</code> is
          prime by searching for factors greater than 1:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e34221"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">x = y // 2                                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># For some y &gt; 1</span></em>
while x &gt; 1:
    if y % x == 0:                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Remainder</span></em>
        print(y, 'has factor', x)
        break                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Skip else</span></em>
    x -= 1
else:                                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Normal exit</span></em>
    print(y, 'is prime')</pre>
<p>Rather than setting a flag to be tested when the loop is
          exited, it inserts a <code class="epub__literal">break</code> where
          a factor is found. This way, the loop <code class="epub__literal">else</code> clause can assume that it will be
          executed only if no factor is found; if you don’t hit the <code class="epub__literal">break</code>, the number is prime.</p>
<p>The loop <code class="epub__literal">else</code> clause is
          also run if the body of the loop is never executed, as you don’t run
          a <code class="epub__literal">break</code> in that event either; in
          a <code class="epub__literal">while</code> loop, this happens if the
          test in the header is false to begin with. Thus, in the preceding
          example you still get the “is prime” message if <code class="epub__literal">x</code> is initially less than or equal to 1
          (for instance, if <code class="epub__literal">y</code> is 2).</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p>This example determines primes, but only informally so.
            Numbers less than 2 are not considered prime by the strict
            mathematical definition. To be really picky, this code also fails
            for negative numbers and succeeds for floating-point numbers with
            no decimal digits. Also note that its code must use <code class="epub__literal">//</code> instead of <code class="epub__literal">/</code> in Python 3.0 because of the migration
            of <code class="epub__literal">/</code> to “true division,” as
            described in Chapter 5 (we need the initial
            division to truncate remainders, not retain them!). If you want to
            experiment with this code, be sure to see the exercise at the end
            of Part IV, which wraps it in a function for
            reuse.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="More on the loop else"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="more_on_the_loop_else"></a>More on the loop else</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Because the loop <code class="epub__literal">else</code>
            clause is unique to Python, it tends to perplex some newcomers. In
            general terms, the loop <code class="epub__literal">else</code>
            provides explicit syntax for a common coding scenario—it is a coding structure
            that lets us catch the “other” way out of a loop, without setting
            and checking flags or conditions.</p>
<p>Suppose, for instance, that we are writing a loop to search
            a list for a value, and we need to know whether the value was
            found after we exit the loop. We might code such a task this way
            (this code is intentionally abstract and incomplete; x is a
            sequence and match() is a tester function to be defined):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e34295"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">found = False
while x and not found:
    if match(x[0]):                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Value at front?</span></em>
        print('Ni')
        found = True
    else:
        x = x[1:]                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Slice off front and repeat</span></em>
if not found:
    print('not found')</pre>
<p>Here, we initialize, set, and later test a flag to determine
            whether the search succeeded or not. This is valid Python code,
            and it does work; however, this is exactly the sort of structure
            that the loop <code class="epub__literal">else</code> clause is
            there to handle. Here’s an <code class="epub__literal">else</code>
            equivalent:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e34311"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">while x:                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Exit when x empty</span></em>
    if match(x[0]):
        print('Ni')
        break                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Exit, go around else</span></em>
    x = x[1:]
else:
    print('Not found')               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Only here if exhausted x</span></em></pre>
<p>This version is more concise. The flag is gone, and we’ve
            replaced the <code class="epub__literal">if</code> test at the
            loop end with an <code class="epub__literal">else</code> (lined up
            vertically with the word <code class="epub__literal">while</code>). Because the <code class="epub__literal">break</code> inside the main part of the
            <code class="epub__literal">while</code> exits the loop and goes
            around the <code class="epub__literal">else</code>, this serves as
            a more structured way to catch the search-failure case.</p>
<p>Some readers might have noticed that the prior example’s
            <code class="epub__literal">else</code> clause could be replaced
            with a test for an empty <code class="epub__literal">x</code>
            after the loop (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">if not
            x:</code>). Although that’s true in this example, the <code class="epub__literal">else</code> provides explicit syntax for this
            coding pattern (it’s more obviously a search-failure clause here),
            and such an explicit empty test may not apply in some cases. The
            loop <code class="epub__literal">else</code> becomes even more
            useful when used in conjunction with the <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop—the topic of the next
            section—because sequence iteration is not under your
            control.</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="why_you_will_care_colon_emulating_c_whi"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Why You Will Care: Emulating C while Loops</p>
<p>The section on expression statements in Chapter 11 stated that
              Python doesn’t allow statements such as assignments to appear in
              places where it expects an expression. That means this common C
              language coding pattern won’t work in Python:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e34371"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">while ((x = next()) != NULL) {...<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>process x</code></em>...}</pre>
<p>C assignments return the value assigned, but Python
              assignments are just statements, not expressions. This
              eliminates a notorious class of C errors (you can’t accidentally
              type <code class="epub__literal">=</code> in Python when you
              mean <code class="epub__literal">==</code>). If you need similar
              behavior, though, there are at least three ways to get the same
              effect in Python <code class="epub__literal">while</code> loops
              without embedding assignments in loop tests. You can move the
              assignment into the loop body with a <code class="epub__literal">break</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e34390"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">while True:
    x = next()
    if not x: break
    ...<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>process x</code></em>...</pre>
<p>or move the assignment into the loop with tests:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e34397"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">x = True
while x:
    x = next()
    if x:
        ...<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>process x</code></em>...</pre>
<p>or move the first assignment outside the loop:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e34404"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">x = next()
while x:
    ...<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>process x</code></em>...
    x = next()</pre>
<p>Of these three coding patterns, the first may be
              considered by some to be the least structured, but it also seems
              to be the simplest and is the most commonly used. A simple
              Python <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop may replace
              some C loops as well.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="for Loops"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
