<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>for Loops</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="for_loops"></a>for Loops</h1>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal"><a id="ch13forstatement"></a>for</code> loop is a <a id="ch13loopsforstatement"></a>generic sequence iterator in Python: it can step through
        the items in any ordered sequence object. The <code class="epub__literal">for</code> statement works on strings, lists,
        tuples, other built-in iterables, and new objects that we’ll see how
        to create later with classes. We met it in brief when studying
        sequence object types; let’s expand on its usage more formally
        here.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="General Format"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="general_format-id2"></a>General Format</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The Python <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e34440"></a>for</code> loop begins with a header line that
          specifies an assignment target (or targets), along with the object
          you want to step through. The header is followed by a block of
          (normally indented) statements that you want to repeat:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e34447"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">for &lt;target&gt; in &lt;object&gt;:             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Assign object items to target</span></em>
    &lt;statements&gt;                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Repeated loop body: use target</span></em>
else:
    &lt;statements&gt;                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># If we didn't hit a 'break'</span></em></pre>
<p>When Python runs a <code class="epub__literal">for</code>
          loop, it assigns the items in the sequence object to the target one
          by one and executes the loop body for each. The loop body typically
          uses the assignment target to refer to the current item in the
          sequence as though it were a cursor stepping through the
          sequence.</p>
<p>The name used as the assignment target in a <code class="epub__literal">for</code> header line is usually a (possibly
          new) variable in the scope where the <code class="epub__literal">for</code> statement is coded. There’s not much
          special about it; it can even be changed inside the loop’s body, but
          it will automatically be set to the next item in the sequence when
          control returns to the top of the loop again. After the loop this
          variable normally still refers to the last item visited, which is
          the last item in the sequence unless the loop exits with a <code class="epub__literal">break</code> statement.</p>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">for</code> statement also
          supports an optional <code class="epub__literal">else</code> block,
          which works exactly as it does in a <code class="epub__literal">while</code> loop—it’s executed if the loop exits
          without running into a <code class="epub__literal">break</code>
          statement (i.e., if all items in the sequence have been visited).
          The <code class="epub__literal">break</code> and <code class="epub__literal">continue</code> statements introduced earlier
          also work the same in a <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop
          as they do in a <code class="epub__literal">while</code>. The
          <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop’s complete format can be
          described this way:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e34503"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">for &lt;target&gt; in &lt;object&gt;:             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Assign object items to target</span></em>
    &lt;statements&gt;
    if &lt;test&gt;: break                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Exit loop now, skip else</span></em>
    if &lt;test&gt;: continue               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Go to top of loop now</span></em>
else:
    &lt;statements&gt;                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># If we didn't hit a 'break'</span></em></pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Examples"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="examples-id1"></a>Examples</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Let’s <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e34521"></a>type a few <code class="epub__literal">for</code>
          loops interactively now, so you can see how they are used in
          practice.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Basic usage"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="basic_usage"></a>Basic usage</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As mentioned earlier, a <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop can step across any kind of
            sequence object. In our first example, for instance, we’ll assign
            the name <code class="epub__literal">x</code> to each of the three
            items in a list in turn, from left to right, and the <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statement will be executed for
            each. Inside the <code class="epub__literal">print</code>
            statement (the loop body), the name <code class="epub__literal">x</code> refers to the current item in the
            list:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e34550"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for x in ["spam", "eggs", "ham"]:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(x, end=' ')</code></strong>
...
spam eggs ham</pre>
<p>The next two examples compute the sum and product of all the
            items in a list. Later in this chapter and later in the book we’ll
            meet tools that apply operations such as <code class="epub__literal">+</code> and <code class="epub__literal">*</code> to items in a list automatically, but
            it’s usually just as easy to use a <code class="epub__literal">for</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e34569"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sum = 0</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for x in [1, 2, 3, 4]:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sum = sum + x</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sum</code></strong>
10
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>prod = 1</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for item in [1, 2, 3, 4]: prod *= item</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>prod</code></strong>
24</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Other data types"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="other_data_types"></a>Other data types</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Any sequence works in a <code class="epub__literal">for</code>, as it’s a generic tool. For
            example, <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops work on
            strings and tuples:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e34604"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S = "lumberjack"</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>T = ("and", "I'm", "okay")</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for x in S: print(x, end=' ')</code></strong>     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Iterate over a string</span></em>
...
l u m b e r j a c k

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for x in T: print(x, end=' ')</code></strong>     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Iterate over a tuple</span></em>
...
and I'm okay</pre>
<p>In fact, as we’ll in the next chapter when we explore the
            notion of “iterables,” <code class="epub__literal">for</code>
            loops can even work on some objects that are not sequences—files
            and dictionaries work, too!</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Tuple assignment in for loops"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="tuple_assignment_in_for_loops"></a>Tuple assignment in for loops</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>If you’re <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e34635"></a>iterating through <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e34641"></a>a sequence of tuples, the loop target itself can
            actually be a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>tuple</em></span> of targets. This is just
            another case of the tuple-unpacking assignment we studied in Chapter 11 at work.
            Remember, the <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop assigns
            items in the sequence object to the target, and assignment works
            the same everywhere:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e34655"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>T = [(1, 2), (3, 4), (5, 6)]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for (a, b) in T:</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Tuple assignment at work</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(a, b)</code></strong>
...
1 2
3 4
5 6</pre>
<p>Here, the first time through the loop is like writing
            <code class="epub__literal">(a,b) = (1,2)</code>, the second time
            is like writing <code class="epub__literal">(a,b) = (3,4)</code>,
            and so on. The net effect is to automatically unpack the current
            tuple on each iteration.</p>
<p>This form is commonly used in conjunction with the <code class="epub__literal">zip</code> call we’ll meet later in this
            chapter to implement parallel traversals. It also makes regular
            appearances in conjunction with SQL databases in Python, where
            query result tables are returned as sequences of sequences like
            the list used here—the outer list is the database table, the
            nested tuples are the rows within the table, and tuple assignment
            extracts columns.</p>
<p>Tuples in <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops also
            come in handy to iterate through <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>both</em></span> keys
            and values in dictionaries using the <code class="epub__literal">items</code> method, rather than looping
            through the keys and indexing to fetch the values manually:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e34693"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D = {'a': 1, 'b': 2, 'c': 3}</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for key in D:</code></strong>
...    <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(key, '=&gt;', D[key])</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Use dict keys iterator and index</span></em>
...
a =&gt; 1
c =&gt; 3
b =&gt; 2

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(D.items())</code></strong>
[('a', 1), ('c', 3), ('b', 2)]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for (key, value) in D.items():</code></strong>
...    <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(key, '=&gt;', value)</code></strong>              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Iterate over both keys and values</span></em>
...
a =&gt; 1
c =&gt; 3
b =&gt; 2</pre>
<p>It’s important to note that tuple assignment in <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops isn’t a special case; any
            assignment target works syntactically after the word <code class="epub__literal">for</code>. Although we can always assign
            manually within the loop to unpack:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e34728"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>T</code></strong>
[(1, 2), (3, 4), (5, 6)]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for both in T:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, b = both</code></strong>                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Manual assignment equivalent</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(a, b)</code></strong>
...
1 2
3 4
5 6</pre>
<p>Tuples in the loop header save us an extra step when
            iterating through sequences of sequences. As suggested in Chapter 11, even
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>nested</em></span> structures may be automatically
            unpacked this way in a <code class="epub__literal">for</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e34755"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>((a, b), c) = ((1, 2), 3)</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Nested sequences work too</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">a, b, c</span></em>
(1, 2, 3)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for ((a, b), c) in [((1, 2), 3), ((4, 5), 6)]: print(a, b, c)</code></strong>
...
1 2 3
4 5 6</pre>
<p>But this is no special case—the <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop simply runs the sort of
            assignment we ran just before it, on each iteration. Any nested
            sequence structure may be unpacked this way, just because
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>sequence assignment</em></span> is so generic:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e34778"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for ((a, b), c) in [([1, 2], 3), ['XY', 6]]: print(a, b, c)</code></strong>
...
1 2 3
X Y 6</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Python 3.0 extended sequence assignment in for loops"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="python_3.0_extended_sequence_assignment"></a>Python 3.0 extended sequence assignment in for
            loops</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In fact, because the loop variable in a <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop can really be any assignment
            target, we can also use <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e34791"></a>Python 3.0’s <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e34799"></a>extended sequence-unpacking assignment syntax here
            to extract items and sections of sequences within sequences.
            Really, this isn’t a special case either, but simply a new
            assignment form in 3.0 (as discussed in Chapter 11); because it
            works in assignment statements, it automatically works in <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops.</p>
<p>Consider the tuple assignment form introduced in the prior
            section. A tuple of values is assigned to a tuple of names on each
            iteration, exactly like a simple assignment statement:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e34815"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, b, c = (1, 2, 3)</code></strong>                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Tuple assignment</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, b, c</code></strong>
(1, 2, 3)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for (a, b, c) in [(1, 2, 3), (4, 5, 6)]:</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Used in for loop</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(a, b, c)</code></strong>
...
1 2 3
4 5 6</pre>
<p>In Python 3.0, because a sequence can be assigned to a more
            general set of names with a starred name to collect multiple
            items, we can use the same syntax to extract parts of nested
            sequences in the <code class="epub__literal">for</code>
            loop:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e34841"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, *b, c = (1, 2, 3, 4)</code></strong>                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Extended seq assignment</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, b, c</code></strong>
(1, [2, 3], 4)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for (a, *b, c) in [(1, 2, 3, 4), (5, 6, 7, 8)]:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(a, b, c)</code></strong>
...
1 [2, 3] 4
5 [6, 7] 8</pre>
<p>In practice, this approach might be used to pick out
            multiple columns from rows of data represented as nested
            sequences. In Python 2.X starred names aren’t allowed, but you can
            achieve similar effects by slicing. The only difference is that
            slicing returns a type-specific result, whereas starred names
            always are assigned lists:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e34860"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for all in [(1, 2, 3, 4), (5, 6, 7, 8)]:</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Manual slicing in 2.6</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, b, c = all[0], all[1:3], all[3]</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(a, b, c)</code></strong>
...
1 (2, 3) 4
5 (6, 7) 8</pre>
<p>See Chapter 11 for more on
            this assignment form.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Nested for loops"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="nested_for_loops"></a>Nested for loops</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Now <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e34883"></a>let’s look at a <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop that’s a bit more sophisticated
            than those we’ve seen so far. The next example illustrates
            statement nesting and the loop <code class="epub__literal">else</code> clause in a <code class="epub__literal">for</code>. Given a list of objects (<code class="epub__literal">items</code>) and a list of keys (<code class="epub__literal">tests</code>), this code searches for each key
            in the objects list and reports on the search’s outcome:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e34905"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>items = ["aaa", 111, (4, 5), 2.01]</code></strong>   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># A set of objects</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>tests = [(4, 5), 3.14]</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Keys to search for</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for key in tests:</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># For all keys</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for item in items:</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># For all items</span></em>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if item == key:</code></strong>              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Check for match</span></em>
...             <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(key, "was found")</code></strong>
...             <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>break</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>else:</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(key, "not found!")</code></strong>
...
(4, 5) was found
3.14 not found!</pre>
<p>Because the nested <code class="epub__literal">if</code>
            runs a <code class="epub__literal">break</code> when a match is
            found, the loop <code class="epub__literal">else</code> clause can
            assume that if it is reached, the search has failed. Notice the
            nesting here. When this code runs, there are two loops going at
            the same time: the outer loop scans the keys list, and the inner
            loop scans the items list for each key. The nesting of the loop
            <code class="epub__literal">else</code> clause is critical; it’s
            indented to the same level as the header line of the inner
            <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop, so it’s associated
            with the inner loop, not the <code class="epub__literal">if</code>
            or the outer <code class="epub__literal">for</code>.</p>
<p>Note that this example is easier to code if we employ the
            <code class="epub__literal">in</code> operator to test membership.
            Because <code class="epub__literal">in</code> implicitly scans an
            object looking for a match (at least logically), it replaces the
            inner loop:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e34983"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for key in tests:</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># For all keys</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if key in items:</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Let Python check for a match</span></em>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(key, "was found")</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>else:</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(key, "not found!")</code></strong>
...
(4, 5) was found
3.14 not found!</pre>
<p>In general, it’s a good idea to let Python do as much of the
            work as possible (as in this solution) for the sake of brevity and
            performance.</p>
<p>The next example performs a typical data-structure task with
            a <code class="epub__literal">for</code>—collecting common items
            in two sequences (strings). It’s roughly a simple set intersection
            routine; after the loop runs, <code class="epub__literal">res</code> refers to a list that contains all
            the items found in <code class="epub__literal">seq1</code> and
            <code class="epub__literal">seq2</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e35023"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>seq1 = "spam"</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>seq2 = "scam"</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res = []</code></strong>                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Start empty</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for x in seq1:</code></strong>                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Scan first sequence</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if x in seq2:</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Common item?</span></em>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res.append(x)</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Add to result end</span></em>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res</code></strong>
['s', 'a', 'm']</pre>
<p>Unfortunately, this code is equipped to work only on two
            specific variables: <code class="epub__literal">seq1</code> and
            <code class="epub__literal">seq2</code>. It would be nice if this
            loop could somehow be generalized into a tool you could use more
            than once. As you’ll see, that simple idea leads us to
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>functions</em></span>, the topic of the next part of the
            book.</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="why_you_will_care_colon_file_scanners"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Why You Will Care: File Scanners</p>
<p>In general, loops come in handy anywhere you need to
              repeat an operation or process something more than once. Because
              files contain multiple characters and lines, they are one of the
              more typical use cases for loops. To load a file’s contents into
              a string all at once, you simply call the file object’s <code class="epub__literal">read</code> method:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e35078"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">file = open('test.txt', 'r')   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Read contents into a string</span></em>
print(file.read())</pre>
<p>But to load a file in smaller pieces, it’s common to code
              either a <code class="epub__literal">while</code> loop with
              breaks on end-of-file, or a <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop. To read by characters,
              either of the following codings will suffice:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e35091"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">file = open('test.txt')
while True:
    char = file.read(1)         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Read by character</span></em>
    if not char: break
    print(char)

for char in open('test.txt').read():
    print(char)</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop here also
              processes each character, but it loads the file into memory all
              at once (and assumes it fits!). To read by lines or blocks
              instead, you can use <code class="epub__literal">while</code>
              loop code like this:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e35104"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">file = open('test.txt')
while True:
    line = file.readline()      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Read line by line</span></em>
    if not line: break
    print(line, end='')         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Line already has a \n</span></em>

file = open('test.txt', 'rb')
while True:
    chunk = file.read(10)       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Read byte chunks: up to 10 bytes</span></em>
    if not chunk: break
    print(chunk)</pre>
<p>You typically read binary data in blocks. To read text
              files line by line, though, the <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop tends to be easiest to code
              and the quickest to run:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e35120"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">for line in open('test.txt').readlines():
    print(line, end='')

for line in open('test.txt'):   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Use iterators: best text input mode</span></em>
    print(line, end='')</pre>
<p>The file <code class="epub__literal">readlines</code>
              method loads a file all at once into a line-string list, and the
              last example here relies on file <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>iterators</em></span>
              to automatically read one line on each loop iteration (iterators
              are covered in detail in Chapter 14). See the
              library manual for more on the calls used here. The last example
              here is generally the best option for text files—besides its
              simplicity, it works for arbitrarily large files and doesn’t
              load the entire file into memory all at once. The iterator
              version may be the quickest, but I/O performance is less
              clear-cut in Python 3.0.</p>
<p>In some 2.X Python code, you may also see the name
              <code class="epub__literal">open</code> replaced with <code class="epub__literal">file</code> and the file object’s older
              <code class="epub__literal">xreadlines</code> method used to
              achieve the same effect as the file’s automatic line iterator
              (it’s like <code class="epub__literal">readlines</code> but
              doesn’t load the file into memory all at once). Both <code class="epub__literal">file</code> and <code class="epub__literal">xreadlines</code> are removed in Python 3.0,
              because they are redundant; you shouldn’t use them in 2.6
              either, but they may pop up in older code and resources. Watch
              for more on reading files in Chapter 36; as we’ll see there, text
              and binary files have slightly different semantics in <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e35158"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e35160"></a>3.0.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Loop Coding Techniques"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
