<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Loop Coding Techniques</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="loop_coding_techniques"></a>Loop Coding Techniques</h1>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop <a id="ch13loopscodingtech"></a>subsumes most counter-style loops. It’s generally
        simpler to code and quicker to run than a <code class="epub__literal">while</code>, so it’s the first tool you should
        reach for whenever you need to step through a sequence. But there are
        also situations where you will need to iterate in more specialized
        ways. For example, what if you need to visit every second or third
        item in a list, or change the list along the way? How about traversing
        more than one sequence in parallel, in the same <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop?</p>
<p>You can always code such unique iterations with a <code class="epub__literal">while</code> loop and manual indexing, but Python
        provides two built-ins that allow you to specialize the iteration in a
        <code class="epub__literal">for</code>:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The built-in <code class="epub__literal">range</code>
            function produces a series of successively higher integers, which
            can be used as indexes in a <code class="epub__literal">for</code>.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The built-in <code class="epub__literal">zip</code> function
            returns a series of parallel-item tuples, which can be used to
            traverse multiple sequences in a <code class="epub__literal">for</code>.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Because <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops typically
        run quicker than <code class="epub__literal">while</code>-based
        counter loops, it’s to your advantage to use tools like these that
        allow you to use <code class="epub__literal">for</code> when possible.
        Let’s look at each of these built-ins in turn.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Counter Loops: while and range"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="counter_loops_colon_while_and_range"></a>Counter Loops: while and range</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e35227"></a>range</code> function is really a <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e35232"></a>general tool that can be used in a variety of
          contexts. <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e35238"></a>Although it’s used most often to generate indexes in a
          <code class="epub__literal">for</code>, you can use it anywhere you
          need a list of integers. In Python 3.0, <code class="epub__literal">range</code> is an <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e35252"></a>iterator</em></span> that generates items on demand, so
          we need to wrap it in a <code class="epub__literal">list</code> call
          to display its results all at once (more on iterators in Chapter 14):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e35264"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(range(5)), list(range(2, 5)), list(range(0, 10, 2))</code></strong>
([0, 1, 2, 3, 4], [2, 3, 4], [0, 2, 4, 6, 8])</pre>
<p>With one argument, <code class="epub__literal">range</code>
          generates a list of integers from zero up to but not including the
          argument’s value. If you pass in two arguments, the first is taken
          as the lower bound. An optional third argument can give a
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>step</em></span>; if it is used, Python adds the step to
          each successive integer in the result (the step defaults to 1).
          Ranges can also be nonpositive and nonascending, if you want them to
          be:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e35277"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(range(−5, 5))</code></strong>
[−5, −4, −3, −2, −1, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(range(5, −5, −1))</code></strong>
[5, 4, 3, 2, 1, 0, −1, −2, −3, −4]</pre>
<p>Although such <code class="epub__literal">range</code> results
          may be useful all by themselves, they tend to come in most handy
          within <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops. For one thing,
          they provide a simple way to repeat an action a specific number of
          times. To print three lines, for example, use a <code class="epub__literal">range</code> to generate the appropriate number
          of integers; <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops force
          results from <code class="epub__literal">range</code> automatically
          in 3.0, so we don’t need <code class="epub__literal">list</code>
          here:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e35306"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for i in range(3):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(i, 'Pythons')</code></strong>
...
0 Pythons
1 Pythons
2 Pythons</pre>
<p><code class="epub__literal">range</code> is also commonly used
          to iterate over a sequence indirectly. The easiest and fastest way
          to step through a sequence exhaustively is always with a simple
          <code class="epub__literal">for</code>, as Python handles most of
          the details for you:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e35321"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = 'spam'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for item in X: print(item, end=' ')</code></strong>           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Simple iteration</span></em>
...
s p a m</pre>
<p>Internally, the <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop
          handles the details of the iteration automatically when used this
          way. If you really need to take over the indexing logic explicitly,
          you can do it with a <code class="epub__literal">while</code>
          loop:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e35340"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>i = 0</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>while i &lt; len(X):</code></strong>                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># while loop iteration</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(X[i], end=' ')</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>i += 1</code></strong>
...
s p a m</pre>
<p>You can also do manual indexing with a <code class="epub__literal">for</code>, though, if you use <code class="epub__literal">range</code> to generate a list of indexes to
          iterate through. It’s a multistep process, but it’s sufficient to
          generate offsets, rather than the items at those offsets:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e35366"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X</code></strong>
'spam'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>len(X)</code></strong>                                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Length of string</span></em>
4
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(range(len(X)))</code></strong>                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># All legal offsets into X</span></em>
[0, 1, 2, 3]
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for i in range(len(X)): print(X[i], end=' ')</code></strong>  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Manual for indexing</span></em>
...
s p a m</pre>
<p>Note that because this example is stepping over a list of
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>offsets</em></span> into <code class="epub__literal">X</code>, not the actual
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>items</em></span> of <code class="epub__literal">X</code>,
          we need to index back into <code class="epub__literal">X</code>
          within the loop to fetch each item.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Nonexhaustive Traversals: range and Slices"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="nonexhaustive_traversals_colon_range_an"></a>Nonexhaustive Traversals: range and Slices</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e35412"></a>last <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e35418"></a>example in the prior section works, but it’s not the
          fastest option. It’s also more work than we need to do. Unless you
          have a special indexing requirement, you’re always better off using
          the simple <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop form in
          Python—as a general rule, use <code class="epub__literal">for</code>
          instead of <code class="epub__literal">while</code> whenever
          possible, and don’t use <code class="epub__literal">range</code>
          calls in <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops except as a
          last resort. This simpler solution is better:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e35440"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for item in X: print(item)</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Simple iteration</span></em>
...</pre>
<p>However, the coding pattern used in the prior example does
          allow us to do more specialized sorts of traversals. For instance,
          we can skip items as we go:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e35450"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S = 'abcdefghijk'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(range(0, len(S), 2))</code></strong>
[0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for i in range(0, len(S), 2): print(S[i], end=' ')</code></strong>
...
a c e g i k</pre>
<p>Here, we visit every <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>second</em></span> item in the
          string <code class="epub__literal">S</code> by stepping over the
          generated <code class="epub__literal">range</code> list. To visit
          every third item, change the third <code class="epub__literal">range</code> argument to be <code class="epub__literal">3</code>, and so on. In effect, using <code class="epub__literal">range</code> this way lets you skip items in
          loops while still retaining the simplicity of the <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop construct.</p>
<p>Still, this is probably not the ideal best-practice technique
          in Python today. If you really want to skip items in a sequence, the
          extended three-limit form of the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>slice
          expression</em></span>, presented in Chapter 7,
          provides a simpler route to the same goal. To visit every second
          character in <code class="epub__literal">S</code>, for example,
          slice with a stride of 2:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e35495"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S = 'abcdefghijk'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for c in S[::2]:</code></strong> <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(c, end=' ')</code></strong>
...
a c e g i k</pre>
<p>The result is the same, but substantially easier for you to
          write and for others to read. The only real advantage to using
          <code class="epub__literal">range</code> here instead is that it
          does not copy the string and does not create a list in 3.0; for very
          large strings, it may save memory.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Changing Lists: range"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="changing_lists_colon_range"></a>Changing Lists: range</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Another <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e35516"></a>common place where you may use the <code class="epub__literal">range</code> and <code class="epub__literal">for</code> combination is in loops that change a
          list as it is being traversed. Suppose, for example, that you need
          to add 1 to every item in a list. You can try this with a simple
          <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop, but the result probably
          won’t be exactly what you want:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e35533"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for x in L:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x += 1</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x</code></strong>
6</pre>
<p>This doesn’t quite work—it changes the loop variable <code class="epub__literal">x</code>, not the list <code class="epub__literal">L</code>. The reason is somewhat subtle. Each
          time through the loop, <code class="epub__literal">x</code> refers
          to the next integer already pulled out of the list. In the first
          iteration, for example, <code class="epub__literal">x</code> is
          integer <code class="epub__literal">1</code>. In the next iteration,
          the loop body sets <code class="epub__literal">x</code> to a
          different object, integer <code class="epub__literal">2</code>, but
          it does not update the list where <code class="epub__literal">1</code> originally came from.</p>
<p>To really change the list as we march across it, we need to
          use indexes so we can assign an updated value to each position as we
          go. The <code class="epub__literal">range</code>/<code class="epub__literal">len</code> combination can produce the required
          indexes for us:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e35585"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for i in range(len(L)):</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Add one to each item in L</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L[i] += 1</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Or L[i] = L[i] + 1</span></em>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
[2, 3, 4, 5, 6]</pre>
<p>When coded this way, the list is changed as we proceed through
          the loop. There is no way to do the same with a simple <code class="epub__literal">for x in L:</code>-style loop, because such a
          loop iterates through actual items, not list positions. But what
          about the equivalent <code class="epub__literal">while</code> loop?
          Such a loop requires a bit more work on our part, and likely runs
          more slowly:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e35614"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>i = 0</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>while i &lt; len(L):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L[i] += 1</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>i += 1</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
[3, 4, 5, 6, 7]</pre>
<p>Here again, though, the <code class="epub__literal">range</code> solution may not be ideal either. A
          list comprehension expression of the form:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e35636"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">[x+1 for x in L]</pre>
<p>would do similar work, albeit without changing the original
          list in-place (we could assign the expression’s new list object
          result back to <code class="epub__literal">L</code>, but this would
          not update any other references to the original list). Because this
          is such a central looping concept, we’ll save a complete exploration
          of list comprehensions for the next chapter.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Parallel Traversals: zip and map"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="parallel_traversals_colon_zip_and_map"></a>Parallel Traversals: zip and map</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e35648"></a>we’ve <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e35654"></a>seen, the <code class="epub__literal">range</code>
          built-in allows us to traverse sequences with <code class="epub__literal">for</code> in a nonexhaustive fashion. In the
          same spirit, the built-in <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e35665"></a>zip</code> function allows us to use <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops to visit multiple sequences
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>in parallel</em></span>. In basic operation, <code class="epub__literal">zip</code> takes one or more sequences as
          arguments and returns a series of tuples that pair up parallel items
          taken from those sequences. For example, suppose we’re working with
          two lists:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e35680"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L1 = [1,2,3,4]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L2 = [5,6,7,8]</code></strong></pre>
<p>To combine the items in these lists, we can use <code class="epub__literal">zip</code> to create a list of tuple pairs (like
          <code class="epub__literal">range</code>, <code class="epub__literal">zip</code> is an iterable object in 3.0, so we
          must wrap it in a <code class="epub__literal">list</code> call to
          display all its results at once—more on iterators in the next
          chapter):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e35701"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>zip(L1, L2)</code></strong>
&lt;zip object at 0x026523C8&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(zip(L1, L2))</code></strong>                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># list() required in 3.0, not 2.6</span></em>
[(1, 5), (2, 6), (3, 7), (4, 8)]</pre>
<p>Such a result may be useful in other contexts as well, but
          when wedded with the <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop, it
          supports parallel iterations:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e35717"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for (x, y) in zip(L1, L2):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(x, y, '--', x+y)</code></strong>
...
1 5 -- 6
2 6 -- 8
3 7 -- 10
4 8 -- 12</pre>
<p>Here, we step over the result of the <code class="epub__literal">zip</code> call—that is, the pairs of items
          pulled from the two lists. Notice that this <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop again uses the tuple assignment
          form we met earlier to unpack each tuple in the <code class="epub__literal">zip</code> result. The first time through, it’s
          as though we ran the assignment statement <code class="epub__literal">(x, y) = (1, 5)</code>.</p>
<p>The net effect is that we scan both <code class="epub__literal">L1</code> <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>and</em></span> <code class="epub__literal">L2</code> in our loop. We could achieve a similar
          effect with a <code class="epub__literal">while</code> loop that
          handles indexing manually, but it would require more typing and
          would likely run more slowly than the <code class="epub__literal">for</code>/<code class="epub__literal">zip</code>
          approach.</p>
<p>Strictly speaking, the <code class="epub__literal">zip</code>
          function is more general than this example suggests. For instance,
          it accepts any type of sequence (really, any iterable object,
          including files), and it accepts more than two arguments. With three
          arguments, as in the following example, it builds a list of
          three-item tuples with items from each sequence, essentially
          projecting by columns (technically, we get an N-ary tuple for N
          arguments):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e35765"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>T1, T2, T3 = (1,2,3), (4,5,6), (7,8,9)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>T3</code></strong>
(7, 8, 9)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(zip(T1, T2, T3))</code></strong>
[(1, 4, 7), (2, 5, 8), (3, 6, 9)]</pre>
<p>Moreover, <code class="epub__literal">zip</code> truncates
          result tuples at the length of the shortest sequence when the
          argument lengths differ. In the following, we zip together two
          strings to pick out characters in parallel, but the result has only
          as many tuples as the length of the shortest sequence:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e35782"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S1 = 'abc'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S2 = 'xyz123'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(zip(S1, S2))</code></strong>
[('a', 'x'), ('b', 'y'), ('c', 'z')]</pre>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="map equivalence in Python 2.6"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="map_equivalence_in_python_2.6"></a>map equivalence in Python 2.6</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In Python 2.X, the related built-in <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e35799"></a>map</code> function pairs items from sequences in
            a similar fashion, but it pads shorter sequences with <code class="epub__literal">None</code> if the argument lengths differ
            instead of truncating to the shortest length:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e35807"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S1 = 'abc'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S2 = 'xyz123'</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>map(None, S1, S2)</code></strong>                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 2.X only</span></em>
[('a', 'x'), ('b', 'y'), ('c', 'z'), (None, '1'), (None, '2'), (None,'3')]</pre>
<p>This example is using a degenerate form of the <code class="epub__literal">map</code> built-in, which is no longer
            supported in 3.0. Normally, <code class="epub__literal">map</code>
            takes a function and one or more sequence arguments and collects
            the results of calling the function with parallel items taken from
            the sequence(s). We’ll study <code class="epub__literal">map</code> in detail in Chapters 19 and 20, but as a brief example, the
            following maps the built-in <code class="epub__literal">ord</code>
            function across each item in a string and collects the results
            (like <code class="epub__literal">zip</code>, <code class="epub__literal">map</code> is a value generator in 3.0 and so
            must be passed to <code class="epub__literal">list</code> to
            collect all its results at once):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e35849"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(map(ord, 'spam'))</code></strong>
[115, 112, 97, 109]</pre>
<p>This works the same as the
            following loop statement, but is often quicker:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e35857"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res = []</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for c in 'spam': res.append(ord(c))</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res</code></strong>
[115, 112, 97, 109]</pre><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Version skew note</em></span>: The degenerate
              form of <code class="epub__literal">map</code> using a function
              argument of <code class="epub__literal">None</code> is no longer
              supported in Python 3.0, because it largely overlaps with
              <code class="epub__literal">zip</code> (and was, frankly, a bit
              at odds with <code class="epub__literal">map</code>’s
              function-application purpose). In 3.0, either use <code class="epub__literal">zip</code> or write loop code to pad results
              yourself. We’ll see how to do this in Chapter 20, after we’ve
              had a chance to study some additional iteration concepts.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Dictionary construction with zip"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="dictionary_construction_with_zip"></a>Dictionary construction with zip</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In Chapter 8, I suggested
            that the <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e35899"></a>zip</code> call used here can also be handy for
            generating dictionaries when the sets of keys and values must be
            computed at runtime. Now that we’re becoming proficient with
            <code class="epub__literal">zip</code>, I’ll explain how it
            relates to dictionary construction. As you’ve learned, you can
            always create a dictionary by coding a dictionary literal, or by
            assigning to keys over time:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e35909"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D1 = {'spam':1, 'eggs':3, 'toast':5}</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D1</code></strong>
{'toast': 5, 'eggs': 3, 'spam': 1}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D1 = {}</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D1['spam']  = 1</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D1['eggs']  = 3</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D1['toast'] = 5</code></strong></pre>
<p>What to do, though, if your program obtains dictionary keys
            and values in <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>lists</em></span> at runtime, after you’ve
            coded your script? For example, say you had the following keys and
            values lists:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e35934"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>keys = ['spam', 'eggs', 'toast']</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>vals = [1, 3, 5]</code></strong></pre>
<p>One solution for turning those lists into a dictionary would
            be to <code class="epub__literal">zip</code> the lists and step
            through them in parallel with a <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e35949"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(zip(keys, vals))</code></strong>
[('spam', 1), ('eggs', 3), ('toast', 5)]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D2 = {}</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for (k, v) in zip(keys, vals): D2[k] = v</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D2</code></strong>
{'toast': 5, 'eggs': 3, 'spam': 1}</pre>
<p>It turns out, though, that in
            Python 2.2 and later you can skip the <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop altogether and simply pass the
            zipped keys/values lists to the built-in <code class="epub__literal">dict</code> constructor call:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e35972"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>keys = ['spam', 'eggs', 'toast']</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>vals = [1, 3, 5]</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D3 = dict(zip(keys, vals))</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D3</code></strong>
{'toast': 5, 'eggs': 3, 'spam': 1}</pre>
<p>The built-in name <code class="epub__literal">dict</code> is
            really a type name in Python (you’ll learn more about type names,
            and subclassing them, in Chapter 31). Calling it achieves something
            like a list-to-dictionary conversion, but it’s really an object
            construction request. In the next chapter we’ll explore a related
            but richer concept, the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>list comprehension</em></span>,
            which builds lists in a single expression; we’ll also revisit 3.0
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>dictionary comprehensions,</em></span> an alternative to
            the <code class="epub__literal">dict</code> call for zipped
            key/value pairs.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Generating Both Offsets and Items: enumerate"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="generating_both_offsets_and_items_colon"></a>Generating Both Offsets and Items: enumerate</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Earlier, <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e36007"></a>we discussed using <code class="epub__literal">range</code> to generate the offsets of items in
          a string, rather than the items at those offsets. In some programs,
          though, we need both: the item to use, plus an offset as we go.
          Traditionally, this was coded with a simple <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop that also kept a counter of the
          current offset:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e36019"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S = 'spam'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>offset = 0</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for item in S:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(item, 'appears at offset', offset)</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>offset += 1</code></strong>
...
s appears at offset 0
p appears at offset 1
a appears at offset 2
m appears at offset 3</pre>
<p>This works, but in recent Python releases a new built-in named
          <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e36039"></a>enumerate</code> does the job for us:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e36044"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S = 'spam'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for (offset, item) in enumerate(S):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(item, 'appears at offset', offset)</code></strong>
...
s appears at offset 0
p appears at offset 1
a appears at offset 2
m appears at offset 3</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">enumerate</code> function
          returns a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e36061"></a>generator object</em></span>—a kind of object that
          supports the iteration protocol that we will study in the next
          chapter and will discuss in more detail in the next part of the
          book. In short, it has a <code class="epub__literal">__next__</code>
          method called by the <code class="epub__literal">next</code>
          built-in function, which returns an <code class="epub__literal">(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>index</code></em><code class="epub__literal">,</code> <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>value</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code> tuple each time through the loop. We can
          unpack these tuples with tuple assignment in the <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop (much like using <code class="epub__literal">zip</code>):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e36091"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>E = enumerate(S)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>E</code></strong>
&lt;enumerate object at 0x02765AA8&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(E)</code></strong>
(0, 's')
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(E)</code></strong>
(1, 'p')
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(E)</code></strong>
(2, 'a')</pre>
<p>As usual, we don’t normally see this machinery because
          iteration contexts—including
          list comprehensions, the subject of Chapter 14—run the
          iteration protocol automatically:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e36118"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[c * i for (i, c) in enumerate(S)]</code></strong>
['', 'p', 'aa', 'mmm']</pre>
<p>To fully understand iteration concepts like <code class="epub__literal">enumerate</code>, <code class="epub__literal">zip</code>, and list comprehensions, we need to
          move on to the next chapter for a more formal <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e36131"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e36133"></a>dissection.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Chapter Summary"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
