<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_answers-id12"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</h1>
<div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">while</code> loop is a
            general looping statement, but the <code class="epub__literal">for</code> is designed to iterate across items
            in a sequence (really, iterable). Although the <code class="epub__literal">while</code> can imitate the <code class="epub__literal">for</code> with counter loops, it takes more
            code and might run slower.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">break</code> statement exits
            a loop immediately (you wind up below the entire <code class="epub__literal">while</code> or <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop statement), and <code class="epub__literal">continue</code> jumps back to the top of the
            loop (you wind up positioned just before the test in <code class="epub__literal">while</code> or the next item fetch in <code class="epub__literal">for</code>).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">else</code> clause in a
            <code class="epub__literal">while</code> or <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop will be run once as the loop is
            exiting, if the loop exits normally (without running into a
            <code class="epub__literal">break</code> statement). A <code class="epub__literal">break</code> exits the loop immediately,
            skipping the <code class="epub__literal">else</code> part on the
            way out (if there is one).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Counter loops can be coded with a <code class="epub__literal">while</code> statement that keeps track of the
            index manually, or with a <code class="epub__literal">for</code>
            loop that uses the <code class="epub__literal">range</code>
            built-in function to generate successive integer offsets. Neither
            is the preferred way to work in Python, if you need to simply step
            across all the items in a sequence. Instead, use a simple <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop instead, without <code class="epub__literal">range</code> or counters, whenever possible; it
            will be easier to code and usually quicker to run.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">range</code> built-in can be
            used in a <code class="epub__literal">for</code> to implement a
            fixed number of repetitions, to scan by offsets instead of items
            at offsets, to skip successive items as you go, and to change a
            list while stepping across it. None of these roles requires
            <code class="epub__literal">range</code>, and most have
            alternatives—scanning actual items, three-limit slices, and list
            comprehensions are often better solutions today (despite the
            natural inclinations of ex-C programmers to want to count
            things!).</p></li></ol>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
