<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 14. Iterations and Comprehensions, Part 1</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 14. Iterations and Comprehensions, Part 1"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h1 class="epub__title"><a id="iterations_and_comprehensions_comma_par"></a>Chapter 14. Iterations and Comprehensions, Part 1</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In the prior chapter we met Python’s two looping statements,
      <code class="epub__literal">while</code> and <code class="epub__literal">for</code>. Although they can handle most repetitive
      tasks programs need to perform, the need to iterate over sequences is so
      common and pervasive that Python provides additional tools to make it
      simpler and more efficient. This chapter begins our exploration of these
      tools. Specifically, it presents the related concepts of Python’s
      <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e36334"></a>iteration protocol</em></span>—a method-call model used by
      the <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop—and fills in some
      details on <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e36342"></a><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>list comprehensions</em></span>—a close cousin to
      the <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop that applies an
      expression to items in an iterable.</p>
<p>Because both of these tools are related to both the <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop and functions, we’ll take a two-pass
      approach to covering them in this book: this chapter introduces the
      basics in the context of looping tools, serving as something of
      continuation of the prior chapter, and a later chapter (Chapter 20) revisits them in
      the context of function-based tools. In this chapter, we’ll also sample
      additional iteration tools in Python and touch on the new iterators
      available in Python 3.0.</p>
<p>One note up front: some of the concepts presented in these
      chapters may seem advanced at first glance. With practice, though,
      you’ll find that these tools are useful and powerful. Although never
      strictly required, because they’ve become commonplace in Python code, a
      basic understanding can also help if you must read programs written by
      others.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Iterators: A First Look"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
