<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Iterators: A First Look</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="iterators_colon_a_first_look"></a>Iterators: A First Look</h1>
<p>In <a id="ch14iterators"></a>the preceding chapter, I mentioned that the <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e36371"></a>for</code> loop can work on any sequence type in
        Python, including lists, tuples, and strings, like this:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e36378"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for x in [1, 2, 3, 4]: print(x ** 2, end=' ')</code></strong>
...
1 4 9 16

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for x in (1, 2, 3, 4): print(x ** 3, end=' ')</code></strong>
...
1 8 27 64

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for x in 'spam': print(x * 2, end=' ')</code></strong>
...
ss pp aa mm</pre>
<p>Actually, the <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop turns
        out to be even more generic than this—it works on any
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>iterable object</em></span>. In fact, this is true of all
        iteration tools that scan objects from left to right in Python,
        including <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops, the list
        comprehensions we’ll study in this chapter, <code class="epub__literal">in</code> membership tests, the <code class="epub__literal">map</code> built-in function, and more.</p>
<p>The concept of “iterable objects” is relatively recent in
        Python, but it has come to permeate the language’s design. It’s
        essentially a generalization of the notion of sequences—an <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e36408"></a>object is considered <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>iterable</em></span> if it
        is either a physically stored sequence or an object that produces one
        result at a time in the context of an iteration tool like a <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop. In a sense, iterable objects
        include both physical sequences and <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>virtual</em></span>
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>sequences</em></span>
        computed on demand.<sup>[33]</sup></p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The Iteration Protocol: File Iterators"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_iteration_protocol_colon_file_itera"></a>The Iteration Protocol: File Iterators</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>One <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e36449"></a>of the <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e36453"></a>easiest <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e36459"></a>ways to understand what this means is to look at how
          it works with a built-in type such as the file. Recall from Chapter 9 that open file
          objects have a method called <code class="epub__literal">readline</code>, which reads one line of text
          from a file at a time—each time we call the <code class="epub__literal">readline</code> method, we advance to the next
          line. At the end of the file, an empty string is returned, which we
          can detect to break out of the loop:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e36472"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f = open('script1.py')</code></strong>     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Read a 4-line script file in this directory</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f.readline()</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># readline loads one line on each call</span></em>
'import sys\n'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f.readline()</code></strong>
'print(sys.path)\n'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f.readline()</code></strong>
'x = 2\n'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f.readline()</code></strong>
'print(2 ** 33)\n'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f.readline()</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Returns empty string at end-of-file</span></em>
''</pre>
<p>However, files also have a method named <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e36504"></a><code class="epub__literal">__next__</code> <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e36510"></a>that has a nearly identical effect—it returns the next
          line from a file each time it is called. The only noticeable
          difference is that <code class="epub__literal">__next__</code>
          raises a built-in <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e36518"></a>StopIteration</code> exception at end-of-file
          instead of returning an empty string:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e36523"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f = open('script1.py')</code></strong>     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># __next__ loads one line on each call too</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f.__next__()</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># But raises an exception at end-of-file</span></em>
'import sys\n'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f.__next__()</code></strong>
'print(sys.path)\n'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f.__next__()</code></strong>
'x = 2\n'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f.__next__()</code></strong>
'print(2 ** 33)\n'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f.__next__()</code></strong>
Traceback (most recent call last):
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...more exception text omitted...</code></em>
StopIteration</pre>
<p>This interface is exactly what we call the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>iteration
          protocol</em></span> in Python. Any object with a <code class="epub__literal">__next__</code> method to advance to a next
          result, which raises <code class="epub__literal">StopIteration</code> at the end of the series of
          results, is considered iterable in Python. Any such object may also
          be stepped through with a <code class="epub__literal">for</code>
          loop or other iteration tool, because all iteration tools normally
          work internally by calling <code class="epub__literal">__next__</code> on each iteration and catching
          the <code class="epub__literal">StopIteration</code> exception to
          determine when to exit.</p>
<p>The net effect of this magic is that, as mentioned in Chapter 9, the best way
          to read a text file line by line today is to <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>not read it
          at all</em></span>—instead, allow the <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e36583"></a>for</code> loop to automatically call <code class="epub__literal">__next__</code> to advance to the next line on
          each iteration. The file object’s iterator will do the work of
          automatically loading lines as you go. The following, for example,
          reads a file line by line, printing the uppercase version of each
          line along the way, without ever explicitly reading from the file at
          all:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e36593"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for line in open('script1.py'):</code></strong>       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Use file iterators to read by lines</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(line.upper(), end='')</code></strong>       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Calls __next__, catches StopIteration</span></em>
...
IMPORT SYS
PRINT(SYS.PATH)
X = 2
PRINT(2 ** 33)</pre>
<p>Notice that the <code class="epub__literal">print</code> uses
          <code class="epub__literal">end=''</code> here to suppress adding a
          <code class="epub__literal">\n</code>, because line strings already
          have one (without this, our output would be double-spaced). This is
          considered the best way to read text files line by line today, for
          three reasons: it’s the simplest to code, might be the quickest to
          run, and is the best in terms of memory usage. The older, original
          way to achieve the same effect with a <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop is to call the file <code class="epub__literal">readlines</code> method to load the file’s
          content into memory as a list of line strings:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e36624"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for line in open('script1.py').readlines():</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(line.upper(), end='')</code></strong>
...
IMPORT SYS
PRINT(SYS.PATH)
X = 2
PRINT(2 ** 33)</pre>
<p>This <code class="epub__literal">readlines</code> technique
          still works, but it is not considered the best practice today and
          performs poorly in terms of memory usage. In fact, because this
          version really does load the entire file into memory all at once, it
          will not even work for files too big to fit into the memory space
          available on your computer. By contrast, because it reads one line
          at a time, the iterator-based version is immune to such
          memory-explosion issues. The iterator version might run quicker too,
          though this can vary per release (Python 3.0 made this advantage
          less clear-cut by rewriting I/O libraries to support Unicode text
          and be less system-dependent).</p>
<p>As mentioned in the prior chapter’s sidebar, Why You Will Care: File Scanners, it’s also
          possible to read a file line by line with a <code class="epub__literal">while</code> loop:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e36645"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f = open('script1.py')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>while True:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>line = f.readline()</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if not line: break</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(line.upper(), end='')</code></strong>
...
...<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>same output</code></em>...</pre>
<p>However, this may run slower than the iterator-based <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop version, because iterators run at
          C language speed inside Python, whereas the <code class="epub__literal">while</code> loop version runs Python byte code
          through the Python virtual machine. Any time we trade Python code
          for C code, speed tends to increase. This is not an absolute truth,
          though, especially in Python 3.0; we’ll see timing techniques later
          in this book for measuring the relative speed of alternatives like
          these.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Manual Iteration: iter and next"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="manual_iteration_colon_iter_and_next"></a>Manual Iteration: iter and next</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To support <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e36679"></a>manual iteration <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e36685"></a>code (with less typing), Python 3.0 also provides a
          built-in function, <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e36690"></a>next</code>, that automatically calls an object’s
          <code class="epub__literal">__next__</code> method. Given an
          iterable object <code class="epub__literal">X</code>, the call
          <code class="epub__literal">next(X)</code> is the same as <code class="epub__literal">X.__next__()</code>, but noticeably simpler. With
          files, for instance, either form may be used:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e36708"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f = open('script1.py')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f.__next__()</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Call iteration method directly</span></em>
'import sys\n'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f.__next__()</code></strong>
'print(sys.path)\n'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f = open('script1.py')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(f)</code></strong>                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># next built-in calls __next__</span></em>
'import sys\n'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(f)</code></strong>
'print(sys.path)\n'</pre>
<p>Technically, there is one more piece to the iteration
          protocol. When the <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop
          begins, it obtains an iterator from the iterable object by passing
          it to the <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e36741"></a>iter</code> built-in function; the object returned
          by <code class="epub__literal">iter</code> has the required <code class="epub__literal">next</code> method. This becomes obvious if we
          look at how <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops internally
          process built-in sequence types such as lists:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e36755"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = [1, 2, 3]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>I = iter(L)</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Obtain an iterator object</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>I.__next__()</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Call next to advance to next item</span></em>
1
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>I.__next__()</code></strong>
2
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>I.__next__()</code></strong>
3
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>I.__next__()</code></strong>
Traceback (most recent call last):
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...more omitted...</code></em>
StopIteration</pre>
<p>This initial step is not required for files, because a file
          object is its own iterator. That is, files have their own <code class="epub__literal">__next__</code> method and so do not need to
          return a different object that does:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e36790"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f = open('script1.py')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>iter(f) is f</code></strong>
True
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f.__next__()</code></strong>
'import sys\n'</pre>
<p>Lists, and many other built-in objects, are not their own
          iterators because they support multiple open iterations. For such
          objects, we must call <code class="epub__literal">iter</code> to
          start iterating:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e36806"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = [1, 2, 3]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>iter(L) is L</code></strong>
False
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L.__next__()</code></strong>
AttributeError: 'list' object has no attribute '__next__'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>I = iter(L)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>I.__next__()</code></strong>
1
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(I)</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same as I.__next__()</span></em>
2</pre>
<p>Although Python iteration tools call these functions
          automatically, we can use them to apply the iteration protocol
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>manually</em></span>, too. The following interaction
          demonstrates the equivalence between automatic and manual
          iteration:<sup>[34]</sup></p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e36880"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = [1, 2, 3]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for X in L:</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Automatic iteration</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(X ** 2, end=' ')</code></strong>  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Obtains iter, calls __next__, catches exceptions</span></em>
...
1 4 9

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>I = iter(L)</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Manual iteration: what for loops usually do</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>while True:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>try:</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># try statement catches exceptions</span></em>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = next(I)</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Or call I.__next__</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>except StopIteration:</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>break</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(X ** 2, end=' ')</code></strong>
...
1 4 9</pre>
<p>To understand this code, you need to know that <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statements run an action and catch
          exceptions that occur while the action runs (we’ll explore
          exceptions in depth in Part VII). I
          should also note that <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops
          and other iteration contexts can sometimes work differently for
          user-defined classes, repeatedly indexing an object instead of
          running the iteration protocol. We’ll defer that story until we
          study class operator overloading in Chapter 29.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Version skew note</em></span>: In <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e36947"></a>Python 2.6, the iteration method is named <code class="epub__literal">X.next()</code> instead of <code class="epub__literal">X.__next__()</code>. For portability, the
            <code class="epub__literal">next(X)</code> built-in function is
            available in Python 2.6 too (but not earlier), and calls 2.6’s
            <code class="epub__literal">X.next()</code> instead of 3.0’s
            <code class="epub__literal">X.__next__()</code>. Iteration works
            the same in 2.6 in all other ways, though; simply use <code class="epub__literal">X.next()</code> or <code class="epub__literal">next(X)</code> for manual iterations, instead
            of 3.0’s <code class="epub__literal">X.__next__()</code>. Prior to
            2.6, use manual <code class="epub__literal">X.next()</code> calls
            instead of <code class="epub__literal">next(X)</code>.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Other Built-in Type Iterators"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="other_built-in_type_iterators"></a>Other Built-in Type Iterators</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Besides <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e36989"></a>files and physical sequences like lists, other types
          have useful iterators as well. The classic way to step through the
          keys of a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>dictionary</em></span>, for example, is to
          request its keys list explicitly:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e36998"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D = {'a':1, 'b':2, 'c':3}</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for key in D.keys():</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(key, D[key])</code></strong>
...
a 1
c 3
b 2</pre>
<p>In recent versions of Python, though, dictionaries have an
          iterator that automatically returns one key at a time in an
          iteration context:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e37011"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>I = iter(D)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(I)</code></strong>
'a'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(I)</code></strong>
'c'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(I)</code></strong>
'b'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(I)</code></strong>
Traceback (most recent call last):
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...more omitted...</code></em>
StopIteration</pre>
<p>The net effect is that we no longer need to call the <code class="epub__literal">keys</code> method to step through dictionary
          keys—the <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop will use the
          iteration protocol to grab one key each time through:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e37040"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for key in D:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(key, D[key])</code></strong>
...
a 1
c 3
b 2</pre>
<p>We can’t delve into their details here, but other Python
          object types also support the iterator protocol and thus may be used
          in <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops too. For instance,
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>shelves</em></span> (an access-by-key filesystem for Python
          objects) and the results from <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code> (a tool for reading the output of
          shell commands) are iterable as well:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e37059"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import os</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>P = os.popen('dir')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>P.__next__()</code></strong>
' Volume in drive C is SQ004828V03\n'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>P.__next__()</code></strong>
' Volume Serial Number is 08BE-3CD4\n'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(P)</code></strong>
TypeError: _wrap_close object is not an iterator</pre>
<p>Notice that <code class="epub__literal">popen</code> objects
          support a <code class="epub__literal">P.next()</code> method in
          Python 2.6. In 3.0, they support the <code class="epub__literal">P.__next__()</code> method, but not the <code class="epub__literal">next(P)</code> built-in; since the latter is
          defined to call the former, it’s not clear if this behavior will
          endure in future releases (as described in an earlier footnote, this
          appears to be an implementation issue). This is only an issue for
          manual iteration, though; if you iterate over these objects
          automatically with <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops and
          other iteration contexts (described in the next sections), they
          return successive lines in either Python version.</p>
<p>The iteration protocol also is the reason that we’ve had to
          wrap some results in a <code class="epub__literal">list</code> call
          to see their values all at once. Objects that are iterable return
          results one at a time, not in a physical list:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e37099"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>R = range(5)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>R</code></strong>                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Ranges are iterables in 3.0</span></em>
range(0, 5)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>I = iter(R)</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Use iteration protocol to produce results</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(I)</code></strong>
0
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(I)</code></strong>
1
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(range(5))</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Or use list to collect all results at once</span></em>
[0, 1, 2, 3, 4]</pre>
<p><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e38764"></a>Now that you have a better understanding of this
          protocol, you should be able to see how it explains why the <code class="epub__literal">enumerate</code> tool introduced in the prior
          chapter works the way it does:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e37134"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>E = enumerate('spam')</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># enumerate is an iterable too</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>E</code></strong>
&lt;enumerate object at 0x0253F508&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>I = iter(E)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(I)</code></strong>                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Generate results with iteration protocol</span></em>
(0, 's')
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(I)</code></strong>                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Or use list to force generation to run</span></em>
(1, 'p')
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(enumerate('spam'))</code></strong>
[(0, 's'), (1, 'p'), (2, 'a'), (3, 'm')]</pre>
<p>We don’t normally see this machinery because <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops run it for us automatically to
          step through results. In fact, everything that scans left-to-right
          in Python employs the iteration protocol in the same way—including
          the topic of the next <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e37169"></a>section.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="List Comprehensions: A First Look"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
