<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>List Comprehensions: A First Look</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="list_comprehensions_colon_a_first_look"></a>List Comprehensions: A First Look</h1>
<p>Now <a id="ch14listcomprehensions"></a>that we’ve seen how the iteration protocol works, let’s
        turn to a very common use case. Together with <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops, list comprehensions are one of
        the most prominent contexts in which the iteration protocol is
        applied.</p>
<p>In the previous chapter, we learned how to use <code class="epub__literal">range</code> to change a list as we step across
        it:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e37189"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for i in range(len(L)):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L[i] += 10</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
[11, 12, 13, 14, 15]</pre>
<p>This works, but as I mentioned there, it may not be the optimal
        “best-practice” approach in Python. Today, the list comprehension
        expression makes many such prior use cases obsolete. Here, for
        example, we can replace the loop with a single expression that
        produces the desired result list:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e37205"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = [x + 10 for x in L]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L</code></strong>
[21, 22, 23, 24, 25]</pre>
<p>The net result is the same, but it requires less coding on our
        part and is likely to run substantially faster. The list comprehension
        isn’t exactly the same as the <code class="epub__literal">for</code>
        loop statement version because it makes a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>new</em></span>
        list object (which might matter if there are multiple references to
        the original list), but it’s close enough for most applications and is
        a common and convenient enough approach to merit a closer look
        here.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="List Comprehension Basics"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="list_comprehension_basics"></a>List Comprehension Basics</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>We met the list <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e37226"></a>comprehension briefly in Chapter 4. Syntactically, its
          syntax is derived from a construct in set theory notation that
          applies an operation to each item in a set, but you don’t have to
          know set theory to use this tool. In Python, most people find that a
          list comprehension simply looks like a backward <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop.</p>
<p>To get a handle on the syntax, let’s dissect the prior
          section’s example in more detail:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e37239"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = [x + 10 for x in L]</code></strong></pre>
<p>List comprehensions are written in <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e37245"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e37250"></a>square brackets because they are ultimately a way to
          construct a new list. They begin with an arbitrary expression that
          we make up, which uses a loop variable that we make up (<code class="epub__literal">x + 10</code>). That is followed by what you
          should now recognize as the header of a <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop, which names the loop variable,
          and an iterable object (<code class="epub__literal">for x in
          L</code>).</p>
<p>To run the expression, Python executes an iteration across
          <code class="epub__literal">L</code> inside the interpreter,
          assigning <code class="epub__literal">x</code> to each item in turn,
          and collects the results of running the items through the expression
          on the left side. The result list we get back is exactly what the
          list comprehension says—a new list containing <code class="epub__literal">x + 10</code>, for every <code class="epub__literal">x</code> in <code class="epub__literal">L</code>.</p>
<p>Technically speaking, list comprehensions are never really
          required because we can always build up a list of expression results
          manually with <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops that
          append results as we go:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e37287"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res = []</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for x in L:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res.append(x + 10)</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res</code></strong>
[21, 22, 23, 24, 25]</pre>
<p>In fact, this is exactly what the list comprehension does
          internally.</p>
<p>However, list comprehensions are more concise to write, and
          because this code pattern of building up result lists is so common
          in Python work, they turn out to be very handy in many contexts.
          Moreover, list comprehensions can run much faster than manual
          <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop statements (often
          roughly twice as fast) because their iterations are performed at C
          language speed inside the interpreter, rather than with manual
          Python code; especially for larger data sets, there is a major
          performance advantage to using them.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Using List Comprehensions on Files"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="using_list_comprehensions_on_files"></a>Using List Comprehensions on Files</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Let’s work <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e37313"></a>through another common use case for list
          comprehensions to explore them in more detail. Recall that the file
          object has a <code class="epub__literal">readlines</code> method
          that loads the file into a list of line strings all at once:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e37322"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f = open('script1.py')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>lines = f.readlines()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>lines</code></strong>
['import sys\n', 'print(sys.path)\n', 'x = 2\n', 'print(2 ** 33)\n']</pre>
<p>This works, but the lines in the result all include the
          newline character (<code class="epub__literal">\n</code>) at the
          end. For many programs, the newline character gets in the way—we
          have to be careful to avoid double-spacing when printing, and so on.
          It would be nice if we could get rid of these newlines all at once,
          wouldn’t it?</p>
<p>Any time we start thinking about performing an operation on
          each item in a sequence, we’re in the realm of list comprehensions.
          For example, assuming the variable <code class="epub__literal">lines</code> is as it was in the prior
          interaction, the following code does the job by running each line in
          the list through the string <code class="epub__literal">rstrip</code> method to remove whitespace on the
          right side (a <code class="epub__literal">line[:−1]</code> slice
          would work, too, but only if we can be sure all lines are properly
          terminated):</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e37352"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>lines = [line.rstrip() for line in lines]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>lines</code></strong>
['import sys', 'print(sys.path)', 'x = 2', 'print(2 ** 33)']</pre>
<p>This works as planned. Because list comprehensions are an
          iteration context just like <code class="epub__literal">for</code>
          loop statements, though, we don’t even have to open the file ahead
          of time. If we open it inside the expression, the list comprehension
          will automatically use the iteration protocol we met earlier in this
          chapter. That is, it will read one line from the file at a time by
          calling the file’s <code class="epub__literal">next</code> method,
          run the line through the <code class="epub__literal">rstrip</code>
          expression, and add it to the result list. Again, we get what we ask
          for—the <code class="epub__literal">rstrip</code> result of a line,
          for every line in the file:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e37374"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>lines = [line.rstrip() for line in open('script1.py')]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>lines</code></strong>
['import sys', 'print(sys.path)', 'x = 2', 'print(2 ** 33)']</pre>
<p>This expression does a lot implicitly, but we’re getting a lot
          of work for free here—Python scans the file and builds a list of
          operation results automatically. It’s also an efficient way to code
          this operation: because most of this work is done inside the Python
          interpreter, it is likely much faster than an equivalent <code class="epub__literal">for</code> statement. Again, especially for large
          files, the speed advantages of list comprehensions can be
          significant.</p>
<p>Besides their efficiency, list comprehensions are also
          remarkably expressive. In our example, we can run any string
          operation on a file’s lines as we iterate. Here’s the list
          comprehension equivalent to the file iterator uppercase example we
          met earlier, along with a few others (the method chaining in the
          second of these examples works because string methods return a new
          string, to which we can apply another string method):</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e37389"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[line.upper() for line in open('script1.py')]</code></strong>
['IMPORT SYS\n', 'PRINT(SYS.PATH)\n', 'X = 2\n', 'PRINT(2 ** 33)\n']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[line.rstrip().upper() for line in open('script1.py')]</code></strong>
['IMPORT SYS', 'PRINT(SYS.PATH)', 'X = 2', 'PRINT(2 ** 33)']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[line.split() for line in open('script1.py')]</code></strong>
[['import', 'sys'], ['print(sys.path)'], ['x', '=', '2'], ['print(2', '**','33)']]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[line.replace(' ', '!') for line in open('script1.py')]</code></strong>
['import!sys\n', 'print(sys.path)\n', 'x!=!2\n', 'print(2!**!33)\n']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[('sys' in line, line[0]) for line in open('script1.py')]</code></strong>
[(True, 'i'), (True, 'p'), (False, 'x'), (False, 'p')]</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Extended List Comprehension Syntax"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="extended_list_comprehension_syntax"></a>Extended List Comprehension Syntax</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In fact, <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e37411"></a>list comprehensions can be even more advanced in
          practice. As one particularly useful extension, the <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop nested in the expression can have
          an associated <code class="epub__literal">if</code> clause to filter
          out of the result items for which the test is not true.</p>
<p>For example, suppose we want to repeat the prior section’s
          file-scanning example, but we need to collect only lines that begin
          with the letter <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>p</em></span> (perhaps the first character
          on each line is an action code of some sort). Adding an <code class="epub__literal">if</code> filter clause to our expression does
          the trick:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e37431"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>lines = [line.rstrip() for line in open('script1.py') if line[0] == 'p']</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>lines</code></strong>
['print(sys.path)', 'print(2 ** 33)']</pre>
<p>Here, the <code class="epub__literal">if</code> clause checks
          each line read from the file to see whether its first character is
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>p</em></span>; if not, the line is omitted from the result
          list. This is a fairly big expression, but it’s easy to understand
          if we translate it to its simple <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop statement equivalent. In general,
          we can always translate a list comprehension to a <code class="epub__literal">for</code> statement by appending as we go and
          further indenting each successive part:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e37453"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res = []</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for line in open('script1.py'):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if line[0] == 'p':</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res.append(line.rstrip())</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res</code></strong>
['print(sys.path)', 'print(2 ** 33)']</pre>
<p>This <code class="epub__literal">for</code> statement
          equivalent works, but it takes up four lines instead of one and
          probably runs substantially slower.</p>
<p>List comprehensions can become even more complex if we need
          them to—for instance, they may contain nested loops, coded as a
          series of <code class="epub__literal">for</code> clauses. In fact,
          their full syntax allows for any number of <code class="epub__literal">for</code> clauses, each of which can have an
          optional associated <code class="epub__literal">if</code> clause
          (we’ll be more formal about their syntax in Chapter 20).</p>
<p>For example, the following builds a list of the concatenation
          of <code class="epub__literal">x + y</code> for every <code class="epub__literal">x</code> in one string and every <code class="epub__literal">y</code> in another. It effectively collects the
          permutation of the characters in two strings:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e37499"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[x + y for x in 'abc' for y in 'lmn']</code></strong>
['al', 'am', 'an', 'bl', 'bm', 'bn', 'cl', 'cm', 'cn']</pre>
<p>Again, one way to understand this expression is to convert it
          to statement form by indenting its parts. The following is an
          equivalent, but likely slower, alternative way to achieve the same
          effect:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e37507"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res = []</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for x in 'abc':</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for y in 'lmn':</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res.append(x + y)</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res</code></strong>
['al', 'am', 'an', 'bl', 'bm', 'bn', 'cl', 'cm', 'cn']</pre>
<p>Beyond this complexity level, though, list comprehension
          expressions can often become too compact for their own good. In
          general, they are intended for simple types of iterations; for more
          involved work, a simpler <code class="epub__literal">for</code>
          statement structure will probably be easier to understand and modify
          in the future. As usual in programming, if something is difficult
          for you to understand, it’s probably not a good idea.</p>
<p>We’ll revisit list comprehensions in Chapter 20, in the context
          of functional programming tools; as we’ll see, they turn out to be
          just as related to functions as they are to looping <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e37533"></a>statements.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Other Iteration Contexts"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
