<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_answers-id13"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</h1>
<div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop uses the
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>iteration protocol</em></span> to step through items in
            the object across which it is iterating. It calls the object’s
            <code class="epub__literal">__next__</code> method (run by the
            <code class="epub__literal">next</code> built-in) on each
            iteration and catches the <code class="epub__literal">StopIteration</code> exception to determine
            when to stop looping. Any object that supports this model works in
            a <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop and in other
            iteration contexts.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Both are iteration tools. List comprehensions are a concise
            and efficient way to perform a common <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop task: collecting the results of
            applying an expression to all items in an iterable object. It’s
            always possible to translate a list comprehension to a <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop, and part of the list
            comprehension expression looks like the header of a <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop syntactically.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Iteration contexts in Python include the <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop; list comprehensions; the
            <code class="epub__literal">map</code> built-in function; the
            <code class="epub__literal">in</code> membership test expression;
            and the built-in functions <code class="epub__literal">sorted</code>, <code class="epub__literal">sum</code>, <code class="epub__literal">any</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">all</code>. This category also includes the
            <code class="epub__literal">list</code> and <code class="epub__literal">tuple</code> built-ins, string <code class="epub__literal">join</code> methods, and sequence assignments,
            all of which use the iteration protocol (the <code class="epub__literal">__next__</code> method) to step across iterable
            objects one item at a time.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The best way to read lines from a text file today is to not
            read it explicitly at all: instead, open the file within an
            iteration context such as a <code class="epub__literal">for</code>
            loop or list comprehension, and let the iteration tool
            automatically scan one line at a time by running the file’s <code class="epub__literal">next</code> method on each iteration. This
            approach is generally best in terms of coding simplicity,
            execution speed, and memory space requirements.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>I’ll accept any of the following as correct answers: fear,
            intimidation, nice red uniforms, a comfy chair, and soft
            pillows.</p></li></ol>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[33] </sup>Terminology in this topic tends to be a bit loose. This text
            uses the terms “iterable” and “iterator” interchangeably to refer
            to an object that supports iteration in general. Sometimes the
            term “iterable” refers to an object that supports <code class="epub__literal">iter</code> and “iterator” refers to an object
            return by <code class="epub__literal">iter</code> that supports
            <code class="epub__literal">next(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>I</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code>, but that convention is not universal
            in either the Python world or this book.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[34] </sup>Technically speaking, the <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop calls the internal equivalent
              of <code class="epub__literal">I.__next__</code>, instead of the
              <code class="epub__literal">next(I)</code> used here. There is
              rarely any difference between the two, but as we’ll see in the
              next section, there are some built-in objects in 3.0 (such as
              <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code> results) that
              support the former and not the latter, but may be still be
              iterated across in <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops.
              Your manual iterations can generally use either call scheme. If
              you care for the full story, in 3.0 <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code> results have been
              reimplemented with the <code class="epub__literal">subprocess</code> module and a wrapper class,
              whose <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> method is
              no longer called in 3.0 for implicit <code class="epub__literal">__next__</code> fetches made by the <code class="epub__literal">next</code> built-in, but is called for
              explicit fetches by name—a 3.0 change issue we’ll confront in
              Chapters 37 and 38, which
              apparently burns some standard library code too! Also in 3.0,
              the related 2.6 calls <code class="epub__literal">os.popen2/3/4</code> are no longer available;
              use <code class="epub__literal">subprocess.Popen</code> with
              appropriate arguments instead (see the Python 3.0 library manual
              for the new required code).</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
