<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Common Coding Gotchas</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="common_coding_gotchas"></a>Common Coding Gotchas</h1>
<p>Before <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e39604"></a>the programming exercises for this part of the book,
        let’s run through some of the most common mistakes <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e39610"></a>beginners make when coding Python statements and
        programs. Many of these are warnings I’ve thrown out earlier in this
        part of the book, collected here for ease of reference. You’ll learn
        to avoid these pitfalls once you’ve gained a bit of Python coding
        experience, but a few words now might help you avoid falling into some
        of these traps initially:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Don’t forget the colons</strong></span>.
            Always remember to type a <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e39620"></a><code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm6_d1e39624"></a>:</code> at the end of compound statement headers
            (the first line of an <code class="epub__literal">if</code>,
            <code class="epub__literal">while</code>, <code class="epub__literal">for</code>, etc.). You’ll probably forget at
            first (I did, and so have most of my 3,000 Python students over
            the years), but you can take some comfort from the fact that it
            will soon become an unconscious habit.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Start in column 1</strong></span>. Be
            sure to start <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e39643"></a>top-level (unnested) code in column 1. That includes
            unnested code typed into module files, as well as unnested code
            typed at the interactive prompt.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Blank lines matter at the
            interactive prompt</strong></span>. Blank <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e39653"></a>lines in compound statements are always ignored in
            module files, but when you’re typing code at the interactive prompt, they end the
            statement. In other words, blank lines tell the interactive
            command line that you’ve finished a compound statement; if you
            want to continue, don’t hit the Enter key at the <code class="epub__literal">...</code> prompt (or in IDLE) until you’re
            really done.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Indent consistently</strong></span>.
            Avoid <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e39668"></a>mixing tabs and spaces in the indentation of a
            block, unless you know what your text editor does with tabs.
            Otherwise, what you see in your editor may not be what Python sees
            when it counts tabs as a number of spaces. This is true in any
            block-structured language, not just Python—if the next programmer
            has her tabs set differently, she will not understand the
            structure of your code. It’s safer to use all tabs or all spaces
            for each block.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Don’t <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e39676"></a>code C in Python</strong></span>. A reminder for C/C++
            programmers: you don’t need to type parentheses around tests in
            <code class="epub__literal">if</code> and <code class="epub__literal">while</code> headers (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">if (X==1):</code>). You can, if you like (any
            expression can be enclosed in parentheses), but they are fully
            superfluous in this context. Also, do not terminate all your
            statements with semicolons; it’s technically legal to do this in
            Python as well, but it’s totally useless unless you’re placing
            more than one statement on a single line (the end of a line
            normally terminates a statement). And remember, don’t embed
            assignment statements in <code class="epub__literal">while</code>
            loop tests, and don’t use <code class="epub__literal">{}</code>
            around blocks (indent your nested code blocks consistently
            instead).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Use simple</strong></span> <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for</code></strong> <span class="epub__strong"><strong>loops
            instead of</strong></span> <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>while</code></strong>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>or</strong></span> <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>range</code></strong>. <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e39717"></a>Another reminder: <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e39723"></a>a simple <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop
            (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">for x in seq:</code>) is almost
            always simpler to code and quicker to run than a <code class="epub__literal">while</code>- or <code class="epub__literal">range</code>-based counter loop. Because Python
            handles indexing internally for a simple <code class="epub__literal">for</code>, it can sometimes be twice as fast
            as the equivalent <code class="epub__literal">while</code>. Avoid
            the temptation to count things in Python<a id="I_indexterm6_d1e39748"></a>!</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Beware of mutables in
            assignments</strong></span>. I mentioned this in Chapter 11: you need to
            be careful about using mutables<a id="I_indexterm6_d1e39761"></a> in a <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e39767"></a>multiple-target assignment (<code class="epub__literal">a = b = []</code>), as well as in an augmented
            assignment (<code class="epub__literal">a += [1, 2]</code>). In
            both cases, in-place changes may impact other variables. See Chapter 11 for
            details.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Don’t expect results from functions
            that change objects in-place</strong></span>. We encountered this one
            earlier, too: <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e39787"></a>in-place change operations like the <code class="epub__literal">list.<a id="I_indexterm6_d1e39793"></a>append</code> and <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm6_d1e39799"></a>list.sort</code> methods introduced in Chapter 8 do not return values (other
            than <code class="epub__literal">None</code>), so you should call
            them without assigning the result. It’s not uncommon for beginners
            to say something like <code class="epub__literal">mylist =
            mylist.append(X)</code> to try to get the result of an <code class="epub__literal">append</code>, but what this actually does is
            assign <code class="epub__literal">mylist</code> to <code class="epub__literal">None</code>, not to the modified list (in fact,
            you’ll lose your reference to the list altogether).</p>
<p>A more devious example of this pops up in Python 2.X code
            when trying to step through dictionary items in a sorted fashion.
            It’s fairly common to see code like <code class="epub__literal">for k
            in D.keys().sort():</code>. This almost works—the <code class="epub__literal">keys</code> method builds a keys list, and the
            <code class="epub__literal">sort</code> method orders it—but
            because the <code class="epub__literal">sort</code> method returns
            <code class="epub__literal">None</code>, the loop fails because it
            is ultimately a loop over <code class="epub__literal">None</code>
            (a nonsequence). This fails even sooner in Python 3.0, because
            dictionary keys are views, not lists! To code this correctly,
            either use the newer <code class="epub__literal">sorted</code>
            built-in function, which returns the sorted list, or split the
            method calls out to statements: <code class="epub__literal">Ks =
            list(D.keys())</code>, then <code class="epub__literal">Ks.sort()</code>, and finally, <code class="epub__literal">for k in Ks:</code>. This, by the way, is one
            case where you’ll still want to call the <code class="epub__literal">keys</code> method explicitly for looping,
            instead of relying on the dictionary iterators—iterators do not
            sort.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Always use parentheses to call a
            function</strong></span>. You <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e39863"></a>must add <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e39869"></a>parentheses after a <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e39875"></a>function name to call it, whether it takes arguments
            or not (e.g., use <code class="epub__literal">function()</code>,
            not <code class="epub__literal">function</code>). In Part IV, we’ll see that functions are simply
            objects that have a special operation—a call that you trigger with
            the parentheses.</p>
<p>In classes, this problem seems to occur most often with
            files; it’s common to see beginners type <code class="epub__literal">file.close</code> to close a file, rather than
            <code class="epub__literal">file.close()</code>. Because it’s
            legal to reference a function without calling it, the first
            version with no parentheses succeeds silently, but it does not
            close the file!</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Don’t use extensions or paths in
            imports and reloads</strong></span>. Omit directory paths and file
            suffixes in <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statements
            (e.g., say <code class="epub__literal">import mod</code>, not
            <code class="epub__literal">import mod.py</code>). (We discussed
            module basics in Chapter 3 and will
            continue studying modules in Part V.) Because
            modules may have other suffixes besides <em class="epub__filename">.py</em> (<em class="epub__filename">.pyc</em>, for instance), hardcoding a
            particular suffix is not only illegal syntax, but doesn’t make
            sense. Any platform-specific directory path syntax comes from
            module search path settings, not the <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statement.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Chapter Summary"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
