<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_answers-id14"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</h1>
<div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Documentation strings (docstrings) are considered best for
            larger, functional documentation, describing the use of modules,
            functions, classes, and methods in your code. Hash-mark comments
            are today best limited to micro-documentation about arcane
            expressions or statements. This is partly because docstrings are
            easier to find in a source file, but also because they can be
            extracted and displayed by the PyDoc system.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>You can see docstrings by printing an object’s <code class="epub__literal">__doc__</code> attribute, by passing it to
            PyDoc’s <code class="epub__literal">help</code> function, and by
            selecting modules in PyDoc’s GUI search engine in client/server
            mode. Additionally, PyDoc can be run to save a module’s
            documentation in an HTML file for later viewing or
            printing.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The built-in <code class="epub__literal">dir(X)</code>
            function returns a list of all the attributes attached to any
            object.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Run the PyDoc GUI interface, leave the module name blank,
            and select “open browser”; this opens a web page containing a link
            to every module available to your programs.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Mine, of course. (Seriously, the Preface lists a few
            recommended follow-up books, both for reference and for
            application tutorials.)</p></li></ol>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Test Your Knowledge: Part III Exercises"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
