<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Test Your Knowledge: Part III Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_part_iii_exer"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Part III Exercises</h1>
<p>Now <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e39994"></a>that you know how to code basic program logic, the
        following exercises will ask you to implement some simple tasks with
        statements. Most of the work is in exercise 4, which lets you explore
        coding alternatives. There are always many ways to arrange statements,
        and part of learning Python is learning which arrangements work better
        than others.</p>
<p>See Part III in Appendix B for the
        solutions.</p><div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Coding basic loops</em></span>.</p><div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Write a <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop that
                prints the ASCII code of each character in a string named
                <code class="epub__literal">S</code>. Use the built-in
                function <code class="epub__literal">ord(character)</code> to
                convert each character to an ASCII integer. (Test it
                interactively to see how it works.)</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Next, change your loop to compute the sum of the ASCII
                codes of all the characters in a string.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Finally, modify your code again to return a new list
                that contains the ASCII codes of each character in the string.
                Does the expression <code class="epub__literal">map(ord,
                S)</code> have a similar effect? (Hint: see Chapter 14.)</p></li></ol>
</div></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Backslash characters</em></span>. What happens on
            your machine when you type the following code
            interactively?</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e40041"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">for i in range(50):
    print('hello %d\n\a' % i)</pre>
<p>Beware that if it’s run outside of the IDLE interface this
            example may beep at you, so you may not want to run it in a
            crowded lab. IDLE prints odd characters instead of beeping (see
            the backslash escape characters in Table 7-2).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Sorting dictionaries</em></span>. In Chapter 8, we saw that dictionaries are
            unordered collections. Write a <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop that prints a dictionary’s
            items in sorted (ascending) order. (Hint: use the dictionary
            <code class="epub__literal">keys</code> and list <code class="epub__literal">sort</code> methods, or the newer <code class="epub__literal">sorted</code> built-in function.)</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Program logic alternatives</em></span>. Consider
            the following code, which uses a <code class="epub__literal">while</code> loop and <code class="epub__literal">found</code> flag to search a list of powers of
            2 for the value of 2 raised to the fifth power (32). It’s stored
            in a module file called <em class="epub__filename">power.py</em>.</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e40080"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">L = [1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64]
X = 5

found = False
i = 0
while not found and i &lt; len(L):
   if 2 ** X == L[i]:
       found = True
   else:
       i = i+1

if found:
    print('at index', i)
else:
    print(X, 'not found')

C:\book\tests&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python power.py</code></strong>
at index 5</pre>
<p>As is, the example doesn’t follow normal Python coding
            techniques. Follow the steps outlined here to improve it (for all
            the transformations, you may either type your code interactively
            or store it in a script file run from the system command line—using a file makes this
            exercise much easier):</p><div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>First, rewrite this code with a <code class="epub__literal">while</code> loop <code class="epub__literal">else</code> clause to eliminate the
                <code class="epub__literal">found</code> flag and final
                <code class="epub__literal">if</code> statement.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Next, rewrite the example to use a <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop with an <code class="epub__literal">else</code> clause, to eliminate the
                explicit list-indexing logic. (Hint: to get the index of an
                item, use the list <code class="epub__literal">index</code>
                method—<code class="epub__literal">L.index(X)</code> returns
                the offset of the first <code class="epub__literal">X</code>
                in list <code class="epub__literal">L</code>.)</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Next, remove the loop completely by rewriting the
                example with a simple <code class="epub__literal">in</code>
                operator membership expression. (See Chapter 8 for more details, or type
                this to test: <code class="epub__literal">2 in
                [1,2,3]</code>.)</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Finally, use a <code class="epub__literal">for</code>
                loop and the list <code class="epub__literal">append</code>
                method to generate the powers-of-2 list (<code class="epub__literal">L</code>) instead of hardcoding a list
                literal.</p></li></ol>
</div>
<p>Deeper thoughts:</p><div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Do you think it would improve performance to move the
                <code class="epub__literal">2 ** X</code> expression outside
                the loops? How would you code that?</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>As we saw in exercise 1, Python includes a <code class="epub__literal">map(function, list)</code> tool that can
                generate a powers-of-2 list, too: <code class="epub__literal">map(lambda x: 2 ** x, range(7))</code>. Try
                typing this code interactively; we’ll meet <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code> more formally in Chapter 19.</p></li></ol>
</div>
</li></ol>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
