<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Why Use Functions?</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="why_use_functions_question"></a>Why Use Functions?</h1>
<p>Before <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e40287"></a>we get into the details, let’s establish a clear picture
        of what functions are all about. Functions are a nearly universal
        program-structuring device. You may have come across them before in
        other languages, where they may have been called
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>subroutines</em></span> or <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>procedures</em></span>.
        As a brief introduction, functions serve two primary development
        roles:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Maximizing code reuse and minimizing redundancy</span></dt><dd>
<p>As in most programming languages, Python functions are the
              simplest way to package logic you may wish to use in more than
              one place and more than one time. Up until now, all the code
              we’ve been writing has run immediately. Functions allow us to
              group and generalize code to be used arbitrarily many times
              later. Because they allow us to code an operation in a single
              place and use it in many places, Python functions are the most
              basic <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>factoring</em></span> tool in the language: they
              allow us to reduce code redundancy in our programs, and thereby
              reduce maintenance effort.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Procedural decomposition</span></dt><dd>
<p>Functions also provide a tool for splitting systems into
              pieces that have well-defined roles. For instance, to make a
              pizza from scratch, you would start by mixing the dough, rolling
              it out, adding toppings, baking it, and so on. If you were
              programming a pizza-making robot, functions would help you
              divide the overall “make pizza” task into chunks—one function
              for each subtask in the process. It’s easier to implement the
              smaller tasks in isolation than it is to implement the entire
              process at once. In general, functions are about
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e40319"></a>procedure</em></span>—how to do something, rather
              than what you’re doing it to. We’ll see why this distinction
              matters in Part VI, when we start
              making new object with classes.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>In this part of the book, we’ll explore the tools used to code
        functions in Python: function basics, scope rules, and argument
        passing, along with a few related concepts such as generators and
        functional tools. Because its importance begins to become more
        apparent at this level of coding, we’ll also revisit the notion of
        polymorphism introduced earlier in the book. As you’ll see, functions
        don’t imply much new syntax, but they do lead us to some bigger
        programming ideas.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Coding Functions"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
