<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Coding Functions</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="coding_functions"></a>Coding Functions</h1>
<p>Although <a id="ch16functionscoding"></a>it wasn’t made very formal, we’ve already used some
        functions in earlier chapters. For instance, to make a file object, we
        called the built-in <code class="epub__literal">open</code> function;
        similarly, we used the <code class="epub__literal">len</code> built-in
        function to ask for the number of items in a collection object.</p>
<p>In this chapter, we will explore how to write
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>new</em></span> functions in Python. Functions we write
        behave the same way as the built-ins we’ve already seen: they are
        called in expressions, are
        passed values, and return results. But writing new functions requires
        the application of a few additional ideas that haven’t yet been
        introduced. Moreover, functions behave very differently in Python than
        they do in compiled languages like C. Here is a brief introduction to
        the main concepts behind Python functions, all of which we will study
        in this part of the book:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def</code></strong> <span class="epub__strong"><strong>is executable code</strong></span>. Python functions are
            written with a new statement, the <code class="epub__literal">def</code>. Unlike functions in compiled
            languages such as C, <code class="epub__literal">def</code> is an
            executable statement—your function does not exist until Python
            reaches and runs the <code class="epub__literal">def</code>. In
            fact, it’s legal (and even occasionally useful) to nest <code class="epub__literal">def</code> statements inside <code class="epub__literal">if</code> statements, <code class="epub__literal">while</code> loops, and even other <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s. In typical operation, <code class="epub__literal">def</code> statements are coded in module files
            and are naturally run to generate functions when a module file is
            first imported.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def</code></strong> <span class="epub__strong"><strong>creates an object and assigns it to a
            name</strong></span>. When Python reaches and runs a <code class="epub__literal">def</code> statement, it generates a new
            function object and assigns it to the function’s name. As with all
            assignments, the function name becomes a reference to the function
            object. There’s nothing magic about the name of a function—as
            you’ll see, the function object can be assigned to other names,
            stored in a list, and so on. Function objects may also have
            arbitrary user-defined <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>attributes</em></span> attached to
            them to record data.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><strong class="epub__userinput"><code>lambda</code></strong> <span class="epub__strong"><strong>creates an object but returns it as a
            result</strong></span>. Functions may also be created with the <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code> expression, a feature that allows
            us to in-line function definitions in places where a <code class="epub__literal">def</code> statement won’t work syntactically
            (this is a more advanced concept that we’ll defer until Chapter 19).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return</code></strong> <span class="epub__strong"><strong>sends a result object back to the caller</strong></span>.
            When a function is called, the caller stops until the function
            finishes its work and returns control to the caller. Functions
            that compute a value send it back to the caller with a <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e40425"></a><code class="epub__literal">return</code> statement;
            the returned value becomes the result of the function call.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><strong class="epub__userinput"><code>yield</code></strong> <span class="epub__strong"><strong>sends a result object back to the caller, but
            remembers where it left off</strong></span>. Functions known as
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>generators</em></span> may also use the <code class="epub__literal">yield</code> statement <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e40445"></a>to send back a value and suspend their state such
            that they may be resumed later, to produce a series of results
            over time. This is another advanced topic covered later in this
            part of the book.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><strong class="epub__userinput"><code>global</code></strong> <span class="epub__strong"><strong>declares module-level variables that are to be
            assigned</strong></span>. By default, all names assigned in a function
            are local to that function and exist only while the function runs.
            To assign a name in the enclosing module, functions need to list
            it in a <code class="epub__literal">global</code> statement. More
            generally, names are always looked up in
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>scopes</em></span>—places where variables are stored—and
            assignments bind names to scopes.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><strong class="epub__userinput"><code>nonlocal</code></strong> <span class="epub__strong"><strong>declares enclosing function variables that are to be
            assigned</strong></span>. Similarly, the <code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code> statement added in Python 3.0
            allows a function to assign a name that exists in the scope of a
            syntactically enclosing <code class="epub__literal">def</code>
            statement. This allows enclosing functions to serve as a place to
            retain <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>state</em></span>—information remembered when a
            function is called—without using shared global names.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Arguments are passed by assignment
            (object reference)</strong></span>. In Python, arguments are passed to
            functions by assignment (which, as we’ve learned, means by object
            reference). As you’ll see, in Python’s model the caller and
            function share objects by references, but there is no name
            aliasing. Changing an argument name within a function does not
            also change the corresponding name in the caller, but changing
            passed-in mutable objects can change objects shared by the
            caller.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Arguments, return values, and
            variables are not declared</strong></span>. As with everything in
            Python, there are no type constraints on functions. In fact,
            nothing about a function needs to be declared ahead of time: you
            can pass in arguments of any type, return any kind of object, and
            so on. As one consequence, a single function can often be applied
            to a variety of object types—any objects that sport a compatible
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>interface</em></span> (methods and expressions) will do,
            regardless of their specific types.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>If some of the preceding words didn’t sink in, don’t worry—we’ll
        explore all of these concepts with real code in this part of the book.
        Let’s get started by expanding on some of these ideas and looking at a
        few examples.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="def Statements"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="def_statements"></a>def Statements</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">def</code> statement creates a
          function object and assigns it to a name. Its general format is as
          follows:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e40503"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def &lt;name&gt;(arg1, arg2,... argN):
    &lt;statements&gt;</pre>
<p>As with all compound Python statements, <code class="epub__literal">def</code> consists of a header line followed by
          a block of statements, usually indented (or a simple statement after
          the colon). The statement block becomes the function’s
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>body</em></span>—that is, the code Python executes each
          time the function is called.</p>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">def</code> header line
          specifies a function <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>name</em></span> that is assigned the
          function object, along with a list of zero or more
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>arguments</em></span> (sometimes called
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>parameters</em></span>) in parentheses. The argument names
          in the header are assigned to the objects passed in parentheses at
          the point of call.</p>
<p>Function bodies often contain a <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e40530"></a>return</code> statement:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e40535"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def &lt;name&gt;(arg1, arg2,... argN):
    ...
    return &lt;value&gt;</pre>
<p>The Python <code class="epub__literal">return</code> statement
          can show up anywhere in a function body; it ends the function call
          and sends a result back to the caller. The <code class="epub__literal">return</code> statement consists of an object
          expression that gives the function’s result. The <code class="epub__literal">return</code> statement is optional; if it’s not
          present, the function exits when the control flow falls off the end
          of the function body. Technically, a function without a <code class="epub__literal">return</code> statement returns the <code class="epub__literal">None</code> object automatically, but this return
          value is usually ignored.</p>
<p>Functions may also contain <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e40556"></a><code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e40564"></a>yield</code> statements, which are designed to
          produce a series of values over time, but we’ll defer discussion of
          these until we survey generator topics in Chapter 20.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="def Executes at Runtime"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="def_executes_at_runtime"></a>def Executes at Runtime</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The Python <code class="epub__literal">def</code> is a true
          executable statement: when it runs, it creates a new function object
          and assigns it to a name. (Remember, all we have in Python is
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>runtime</em></span>; there is no such thing as a separate
          compile time.) Because it’s a statement, a <code class="epub__literal">def</code> can appear anywhere a statement
          can—even nested in other statements. For instance, although <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s normally are run when the module
          enclosing them is imported, it’s also completely legal to nest a
          function <code class="epub__literal">def</code> inside an <code class="epub__literal">if</code> statement to select between alternative
          definitions:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e40598"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">if test:
    def func():            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Define func this way</span></em>
        ...
else:
    def func():            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Or else this way</span></em>
        ...
...
func()                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Call the version selected and built</span></em></pre>
<p>One way to understand this code is to realize that the
          <code class="epub__literal">def</code> is much like an <code class="epub__literal">=</code> statement: it simply assigns a name at
          runtime. Unlike in compiled languages such as C, Python functions do
          not need to be fully defined before the program runs. More
          generally, <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s are not evaluated
          until they are reached and run, and the code
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>inside</em></span> <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s
          is not evaluated until the functions are later called.</p>
<p>Because function definition happens at runtime, there’s
          nothing special about the function name. What’s important is the
          object to which it refers:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e40627"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">othername = func           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Assign function object</span></em>
othername()                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Call func again</span></em></pre>
<p>Here, the function was assigned to a different name and called
          through the new name. Like everything else in Python, functions are
          just <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>objects</em></span>; they are recorded explicitly in
          memory at program execution time. In fact, besides calls, functions
          allow arbitrary <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>attributes</em></span> to be attached to
          record information for later <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e40642"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e40644"></a>use:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e40647"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def func(): ...            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Create function object</span></em>
func()                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Call object</span></em>
func.attr = value          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Attach attributes</span></em></pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="A First Example: Definitions and Calls"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
