<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>A First Example: Definitions and Calls</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="a_first_example_colon_definitions_and_c"></a>A First Example: Definitions and Calls</h1>
<p>Apart <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e40662"></a>from such runtime concepts (which tend to seem most
        unique to programmers with backgrounds in traditional compiled
        languages), Python functions are straightforward to use. Let’s code a
        first real example to demonstrate the basics. As you’ll see, there are
        two sides to the function picture: a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>definition</em></span>
        (the <code class="epub__literal">def</code> that creates a function)
        and a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>call</em></span> (an expression that tells Python to
        run the function’s body).</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Definition"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="definition"></a>Definition</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Here’s a <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e40682"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e40687"></a>definition typed interactively that defines a function
          called <code class="epub__literal">times</code>, which returns the
          product of its two arguments:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e40694"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def times(x, y):</code></strong>       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Create and assign function</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return x * y</code></strong>       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Body executed when called</span></em>
...</pre>
<p>When Python reaches and runs this <code class="epub__literal">def</code>, it creates a new function object that
          packages the function’s code and assigns the object to the name
          <code class="epub__literal">times</code>. Typically, such a
          statement is coded in a module file and runs when the enclosing file
          is imported; for something this small, though, the interactive
          prompt suffices.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Calls"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="calls"></a>Calls</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>After <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e40721"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e40724"></a>the <code class="epub__literal">def</code> has run,
          you can call (run) the function in your program by adding parentheses after the function’s name.
          The parentheses may optionally contain one or more object arguments,
          to be passed (assigned) to the names in the function’s
          header:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e40736"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>times(2, 4)</code></strong>            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Arguments in parentheses</span></em>
8</pre>
<p>This expression passes two arguments to <code class="epub__literal">times</code>. As mentioned previously, arguments
          are passed by assignment, so in this case the name <code class="epub__literal">x</code> in the function header is assigned the
          value <code class="epub__literal">2</code>, <code class="epub__literal">y</code> is assigned the value <code class="epub__literal">4</code>, and the function’s body is run. For
          this function, the body is just a <code class="epub__literal">return</code> statement that sends back the
          result as the value of the call expression. The returned object was
          printed here interactively (as in most languages, <code class="epub__literal">2 * 4</code> is <code class="epub__literal">8</code> in Python), but if we needed to use it
          later we could instead assign it to a variable. For example:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e40771"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = times(3.14, 4)</code></strong>     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Save the result object</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x</code></strong>
12.56</pre>
<p>Now, watch what happens when the function is called a third
          time, with very different kinds of objects passed in:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e40784"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>times('Ni', 4)</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Functions are "typeless"</span></em>
'NiNiNiNi'</pre>
<p>This time, our function means something completely different
          (Monty Python reference again intended). In this third call, a
          string and an integer are passed to <code class="epub__literal">x</code> and <code class="epub__literal">y</code>, instead of two numbers. Recall that
          <code class="epub__literal">*</code> works on both numbers and
          sequences; because we never declare the types of variables,
          arguments, or return values in Python, we can use <code class="epub__literal">times</code> to either
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>multiply</em></span> numbers or <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>repeat</em></span>
          sequences.</p>
<p>In other words, what our <code class="epub__literal">times</code> function means and does depends on
          what we pass into it. This is a core idea in Python (and perhaps the
          key to using the language well), which we’ll explore in the next
          section.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Polymorphism in Python"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="polymorphism_in_python"></a>Polymorphism in Python</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e40823"></a>we <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e40827"></a>just saw, the very meaning of the expression <code class="epub__literal">x * y</code> in our simple <code class="epub__literal">times</code> function depends completely upon the
          kinds of objects that <code class="epub__literal">x</code> and
          <code class="epub__literal">y</code> are—thus, the same function can
          perform multiplication in one instance and repetition in another.
          Python leaves it up to the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>objects</em></span> to do
          something reasonable for the syntax. Really, <code class="epub__literal">*</code> is just a dispatch mechanism that routes
          control to the objects being processed.</p>
<p>This sort of type-dependent behavior is known as
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>polymorphism</em></span>, a term we first met in Chapter 4 that essentially means
          that the meaning of an operation depends on the objects being
          operated upon. Because it’s a dynamically typed language,
          polymorphism runs rampant in Python. In fact, every operation is a
          polymorphic operation in Python: printing, indexing, the <code class="epub__literal">*</code> operator, and much more.</p>
<p>This is deliberate, and it accounts for much of the language’s
          conciseness and flexibility. A single function, for instance, can
          generally be applied to a whole category of object types
          automatically. As long as those objects support the expected
          interface (a.k.a. protocol), the function can process them. That is,
          if the objects passed into a function have the expected methods and
          expression operators, they are plug-and-play compatible with the
          function’s logic.</p>
<p>Even in our simple <code class="epub__literal">times</code>
          function, this means that <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>any</em></span> two objects that
          support a <code class="epub__literal">*</code> will work, no matter
          what they may be, and no matter when they are coded. This function
          will work on two numbers (performing multiplication), or a string
          and a number (performing repetition), or any other combination of
          objects supporting the expected interface—even class-based objects we
          have not even coded yet.</p>
<p>Moreover, if the objects passed in do <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>not</em></span>
          support this expected interface, Python will detect the error when
          the <code class="epub__literal">*</code> expression is run and raise
          an exception automatically. It’s therefore pointless to code error
          checking ourselves. In fact, doing so would limit our function’s
          utility, as it would be restricted to work only on objects whose
          types we test for.</p>
<p>This turns out to be a crucial philosophical difference
          between <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e40888"></a>Python and statically typed languages like C++ and
          Java: in Python, your code is <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>not supposed to
          care</em></span> about specific data types. If it does, it will be
          limited to working on just the types you anticipated when you wrote
          it, and it will not support other compatible object types that may
          be coded in the future. Although it is possible to test for types
          with tools like the <code class="epub__literal">type</code> built-in
          function, doing so breaks your code’s flexibility. By and large, we
          code to object <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>interfaces</em></span> in Python, not data
          types.</p>
<p>Of course, this polymorphic model of programming means we have
          to test our code to detect errors, rather than providing type
          declarations a compiler can use to detect some types of errors for
          us ahead of time. In exchange for an initial bit of testing, though,
          we radically reduce the amount of code we have to write and
          radically increase our code’s flexibility. As you’ll learn, it’s a
          net win in practice.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="A Second Example: Intersecting Sequences"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
