<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>A Second Example: Intersecting Sequences</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="a_second_example_colon_intersecting_seq"></a>A Second Example: Intersecting Sequences</h1>
<p>Let’s <a id="ch16functionsexintersectseq"></a>look at a second function example that does something a
        bit more useful than multiplying arguments and further illustrates
        function basics.</p>
<p>In Chapter 13, we coded a <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop that collected items held in common
        in two strings. We noted there that the code wasn’t as useful as it
        could be because it was set up to work only on specific variables and
        could not be rerun later. Of course, we could copy the code and paste
        it into each place where it needs to be run, but this solution is
        neither good nor general—we’d still have to edit each copy to support
        different sequence names, and changing the algorithm would then
        require changing multiple copies.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Definition"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="definition-id1"></a>Definition</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>By now, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e40928"></a>you <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e40934"></a>can probably guess that the solution to this dilemma
          is to package the <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop inside
          a function. Doing so offers a number of advantages:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Putting the code in a function makes it a tool that you
              can run as many times as you like.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Because callers can pass in arbitrary arguments, functions
              are general enough to work on any two sequences (or other
              iterables) you wish to intersect.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>When the logic is packaged in a function, you only have to
              change code in one place if you ever need to change the way the
              intersection works.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Coding the function in a module file means it can be
              imported and reused by any program run on your machine.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>In effect, wrapping the code in a function makes it a general
          intersection utility:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e40956"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def intersect(seq1, seq2):
    res = []                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Start empty</span></em>
    for x in seq1:               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Scan seq1</span></em>
        if x in seq2:            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Common item?</span></em>
            res.append(x)        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Add to end</span></em>
    return res</pre>
<p>The transformation from the simple code of Chapter 13 to this function is
          straightforward; we’ve just nested the original logic under a
          <code class="epub__literal">def</code> header and made the objects
          on which it operates passed-in parameter names. Because this
          function computes a result, we’ve also added a <code class="epub__literal">return</code> statement to send a result object
          back to the caller.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Calls"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="calls-id1"></a>Calls</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Before <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e40985"></a>you can call a function, you have to make it.
          <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e40991"></a>To do this, run its <code class="epub__literal">def</code> statement, either by typing it
          interactively or by coding it in a module file and importing the
          file. Once you’ve run the <code class="epub__literal">def</code>,
          you can call the function by passing any two sequence objects in
          parentheses:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e41001"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>s1 = "SPAM"</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>s2 = "SCAM"</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>intersect(s1, s2)</code></strong>            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Strings</span></em>
['S', 'A', 'M']</pre>
<p>Here, we’ve passed in two strings, and we get back a list
          containing the characters in common. The algorithm the function uses
          is simple: “for every item in the first argument, if that item is
          also in the second argument, append the item to the result.” It’s a
          little shorter to say that in Python than in English, but it works
          out the same.</p>
<p>To be fair, our intersect function is fairly slow (it executes
          nested loops), isn’t really mathematical intersection (there may be
          duplicates in the result), and isn’t required at all (as we’ve seen,
          Python’s set data type provides a built-in intersection operation).
          Indeed, the function could be replaced with a single list
          comprehension expression, as it exhibits the classic loop collector
          code pattern:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e41019"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[x for x in s1 if x in s2]</code></strong>
['S', 'A', 'M']</pre>
<p>As a function basics example, though, it does the job—this
          single piece of code can apply to an entire range of object types,
          as the next section explains.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Polymorphism Revisited"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="polymorphism_revisited"></a>Polymorphism Revisited</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Like <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e41031"></a>all functions in Python, <code class="epub__literal">intersect</code> is <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e41040"></a>polymorphic. That is, it works on arbitrary types, as
          long as they support the expected object interface:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e41044"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = intersect([1, 2, 3], (1, 4))</code></strong>      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Mixed types</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x</code></strong>                                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Saved result object</span></em>
[1]</pre>
<p>This time, we passed in different types of objects to our
          function—a list and a tuple (mixed types)—and it still picked out
          the common items. Because you don’t have to specify the types of
          arguments ahead of time, the <code class="epub__literal">intersect</code> function happily iterates
          through any kind of sequence objects you send it, as long as they
          support the expected interfaces.</p>
<p>For <code class="epub__literal">intersect</code>, this means
          that the first argument has to support the <code class="epub__literal">for</code><a name="second has"></a> loop, and the second has to support
          the <code class="epub__literal">in</code> membership test. Any two
          such objects will work, regardless of their specific types—that
          includes physically stored sequences like strings and lists; all the
          iterable objects we met in Chapter 14, including
          files and dictionaries; and even any class-based objects we code
          that apply operator overloading techniques (we’ll discuss these
          later in the book).<sup>[35]</sup></p>
<p>Here again, if we pass in objects that do not support these
          interfaces (e.g., numbers), Python will automatically detect the
          mismatch and raise an exception for us—which is exactly what we
          want, and the best we could do on our own if we coded explicit type
          tests. By not coding type tests and allowing Python to detect the
          mismatches for us, we both reduce the amount of code we need to
          write and increase our code’s flexibility.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Local Variables"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="local_variables"></a>Local Variables</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Probably the <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e41113"></a>most interesting part of this example is its names. It
          turns out that the variable <code class="epub__literal">res</code>
          inside <code class="epub__literal">intersect</code> is what in
          Python is called a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e41128"></a>local variable<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e41132"></a></em></span>—a name that is visible only to code inside
          the function <code class="epub__literal">def</code> and that exists
          only while the function runs. In fact, because all names
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>assigned</em></span> in any way inside a function are
          classified as local variables by default, nearly all the names in
          <code class="epub__literal">intersect</code> are local
          variables:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">res</code> is obviously
              assigned, so it is a local variable.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Arguments are passed by assignment, so <code class="epub__literal">seq1</code> and <code class="epub__literal">seq2</code> are, too.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop assigns
              items to a variable, so the name <code class="epub__literal">x</code> is also local.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>All these local variables appear when the function is called
          and disappear when the function exits—the<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e41174"></a> <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e41182"></a><code class="epub__literal">return</code> statement at
          the end of <code class="epub__literal">intersect</code> sends back
          the result <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>object</em></span>, but the
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>name</em></span> <code class="epub__literal">res</code>
          goes away. To fully explore the notion of locals, though, we need to
          move on <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e41201"></a>to Chapter 17.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Chapter Summary"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
