<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_answers-id15"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</h1>
<div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Functions are the most basic way of avoiding code
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>redundancy</em></span> in Python—factoring code into
            functions means that we have only one copy of an operation’s code
            to update in the future. Functions are also the basic unit of code
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>reuse</em></span> in Python—wrapping code in functions
            makes it a reusable tool, callable in a variety of programs.
            Finally, functions allow us to divide a complex system into
            manageable parts, each of which may be developed
            individually.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>A function is created when Python reaches and runs the
            <code class="epub__literal">def</code> statement; this statement
            creates a function object and assigns it the function’s name. This
            normally happens when the enclosing module file is imported by
            another module (recall that imports run the code in a file from
            top to bottom, including any <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s), but it can also occur when a
            <code class="epub__literal">def</code> is typed interactively or
            nested in other statements, such as <code class="epub__literal">if</code>s.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>A function returns the <code class="epub__literal">None</code> object by default if the control
            flow falls off the end of the function body without running into a
            <code class="epub__literal">return</code> statement. Such
            functions are usually called with expression statements, as
            assigning their <code class="epub__literal">None</code> results to
            variables is generally pointless.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The function body (the code nested inside the function
            definition statement) is run when the function is later called
            with a call expression. The body runs anew each time the function
            is called.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Checking the types of objects passed into a function
            effectively breaks the function’s flexibility, constraining the
            function to work on specific types only. Without such checks, the
            function would likely be able to process an entire range of object
            types—any objects that support the interface expected by the
            function will work. (The term <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>interface</em></span> means
            the set of methods and expression operators the function’s code
            runs.)</p></li></ol>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[35] </sup>This code will always work if we intersect files’ contents
              obtained with <code class="epub__literal">file.readlines()</code>. It may not work to
              intersect lines in open input files directly, though, depending
              on the file object’s implementation of the <code class="epub__literal">in</code> operator or general iteration.
              Files must generally be rewound (e.g., with a <code class="epub__literal">file.seek(0)</code> or another <code class="epub__literal">open</code>) after they have been read to
              end-of-file once. As we’ll see in Chapter 29 when we study operator
              overloading, classes implement the <code class="epub__literal">in</code> operator either by providing the
              specific <code class="epub__literal">__contains__</code> method
              or by supporting the general iteration protocol with the
              <code class="epub__literal">__iter__</code> or older <code class="epub__literal">__getitem__</code> methods; if coded, classes
              can define what iteration means for their data.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
