<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>The global Statement</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="the_global_statement"></a>The global Statement</h1>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal"><a id="ch17globalstatement"></a>global</code> statement and its <code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code> cousin are the only things that are
        remotely like declaration statements in Python. They are not type or
        size declarations, though; they are <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>namespace
        declarations</em></span>. The <code class="epub__literal">global</code>
        statement tells Python that a function plans to change one or more
        global names—i.e., names that live in the enclosing module’s scope
        (namespace).</p>
<p>We’ve talked about <code class="epub__literal">global</code> in
        passing already. Here’s a summary:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Global names are variables assigned at the top level of the
            enclosing module file.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Global names must be declared only if they are assigned
            within a function.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Global names may be referenced within a function without
            being declared.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>In other words, <code class="epub__literal">global</code> allows
        us to change names that live outside a <code class="epub__literal">def</code> at the top level of a module file. As
        we’ll see later, the <code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code>
        statement is almost identical but applies to names in the enclosing
        <code class="epub__literal">def</code>’s local scope, rather than
        names in the enclosing module.</p>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">global</code> statement consists
        of the keyword <code class="epub__literal">global</code>, followed by
        one or more names separated by commas. All the listed names will be
        mapped to the enclosing module’s scope when assigned or referenced
        within the function body. For instance:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e42165"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">X = 88                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Global X</span></em>

def func():
    global X
    X = 99                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Global X: outside def</span></em>

func()
print(X)                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Prints 99</span></em></pre>
<p>We’ve added a <code class="epub__literal">global</code>
        declaration to the example here, such that the <code class="epub__literal">X</code> inside the <code class="epub__literal">def</code> now refers to the <code class="epub__literal">X</code> outside the <code class="epub__literal">def</code>; they are the same variable this time.
        Here is a slightly more involved example of <code class="epub__literal">global</code> at work:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e42196"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">y, z = 1, 2                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Global variables in module</span></em>
def all_global():
    global x                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Declare globals assigned</span></em>
    x = y + z                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># No need to declare y, z: LEGB rule</span></em></pre>
<p>Here, <code class="epub__literal">x</code>, <code class="epub__literal">y</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">z</code>
        are all globals inside the function <code class="epub__literal">all_global</code>. <code class="epub__literal">y</code> and <code class="epub__literal">z</code>
        are global because they aren’t assigned in the function; <code class="epub__literal">x</code> is global because it was listed in a
        <code class="epub__literal">global</code> statement to map it to the
        module’s scope explicitly. Without the <code class="epub__literal">global</code> here, <code class="epub__literal">x</code> would be considered local by virtue of the
        assignment.</p>
<p>Notice that <code class="epub__literal">y</code> and <code class="epub__literal">z</code> are not declared global; Python’s LEGB
        lookup rule finds them in the module automatically. Also, notice that
        <code class="epub__literal">x</code> might not exist in the enclosing
        module before the function runs; in this case, the assignment in the
        function creates <code class="epub__literal">x</code> in the
        module.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Minimize Global Variables"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="minimize_global_variables"></a>Minimize Global Variables</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>By <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e42259"></a>default, names assigned in functions are locals, so if
          you want to change names outside functions you have to write extra
          code (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">global</code> statements).
          This is by design—as is common in Python, you have to say more to do
          the potentially “wrong” thing. Although there are times when globals
          are useful, variables assigned in a <code class="epub__literal">def</code> are local by default because that is
          normally the best policy. Changing globals can lead to well-known
          software engineering problems: because the variables’ values are
          dependent on the order of
          calls to arbitrarily distant functions, programs can become
          difficult to debug.</p>
<p>Consider this module file, for example:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e42276"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">X = 99
def func1():
    global X
    X = 88

def func2():
    global X
    X = 77</pre>
<p>Now, imagine that it is your job to modify or reuse this
          module file. What will the value of <code class="epub__literal">X</code> be here? Really, that question has no
          meaning unless it’s qualified with a point of reference in time—the
          value of <code class="epub__literal">X</code> is timing-dependent,
          as it depends on which function was called last (something we can’t
          tell from this file alone).</p>
<p>The net effect is that to understand this code, you have to
          trace the flow of control through the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>entire
          program</em></span>. And, if you need to reuse or modify the code,
          you have to keep the entire program in your head all at once. In
          this case, you can’t really use one of these functions without
          bringing along the other. They are dependent on (that is,
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>coupled</em></span> with) the global variable. This is the
          problem with globals—they generally make code more difficult to
          understand and use than code consisting of self-contained functions
          that rely on locals.</p>
<p>On the other hand, short of using object-oriented programming
          and classes, global variables are probably the most straightforward
          way to retain shared state information (information that a function
          needs to remember for use the next time it is called) in
          Python—local variables disappear when the function returns, but
          globals do not. Other techniques, such as default mutable arguments
          and enclosing function scopes, can achieve this, too, but they are
          more complex than pushing values out to the global scope for
          retention.</p>
<p>Some programs designate a single module to collect globals; as
          long as this is expected, it is not as harmful. In addition,
          programs that use multithreading to do parallel processing in Python
          commonly depend on global variables—they become shared memory
          between functions running in parallel threads, and so act as a
          communication device.<sup>[38]</sup></p>
<p>For now, though, especially if you are relatively new to
          programming, avoid the temptation to use globals whenever you
          can—try to communicate with passed-in arguments and return values
          instead. Six months from now, both you and your coworkers will be
          happy you did.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Minimize Cross-File Changes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="minimize_cross-file_changes"></a>Minimize Cross-File Changes</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Here’s <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e42333"></a>another scope-related issue: although we
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>can</em></span> change variables in another file directly,
          we usually shouldn’t. Module files were introduced in Chapter 3 and are covered in more depth in
          the next part of this book. <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e42344"></a>To illustrate their relationship to scopes, consider
          these two module files:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e42350"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># first.py</span></em>
X = 99                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># This code doesn't know about second.py</span></em>

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># second.py</span></em>
import first
print(first.X)            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Okay: references a name in another file</span></em>
first.X = 88              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># But changing it can be too subtle and implicit</span></em></pre>
<p>The first defines a variable <code class="epub__literal">X</code>, which the second prints and then
          changes by assignment. Notice that we must import the first module
          into the second file to get to its variable at all—as we’ve learned,
          each module is a self-contained namespace (package of variables),
          and we must import one module to see inside it from another. That’s
          the main point about modules: by segregating variables on a per-file
          basis, they avoid name collisions across files.</p>
<p>Really, though, in terms of this chapter’s topic, the global
          scope of a module file <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>becomes</em></span> the attribute
          namespace of the module object once it is imported—importers
          automatically have access to all of the file’s global variables,
          because a file’s global scope morphs into an object’s attribute
          namespace when it is imported.</p>
<p>After importing the first module, the second module prints its
          variable and then assigns it a new value. Referencing the module’s
          variable to print it is fine—this is how modules are linked together
          into a larger system normally. The problem with the assignment,
          however, is that it is far too implicit: whoever’s charged with
          maintaining or reusing the first module probably has no clue that
          some arbitrarily far-removed module on the import chain can change
          <code class="epub__literal">X</code> out from under him at runtime.
          In fact, the second module may be in a completely different
          directory, and so difficult to notice at all.</p>
<p>Although such cross-file variable changes are always possible
          in Python, they are usually much more subtle than you will want.
          Again, this sets up too strong a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>coupling</em></span>
          between the two files—because they are both dependent on the value
          of the variable <code class="epub__literal">X</code>, it’s difficult
          to understand or reuse one file without the other. Such implicit
          cross-file dependencies can lead to inflexible code at best, and
          outright bugs at worst.</p>
<p>Here again, the best prescription is generally to not do
          this—the best way to communicate across file boundaries is to call
          functions, passing in arguments and getting back return values. In
          this specific case, we would probably be better off coding an
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e42391"></a>accessor function</em></span> to manage the
          change:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e42396"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># first.py</span></em>
X = 99

def setX(new):
    global X
    X = new

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># second.py</span></em>
import first
first.setX(88)</pre>
<p>This requires more code and may seem like a trivial change,
          but it makes a huge difference in terms of readability and
          maintainability—when a person reading the first module by itself
          sees a function, that person will know that it is a point of
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>interface</em></span> and will expect the change to the
          <code class="epub__literal">X</code>. In other words, it removes the
          element of surprise that is rarely a good thing in software
          projects. Although we cannot prevent cross-file changes from
          happening, common sense dictates that they should be minimized
          unless widely accepted across the program.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Other Ways to Access Globals"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="other_ways_to_access_globals"></a>Other Ways to Access Globals</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Interestingly, <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e42416"></a>because global-scope variables morph into the
          attributes of a loaded module object, we can emulate the <code class="epub__literal">global</code> statement by importing the
          enclosing module and assigning to its attributes, as in the
          following example module file. Code in this file imports the
          enclosing module, first by name, and then by indexing the <code class="epub__literal">sys.modules</code> loaded modules table (more on
          this table in Chapter 21):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e42430"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># thismod.py</span></em>

var = 99                              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Global variable == module attribute</span></em>

def local():
    var = 0                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Change local var</span></em>

def glob1():
    global var                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Declare global (normal)</span></em>
    var += 1                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Change global var</span></em>

def glob2():
    var = 0                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Change local var</span></em>
    import thismod                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Import myself</span></em>
    thismod.var += 1                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Change global var</span></em>

def glob3():
    var = 0                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Change local var</span></em>
    import sys                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Import system table</span></em>
    glob = sys.modules['thismod']     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Get module object (or use __name__)</span></em>
    glob.var += 1                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Change global var</span></em>

def test():
    print(var)
    local(); glob1(); glob2(); glob3()
    print(var)</pre>
<p>When run, this adds 3 to the global variable (only the first
          function does not impact it):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e42470"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import thismod</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>thismod.test()</code></strong>
99
102
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>thismod.var</code></strong>
102</pre>
<p>This works, and it illustrates the equivalence of globals to
          module attributes, but it’s much more work than using the <code class="epub__literal">global</code> statement to make your intentions
          explicit.</p>
<p>As we’ve seen, <code class="epub__literal">global</code>
          allows us to change names in a module outside a function. It has a
          cousin named <code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code> that can be
          used to change names in enclosing functions, too, but to understand
          how that can be useful, we first need to explore enclosing functions
          in <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e42494"></a>general.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Scopes and Nested Functions"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
