<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Scopes and Nested Functions</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="scopes_and_nested_functions"></a>Scopes and Nested Functions</h1>
<p>So far, <a id="ch17scopesnestedfunctions"></a>I’ve omitted one part of Python’s scope rules on
        purpose, because it’s relatively rare to encounter it in practice.
        However, it’s time to take a deeper look at the letter
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>E</em></span> in the LEGB lookup rule. The
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>E</em></span> layer is fairly new (it was added in Python
        2.2); it takes the form of the local scopes of any and all enclosing
        function <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s. Enclosing scopes are
        sometimes also called <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>statically nested scopes</em></span>.
        Really, the nesting is a lexical one—<a id="ch17nestedscopes"></a>nested scopes correspond to physically and syntactically
        nested code structures in your program’s source code.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Nested Scope Details"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="nested_scope_details"></a>Nested Scope Details</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>With the addition of nested function scopes, variable lookup
          rules become slightly more complex. Within a function:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>A reference (<code class="epub__literal">X</code>) looks
              for the name <code class="epub__literal">X</code> first in the
              current local scope (function); then in the local scopes of any
              lexically enclosing functions in your source code, from inner to
              outer; then in the current global scope (the module file); and
              finally in the built-in scope (the module <code class="epub__literal">builtins</code>). <code class="epub__literal">global</code> declarations make the search
              begin in the global (module file) scope instead.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>An assignment (<code class="epub__literal">X =
              value</code>) creates or changes the name <code class="epub__literal">X</code> in the current local scope, by
              default. If <code class="epub__literal">X</code> is declared
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>global</em></span> within the function, the assignment
              creates or changes the name <code class="epub__literal">X</code>
              in the enclosing module’s scope instead. If, on the other hand,
              <code class="epub__literal">X</code> is declared
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>nonlocal</em></span> within the function, the
              assignment changes the name <code class="epub__literal">X</code>
              in the closest enclosing function’s local scope.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Notice that the <code class="epub__literal">global</code>
          declaration still maps variables to the enclosing module. When
          nested functions are present, variables in enclosing functions may
          be referenced, but they require <code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code> declarations to be
          changed.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Nested Scope Examples"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="nested_scope_examples"></a>Nested Scope Examples</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e42587"></a>clarify the prior section’s points, let’s illustrate
          with some real code. Here is what an enclosing function scope looks
          like:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e42593"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">X = 99                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Global scope name: not used</span></em>

def f1():
    X = 88               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Enclosing def local</span></em>
    def f2():
        print(X)         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Reference made in nested def</span></em>
    f2()

f1()                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Prints 88: enclosing def local</span></em></pre>
<p>First off, this is legal Python code: the <code class="epub__literal">def</code> is simply an executable statement,
          which can appear anywhere any other statement can—including nested
          in another <code class="epub__literal">def</code>. Here, the nested
          <code class="epub__literal">def</code> runs while a call to the
          function <code class="epub__literal">f1</code> is running; it
          generates a function and assigns it to the name <code class="epub__literal">f2</code>, a local variable within <code class="epub__literal">f1</code>’s local scope. In a sense, <code class="epub__literal">f2</code> is a temporary function that lives only
          during the execution of (and is visible only to code in) the
          enclosing <code class="epub__literal">f1</code>.</p>
<p>But notice what happens inside <code class="epub__literal">f2</code>: when it prints the variable <code class="epub__literal">X</code>, it refers to the <code class="epub__literal">X</code> that lives in the enclosing <code class="epub__literal">f1</code> function’s local scope. Because
          functions can access names in all physically enclosing <code class="epub__literal">def</code> statements, the <code class="epub__literal">X</code> in <code class="epub__literal">f2</code>
          is automatically mapped to the <code class="epub__literal">X</code>
          in <code class="epub__literal">f1</code>, by the LEGB lookup
          rule.</p>
<p>This enclosing scope lookup works even if the enclosing
          function has already returned. For example, the following code
          defines a function that makes and returns another function:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e42665"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def f1():
    X = 88
    def f2():
        print(X)         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Remembers X in enclosing def scope</span></em>
    return f2            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Return f2 but don't call it</span></em>

action = f1()            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Make, return function</span></em>
action()                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Call it now: prints 88</span></em></pre>
<p>In this code, the call to <code class="epub__literal">action</code> is really running the function we
          named <code class="epub__literal">f2</code> when <code class="epub__literal">f1</code> ran. <code class="epub__literal">f2</code> remembers the enclosing scope’s
          <code class="epub__literal">X</code> in <code class="epub__literal">f1</code>, even though <code class="epub__literal">f1</code> is no longer active.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Factory functions"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="factory_functions"></a>Factory functions</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Depending <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e42707"></a>on <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e42713"></a>whom you ask, this sort of behavior is also
            sometimes called a <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e42717"></a><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>closure</em></span> or
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>factory</em></span> function. These terms refer to a
            function object that remembers values in enclosing scopes
            regardless of whether those scopes are still present in memory.
            Although classes (described in Part VI
            of this book) are usually best at remembering state because they
            make it explicit with attribute assignments, such functions
            provide an alternative.</p>
<p>For instance, factory functions are sometimes used by
            programs that need to generate event handlers on the fly in
            response to conditions at runtime (e.g., user inputs that cannot
            be anticipated). Look at the following function, for
            example:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e42730"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def maker(N):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def action(X):</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Make and return action</span></em>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return X ** N</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># action retains N from enclosing scope</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return action</code></strong>
...</pre>
<p>This defines an outer function that simply generates and
            returns a nested function, without calling it. If we call the
            outer function:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e42753"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f = maker(2)</code></strong>                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Pass 2 to N</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f</code></strong>
&lt;function action at 0x014720B0&gt;</pre>
<p>what we get back is a reference to the generated nested
            function—the one created by running the nested <code class="epub__literal">def</code>. If we now call what we got back
            from the outer function:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e42769"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f(3)</code></strong>                                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Pass 3 to X, N remembers 2: 3 ** 2</span></em>
9
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f(4)</code></strong>                                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 4 ** 2</span></em>
16</pre>
<p>it invokes the nested function—the one called <code class="epub__literal">action</code> within <code class="epub__literal">maker</code>. The most unusual part of this is
            that the nested function remembers integer <code class="epub__literal">2</code>, the value of the variable <code class="epub__literal">N</code> in <code class="epub__literal">maker</code>, even though <code class="epub__literal">maker</code> has returned and exited by the
            time we call <code class="epub__literal">action</code>. In effect,
            <code class="epub__literal">N</code> from the enclosing local
            scope is retained as state information attached to <code class="epub__literal">action</code>, and we get back its argument
            squared.</p>
<p>If we now call the outer function again, we get back a new
            nested function with different state information attached. That
            is, we get the argument cubed instead of squared, but the original
            still squares as before:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e42815"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>g = maker(3)</code></strong>                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># g remembers 3, f remembers 2</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>g(3)</code></strong>                                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 3 ** 3</span></em>
27
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f(3)</code></strong>                                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 3 ** 2</span></em>
9</pre>
<p>This works because each call to a factory function like this
            gets its own set of state information. In our case, the function
            we assign to name <code class="epub__literal">g</code> remembers
            <code class="epub__literal">3</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">f</code> remembers <code class="epub__literal">2</code>, because each has its own state
            information retained by the variable <code class="epub__literal">N</code> in <code class="epub__literal">maker</code>.</p>
<p>This is an advanced technique that you’re unlikely to see
            very often in most code, except among programmers with backgrounds
            in functional programming languages. On the other hand, enclosing
            scopes are often employed by <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code> function-creation expressions
            (discussed later in this chapter)—because they are expressions,
            they are almost always nested within a <code class="epub__literal">def</code>. Moreover, function nesting is
            commonly used for <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>decorators</em></span> (explored in
            Chapter 38)—in some cases, it’s the most
            reasonable coding pattern.</p>
<p>As a general rule, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>classes</em></span> are better
            at “memory” like this because they make the state retention
            explicit in attributes. Short of using classes, though, globals,
            enclosing scope references like these, and default arguments are
            the main ways that Python functions can retain state information.
            To see how they compete, Chapter 18<a name="section gives"></a> provides
            complete coverage of defaults, but the next section gives enough
            of an introduction to get us started.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Retaining enclosing scopes’ state with defaults"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="retaining_enclosing_scopes_apostrophy_s"></a>Retaining enclosing scopes’ state with defaults</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In earlier versions of Python, the sort of code in the prior
            section failed because nested <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s did not do anything about scopes—a
            reference to a variable within <code class="epub__literal">f2</code> would search only the local (<code class="epub__literal">f2</code>), then global (the code outside
            <code class="epub__literal">f1</code>), and then built-in scopes.
            Because it skipped the scopes of enclosing functions, an error
            would result. To work around this, programmers typically used
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>default argument values</em></span> to pass in and
            remember the objects in an enclosing scope:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e42898"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def f1():
    x = 88
    def f2(x=x):                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Remember enclosing scope X with defaults</span></em>
        print(x)
    f2()

f1()                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Prints 88</span></em></pre>
<p>This code works in all Python releases, and you’ll still see
            this pattern in some existing Python code. In short, the syntax
            <code class="epub__literal">arg = val</code> in a <code class="epub__literal">def</code> header means that the argument
            <code class="epub__literal">arg</code> will default to the value
            <code class="epub__literal">val</code> if no real value is passed
            to <code class="epub__literal">arg</code> in a call.</p>
<p>In the modified <code class="epub__literal">f2</code> here,
            the <code class="epub__literal">x=x</code> means that the argument
            <code class="epub__literal">x</code> will default to the value of
            <code class="epub__literal">x</code> in the enclosing
            scope—because the second <code class="epub__literal">x</code> is
            evaluated before Python steps into the nested <code class="epub__literal">def</code>, it still refers to the <code class="epub__literal">x</code> in <code class="epub__literal">f1</code>. In effect, the default remembers
            what <code class="epub__literal">x</code> was in <code class="epub__literal">f1</code> (i.e., the object <code class="epub__literal">88</code>).</p>
<p>That’s fairly complex, and it depends entirely on the timing
            of default value evaluations. In fact, the nested scope lookup
            rule was added to Python to make defaults unnecessary for this
            role—today, Python automatically remembers any values required in
            the enclosing scope for use in nested <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s.</p>
<p>Of course, the best prescription for most code is simply to
            avoid nesting <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s within
            <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s, as it will make your
            programs much simpler. The following is an equivalent of the prior
            example that banishes the notion of nesting. Notice the forward
            reference in this code—it’s OK to call a function defined after
            the function that calls it, as long as the second <code class="epub__literal">def</code> runs before the first function is
            actually called. Code inside a <code class="epub__literal">def</code> is never evaluated until the
            function is actually called:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e42977"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def f1():</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = 88</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Pass x along instead of nesting</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f2(x)</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Forward reference okay</span></em>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def f2(x):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(x)</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f1()</code></strong>
88</pre>
<p>If you avoid nesting this way, you can almost forget about
            the nested scopes concept in Python, unless you need to code in
            the factory function style discussed earlier—at least, for
            <code class="epub__literal">def</code> statements. <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>s, which almost naturally appear
            nested in <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s, often rely on
            nested scopes, as the next section explains.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Nested scopes and lambdas"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="nested_scopes_and_lambdas"></a>Nested scopes and lambdas</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>While <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e43020"></a>they’re <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e43026"></a>rarely used in practice for <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s themselves, you are more likely to
            care about nested function scopes when you start coding <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code> expressions. We won’t cover
            <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code> in depth until Chapter 19, but in short, it’s an
            expression that generates a new function to be called later, much
            like a <code class="epub__literal">def</code> statement. Because
            it’s an expression, though, it can be used in places that <code class="epub__literal">def</code> cannot, such as within list and
            dictionary literals.</p>
<p>Like a <code class="epub__literal">def</code>, a <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code> expression introduces a new local
            scope for the function it creates. Thanks to the enclosing scopes
            lookup layer, <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>s can see
            all the variables that live in the functions in which they are
            coded. Thus, the following code works, but only because the nested
            scope rules are applied:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e43059"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def func():
    x = 4
    action = (lambda n: x ** n)          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># x remembered from enclosing def</span></em>
    return action

x = func()
print(x(2))                              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Prints 16, 4 ** 2</span></em></pre>
<p>Prior to the introduction of nested function scopes,
            programmers used defaults to pass values from an enclosing scope
            into <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>s, just as for
            <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s. For instance, the
            following works on all Python releases:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e43074"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def func():
    x = 4
    action = (lambda n, x=x: x ** n)     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Pass x in manually</span></em>
    return action</pre>
<p>Because <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>s are
            expressions, they naturally (and even normally) nest inside
            enclosing <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s. Hence, they are
            perhaps the biggest beneficiaries of the addition of enclosing
            function scopes in the lookup rules; in most cases, it is no
            longer necessary to pass values into <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>s with defaults.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Scopes versus defaults with loop variables"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="scopes_versus_defaults_with_loop_variab"></a>Scopes versus defaults with loop variables</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>There <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e43096"></a>is one notable exception to the rule I just gave: if
            a <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code> or <code class="epub__literal">def</code> defined within a function is nested
            inside a loop, and the nested function references an enclosing
            scope variable that is changed by that loop, all functions
            generated within the loop will have the same value—the value the
            referenced variable had in the last loop iteration.</p>
<p>For instance, the following attempts to build up a list of
            functions that each remember the current variable <code class="epub__literal">i</code> from the enclosing scope:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e43113"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def makeActions():</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>acts = []</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for i in range(5):</code></strong>                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Tries to remember each i</span></em>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>acts.append(lambda x: i ** x)</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># All remember same last i!</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return acts</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>acts = makeActions()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>acts[0]</code></strong>
&lt;function &lt;lambda&gt; at 0x012B16B0&gt;</pre>
<p>This doesn’t quite work, though—because the enclosing scope
            variable is looked up when the nested functions are later
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>called</em></span>, they all effectively remember the
            same value (the value the loop variable had on the
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>last</em></span> loop iteration). That is, we get back 4
            to the power of 2 for each function in the list, because <code class="epub__literal">i</code> is the same in all of them:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e43154"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>acts[0](2)</code></strong>                                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># All are 4 ** 2, value of last i</span></em>
16
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>acts[2](2)</code></strong>                                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># This should be 2 ** 2</span></em>
16
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>acts[4](2)</code></strong>                                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># This should be 4 ** 2</span></em>
16</pre>
<p>This is the one case where we still have to explicitly
            retain enclosing scope values with default arguments, rather than
            enclosing scope references. That is, to make this sort of code
            work, we must pass in the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>current</em></span> value of
            the enclosing scope’s variable with a default. Because defaults
            are evaluated when the nested function is
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>created</em></span> (not when it’s later
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>called</em></span>), each remembers its own value for
            <code class="epub__literal">i</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e43189"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def makeActions():</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>acts = []</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for i in range(5):</code></strong>                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Use defaults instead</span></em>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>acts.append(lambda x, i=i: i ** x)</code></strong>   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Remember current i</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return acts</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>acts = makeActions()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>acts[0](2)</code></strong>                                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 0 ** 2</span></em>
0
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>acts[2](2)</code></strong>                                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 2 ** 2</span></em>
4
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>acts[4](2)</code></strong>                                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 4 ** 2</span></em>
16</pre>
<p>This is a fairly obscure case, but it can come up in
            practice, especially in code that generates callback handler
            functions for a number of widgets in a GUI (e.g., button-press
            handlers). We’ll talk more about defaults in Chapter 18 and <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>s in Chapter 19, so you may want to return
            and review this section later.<sup>[39]</sup></p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Arbitrary scope nesting"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="arbitrary_scope_nesting"></a>Arbitrary scope nesting</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Before <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e43259"></a>ending this discussion, I should note that scopes
            may nest arbitrarily, but only enclosing function <code class="epub__literal">def</code> statements (not classes, described
            in Part VI) are searched:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e43270"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def f1():</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = 99</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def f2():</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def f3():</code></strong>
...             <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(x)</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Found in f1's local scope!</span></em>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f3()</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f2()</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f1()</code></strong>
99</pre>
<p>Python will search the local scopes of
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>all</em></span> enclosing <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s, from inner to outer, after the
            referencing function’s local scope and before the module’s global
            scope or built-ins. However, this sort of code is even less likely
            to pop up in practice. In Python, we say <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>flat is better
            than nested</em></span>—except in very limited contexts, your life
            (and the lives of your coworkers) will generally be better if you
            minimize nested function <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e43311"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e43313"></a>definitions.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="The nonlocal Statement"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
