<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>The nonlocal Statement</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="the_nonlocal_statement"></a>The nonlocal Statement</h1>
<p>In the <a id="ch17nonlocalstatement"></a>prior section we explored the way that nested functions
        can <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>reference</em></span> variables in an enclosing
        function’s scope, even if that function has already returned. It turns
        out that, as of Python 3.0, we can also <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>change</em></span>
        such enclosing scope variables, as long as we declare them in <code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code> statements. With this statement,
        nested <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s can have both read and
        write access to names in enclosing functions.</p>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code> statement is a
        close cousin to <code class="epub__literal">global</code>, covered
        earlier. Like <code class="epub__literal">global</code>, <code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code> declares that a name will
        be changed in an enclosing scope. Unlike <code class="epub__literal">global</code>, though, <code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code> applies to a name in an enclosing
        function’s scope, not the global module scope outside all <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s. Also unlike <code class="epub__literal">global</code>, <code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code> names must already exist in the
        enclosing function’s scope when declared—they can exist only in
        enclosing functions and cannot be created by a first assignment in a
        nested <code class="epub__literal">def</code>.</p>
<p>In other words, <code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code> both
        allows assignment to names in enclosing function scopes and limits
        scope lookups for such names to enclosing <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s. The net effect is a more direct and
        reliable implementation of changeable state information, for programs
        that do not desire or need classes with attributes.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="nonlocal Basics"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="nonlocal_basics"></a>nonlocal Basics</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Python 3.0 introduces a new <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e43384"></a><code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code> statement,
          which has meaning only inside a function:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e43392"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def func():
    nonlocal name1, name2, ...</pre>
<p>This statement allows a nested function to change one or more
          names defined in a syntactically enclosing function’s scope. In
          Python 2.X (including 2.6), when one function <code class="epub__literal">def</code> is nested in another, the nested
          function can reference any of the names defined by assignment in the
          enclosing <code class="epub__literal">def</code>’s scope, but it
          cannot change them. In 3.0, declaring the enclosing scopes’ names in
          a <code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code> statement enables
          nested functions to assign and thus change such names as
          well.</p>
<p>This provides a way for enclosing functions to provide
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>writeable</em></span> state information, remembered when
          the nested function is later called. Allowing the state to change
          makes it more useful to the nested function (imagine a counter in
          the enclosing scope, for instance). In 2.X, programmers usually
          achieve similar goals by using classes or other schemes. Because
          nested functions have become a more common coding pattern for state
          retention, though, <code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code> makes
          it more generally applicable.</p>
<p>Besides allowing names in enclosing <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s to be changed, the <code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code> statement also forces the issue
          for references—just like the <code class="epub__literal">global</code> statement, <code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code> causes searches for the names
          listed in the statement to begin in the enclosing <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s’ scopes, not in the local scope of
          the declaring function. That is, <code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code> also means “skip my local scope
          entirely.”</p>
<p>In fact, the names listed in a <code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code> <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>must</em></span> have
          been previously defined in an enclosing <code class="epub__literal">def</code> when the <code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code> is reached, or an error is
          raised. The net effect is much like <code class="epub__literal">global</code>: <code class="epub__literal">global</code> means the names reside in the
          enclosing module, and <code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code>
          means they reside in an enclosing <code class="epub__literal">def</code>. <code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code> is even more strict, though—scope
          search is restricted to <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>only</em></span> enclosing <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s. That is, nonlocal names can appear
          only in enclosing <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s, not in
          the module’s global scope or built-in scopes outside the <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s.</p>
<p>The addition of <code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code>
          does not alter name reference scope rules in general; they still
          work as before, per the “LEGB” rule described earlier. The <code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code> statement mostly serves to allow
          names in enclosing scopes to be changed rather than just referenced.
          However, <code class="epub__literal">global</code> and <code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code> statements do both restrict the
          lookup rules somewhat, when coded in a function:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">global</code> makes scope
              lookup begin in the enclosing module’s scope and allows names
              there to be assigned. Scope lookup continues on to the built-in
              scope if the name does not exist in the module, but assignments
              to global names always create or change them in the module’s
              scope.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code> restricts
              scope lookup to just enclosing <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s, requires that the names already
              exist there, and allows them to be assigned. Scope lookup does
              not continue on to the global or built-in scopes.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>In Python 2.6, references to enclosing <code class="epub__literal">def</code> scope names are allowed, but not
          assignment. However, you can still use classes with explicit
          attributes to achieve the same changeable state information effect
          as nonlocals (and you may be better off doing so in some contexts);
          globals and function attributes can sometimes accomplish similar
          goals as well. More on this in a moment; first, let’s turn to some
          working code to make this more concrete.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="nonlocal in Action"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="nonlocal_in_action"></a>nonlocal in Action</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>On to some <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e43515"></a>examples, all run in 3.0. References to enclosing
          <code class="epub__literal">def</code> scopes work as they do in
          2.6. In the following, <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e43525"></a>tester</code> builds and returns the function
          <code class="epub__literal">nested</code>, to be called later, and
          the <code class="epub__literal">state</code> reference in <code class="epub__literal">nested</code> maps the local scope of <code class="epub__literal">tester</code> using the normal scope lookup
          rules:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e43543"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\\misc&gt;<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python30\python</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def tester(start):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>state = start</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Referencing nonlocals works normally</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def nested(label):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(label, state)</code></strong>   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Remembers state in enclosing scope</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return nested</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F = tester(0)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F('spam')</code></strong>
spam 0
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F('ham')</code></strong>
ham 0</pre>
<p>Changing a name in an enclosing <code class="epub__literal">def</code>’s scope is not allowed by default,
          though; this is the normal case in 2.6 as well:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e43584"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def tester(start):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>state = start</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def nested(label):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(label, state)</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>state += 1</code></strong>            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Cannot change by default (or in 2.6)</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return nested</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F = tester(0)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F('spam')</code></strong>
UnboundLocalError: local variable 'state' referenced before assignment</pre>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Using nonlocal for changes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="using_nonlocal_for_changes"></a>Using nonlocal for changes</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Now, under 3.0, if we declare <code class="epub__literal">state</code> in the <code class="epub__literal">tester</code> scope as <code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code> within <code class="epub__literal">nested</code>, we get to change it inside the
            nested function, too. This works even though <code class="epub__literal">tester</code> has returned and exited by the
            time we call the returned <code class="epub__literal">nested</code> function through the name <code class="epub__literal">F</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e43644"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def tester(start):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>state = start</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Each call gets its own state</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def nested(label):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>nonlocal state</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Remembers state in enclosing scope</span></em>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(label, state)</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>state += 1</code></strong>            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Allowed to change it if nonlocal</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return nested</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F = tester(0)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F('spam')</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Increments state on each call</span></em>
spam 0
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F('ham')</code></strong>
ham 1
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F('eggs')</code></strong>
eggs 2</pre>
<p>As usual with enclosing scope references, we can call the
            <code class="epub__literal">tester</code> factory function
            multiple times to get multiple copies of its state in memory. The
            <code class="epub__literal">state</code> object in the enclosing
            scope is essentially attached to the <code class="epub__literal">nested</code> function object returned; each
            call makes a new, distinct <code class="epub__literal">state</code> object, such that updating one
            function’s state won’t impact the other. The following continues
            the prior listing’s interaction:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e43707"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>G = tester(42)</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Make a new tester that starts at 42</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>G('spam')</code></strong>
spam 42

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>G('eggs')</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># My state information updated to 43</span></em>
eggs 43

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F('bacon')</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># But F's is where it left off: at 3</span></em>
bacon 3                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Each call has different state information</span></em></pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Boundary cases"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="boundary_cases-id1"></a>Boundary cases</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>There <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e43738"></a>are a few things to watch out for. First, unlike the
            <code class="epub__literal">global</code> statement, <code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code> names really
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>must</em></span> have previously been assigned in an
            enclosing <code class="epub__literal">def</code>’s scope when a
            <code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code> is evaluated, or else
            you’ll get an error—you cannot create them dynamically by
            assigning them anew in the enclosing scope:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e43762"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def tester(start):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def nested(label):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>nonlocal state</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Nonlocals must already exist in enclosing def!</span></em>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>state = 0</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(label, state)</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return nested</code></strong>
...
SyntaxError: no binding for nonlocal 'state' found

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def tester(start):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def nested(label):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>global state</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Globals don't have to exist yet when declared</span></em>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>state = 0</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># This creates the name in the module now</span></em>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(label, state)</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return nested</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F = tester(0)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F('abc')</code></strong>
abc 0
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>state</code></strong>
0</pre>
<p>Second, <code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code>
            restricts the scope lookup to just enclosing <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s; nonlocals are not looked up in the
            enclosing module’s global scope or the built-in scope outside all
            <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s, even if they are already
            there:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e43832"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>spam = 99</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def tester():</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def nested():</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>nonlocal spam</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Must be in a def, not the module!</span></em>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('Current=', spam)</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>spam += 1</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return nested</code></strong>
...
SyntaxError: no binding for nonlocal 'spam' found</pre>
<p>These restrictions make sense once you realize that Python
            would not otherwise generally know which enclosing scope to create
            a brand new name in. In the prior listing, should <code class="epub__literal">spam</code> be assigned in <code class="epub__literal">tester</code>, or the module outside? Because
            this is ambiguous, Python must resolve nonlocals at function
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>creation</em></span> time, not function
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>call</em></span> time.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Why nonlocal?"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="why_nonlocal_question"></a>Why nonlocal?</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Given the extra <a id="ch17nonlocalstatementjustification"></a>complexity of nested functions, you might wonder what
          the fuss is about. Although it’s difficult to see in our small
          examples, state information becomes crucial in many programs. There
          are a variety of ways to “remember” information across function and
          method calls in Python. While there are tradeoffs for all, <code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code> does improve this story
          for enclosing scope references—the <code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code> statement allows multiple copies
          of changeable state to be retained in memory and addresses simple
          state-retention needs where classes may not be warranted<a id="ch17-state-retention"></a>.</p>
<p>As we saw in the prior section, the following code allows
          state to be retained and modified in an enclosing scope. Each call
          to <code class="epub__literal">tester</code> creates a little
          self-contained <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>package of changeable
          information</em></span>, whose names do not clash with any other part
          of the program:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e43907"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def tester(start):
    state = start                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Each call gets its own state</span></em>
    def nested(label):
        nonlocal state                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Remembers state in enclosing scope</span></em>
        print(label, state)
        state += 1                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Allowed to change it if nonlocal</span></em>
    return nested

F = tester(0)
F('spam')</pre>
<p>Unfortunately, this code only works in Python 3.0. If you are
          using Python 2.6, other options are available, depending on your
          goals. The next three sections present some alternatives.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Shared state with globals"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="shared_state_with_globals"></a>Shared state with globals</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>One usual <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e43925"></a>prescription <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e43931"></a>for achieving the <code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code> effect in 2.6 and earlier is to
            simply move the state out to the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>global scope</em></span>
            (the enclosing module):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e43943"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def tester(start):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>global state</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Move it out to the module to change it</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>state = start</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># global allows changes in module scope</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def nested(label):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>global state</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(label, state)</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>state += 1</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return nested</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F = tester(0)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F('spam')</code></strong>                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Each call increments shared global state</span></em>
spam 0
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F('eggs')</code></strong>
eggs 1</pre>
<p>This works in this case, but it requires <code class="epub__literal">global</code> declarations in both functions
            and is prone to name collisions in the global scope (what if
            “state” is already being used?). A worse, and more subtle, problem
            is that it only allows for a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>single shared
            copy</em></span> of the state information in the module scope—if we
            call <code class="epub__literal">tester</code> again, we’ll wind
            up resetting the module’s <code class="epub__literal">state</code>
            variable, such that prior calls will see their <code class="epub__literal">state</code> overwritten:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e44006"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>G = tester(42)</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Resets state's single copy in global scope</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>G('toast')</code></strong>
toast 42

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>G('bacon')</code></strong>
bacon 43

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F('ham')</code></strong>                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Oops -- my counter has been overwritten!</span></em>
ham 44</pre>
<p>As shown earlier, when using <code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code> instead of <code class="epub__literal">global</code>, each call to <code class="epub__literal">tester</code> remembers its own unique copy of
            the <code class="epub__literal">state</code> object.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="State with classes (preview)"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="state_with_classes_open_parenthesis_pre"></a>State with classes (preview)</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e44046"></a>other prescription for changeable state information
            in 2.6 and earlier is to use <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>classes with
            attributes</em></span> to make state information access more
            explicit than the implicit magic of scope lookup rules. As an
            added benefit, each instance of a class gets a fresh copy of the
            state information, as a natural byproduct of Python’s object
            model.</p>
<p>We haven’t explored classes in detail yet, but as a brief
            preview, here is a reformulation of the <code class="epub__literal">tester</code>/<code class="epub__literal">nested</code> functions used earlier as a
            class—state is recorded in objects explicitly as they are created.
            To make sense of this code, you need to know that a <code class="epub__literal">def</code> within a <code class="epub__literal">class</code> like this works exactly like a
            <code class="epub__literal">def</code> outside of a <code class="epub__literal">class</code>, except that the function’s
            <code class="epub__literal">self</code> argument automatically
            receives the implied subject of the call (an instance object
            created by calling the class itself):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e44077"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class tester:</code></strong>                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Class-based alternative (see Part VI)</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __init__(self, start):</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On object construction,</span></em>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>self.state = start</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># save state explicitly in new object</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def nested(self, label):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(label, self.state)</code></strong>       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Reference state explicitly</span></em>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>self.state += 1</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Changes are always allowed</span></em>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F = tester(0)</code></strong>                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Create instance, invoke __init__</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F.nested('spam')</code></strong>                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># F is passed to self</span></em>
spam 0
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F.nested('ham')</code></strong>
ham 1

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>G = tester(42)</code></strong>                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Each instance gets new copy of state</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>G.nested('toast')</code></strong>                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Changing one does not impact others</span></em>
toast 42
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>G.nested('bacon')</code></strong>
bacon 43

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F.nested('eggs')</code></strong>                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># F's state is where it left off</span></em>
eggs 2
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F.state</code></strong>                                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># State may be accessed outside class</span></em>
3</pre>
<p>With just slightly more magic, which we’ll delve into later
            in this book, we could also make our class look like a callable
            function using operator overloading. <code class="epub__literal">__call__</code> intercepts direct calls on an
            instance, so we don’t need to call a named method:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e44165"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class tester:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __init__(self, start):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>self.state = start</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __call__(self, label):</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Intercept direct instance calls</span></em>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(label, self.state)</code></strong>       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># So .nested() not required</span></em>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>self.state += 1</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>H = tester(99)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>H('juice')</code></strong>                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Invokes __call__</span></em>
juice 99
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>H('pancakes')</code></strong>
pancakes 100</pre>
<p>Don’t sweat the details in this code too much at this point
            in the book; we’ll explore classes in depth in Part VI and will look at specific operator
            overloading tools like <code class="epub__literal">__call__</code>
            in Chapter 29, so you may wish to
            file this code away for future reference. The point here is that
            classes can make state information more obvious, by leveraging
            explicit attribute assignment instead of scope lookups.</p>
<p>While using classes for state information is generally a
            good rule of thumb to follow, they might be overkill in cases like
            this, where state is a single counter. Such trivial state cases
            are more common than you might think; in such contexts, nested
            <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s are sometimes more
            lightweight than coding classes, especially if you’re not familiar
            with OOP yet. Moreover, there are some scenarios in which nested
            <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s may actually work better
            than classes (see the description of <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>method
            decorators</em></span> in Chapter 38 for an
            example that is far beyond this chapter’s scope).</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="State with function attributes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="state_with_function_attributes"></a>State with function attributes</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As a final state-retention option, we can also sometimes
            achieve the same effect as nonlocals with <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e44233"></a>function attributes</em></span>—user-defined names
            attached to functions directly. Here’s a final version of our
            example based on this technique—it replaces a nonlocal with an
            attribute attached to the nested function. Although this scheme
            may not be as intuitive to some, it also allows the state variable
            to be accessed <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>outside</em></span> the nested function
            (with nonlocals, we can only see state variables within the nested
            <code class="epub__literal">def</code>):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e44244"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def tester(start):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def nested(label):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(label, nested.state)</code></strong>     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># nested is in enclosing scope</span></em>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>nested.state += 1</code></strong>              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Change attr, not nested itself</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>nested.state = start</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Initial state after func defined</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return nested</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F = tester(0)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F('spam')</code></strong>                              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># F is a 'nested' with state attached</span></em>
spam 0
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F('ham')</code></strong>
ham 1
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F.state</code></strong>                                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Can access state outside functions too</span></em>
2
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>G = tester(42)</code></strong>                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># G has own state, doesn't overwrite F's</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>G('eggs')</code></strong>
eggs 42
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F('ham')</code></strong>
ham 2</pre>
<p>This code relies on the fact that the function name <code class="epub__literal">nested</code> is a local variable in the
            <code class="epub__literal">tester</code> scope enclosing <code class="epub__literal">nested</code>; as such, it can be referenced
            freely inside <code class="epub__literal">nested</code>. This code
            also relies on the fact that changing an object in-place is not an
            assignment to a name; when it increments <code class="epub__literal">nested.state</code>, it is changing part of the
            object <code class="epub__literal">nested</code> references, not
            the name <code class="epub__literal">nested</code> itself. Because
            we’re not really assigning a name in the enclosing scope, no
            <code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code> is needed.</p>
<p>As you can see, globals, nonlocals, classes, and function
            attributes all offer state-retention options. Globals
            only support shared data, classes require a basic knowledge of
            OOP, and both classes and function attributes allow state to be
            accessed outside the nested
            function itself. As usual, the best tool for your program depends
            upon your program’s <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e44341"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e44343"></a>goals<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e44346"></a>.<sup>[40]</sup></p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Chapter Summary"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
