<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_answers-id16"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</h1>
<div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The output here is <code class="epub__literal">'Spam'</code>, because the function references
            a global variable in the enclosing module (because it is not
            assigned in the function, it is considered global).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The output here is <code class="epub__literal">'Spam'</code>
            again because assigning the variable inside the function makes it
            a local and effectively hides the global of the same name. The
            <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statement finds the
            variable unchanged in the global (module) scope.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>It prints <code class="epub__literal">'NI'</code> on one
            line and <code class="epub__literal">'Spam'</code> on another,
            because the reference to the variable within the function finds
            the assigned local and the reference in the <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statement finds the global.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>This time it just prints <code class="epub__literal">'NI'</code> because the global declaration
            forces the variable assigned inside the function to refer to the
            variable in the enclosing global scope.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The output in this case is again <code class="epub__literal">'NI'</code> on one line and <code class="epub__literal">'Spam'</code> on another, because the <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statement in the nested function
            finds the name in the enclosing function’s local scope, and the
            <code class="epub__literal">print</code> at the end finds the
            variable in the global scope.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>This example prints <code class="epub__literal">'Spam'</code>, because the <code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code> statement (available in Python
            3.0 but not 2.6) means that the assignment to <code class="epub__literal">X</code> inside the nested function changes
            <code class="epub__literal">X</code> in the enclosing function’s
            local scope. Without this statement, this assignment would
            classify <code class="epub__literal">X</code> as local to the
            nested function, making it a different variable; the code would
            then print <code class="epub__literal">'NI'</code> instead.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Although the values of local variables go away when a
            function returns, you can make a Python function retain state
            information by using shared global variables, enclosing function
            scope references within nested functions, or using default
            argument values. Function attributes can sometimes allow state to
            be attached to the function itself, instead of looked up in
            scopes. Another alternative, using OOP with classes, sometimes
            supports state retention better than any of the scope-based
            techniques because it makes it explicit with attribute
            assignments; we’ll explore this option in Part VI.</p></li></ol>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[36] </sup>The scope lookup rule was called the “LGB rule” in the
              first edition of this book. The enclosing <code class="epub__literal">def</code> “E” layer was added later in
              Python to obviate the task of passing in enclosing scope names
              explicitly with default arguments—a topic usually of marginal
              interest to Python beginners that we’ll defer until later in
              this chapter. Since this scope is addressed by the <code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code> statement in Python 3.0, I
              suppose the lookup rule might now be better named “LNGB,” but
              backward compatibility matters in books, too!</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[37] </sup>There is technically one more scope in Python: loop
              variables in comprehension and generator expressions are local
              to the expression itself in 3.X (in 2.X, they are local in
              generators but not in list comprehensions). This is a special
              and obscure case that rarely impacts real code, and differs from
              for-loop statements which never localize their variables.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[38] </sup><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Multithreading</em></span> runs function calls in
              parallel with the rest of the program and is supported by
              Python’s standard library modules <code class="epub__literal">_thread</code>, <code class="epub__literal">threading</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">queue</code> (<code class="epub__literal">thread</code>, <code class="epub__literal">threading</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">Queue</code> in Python 2.6). Because all
              threaded functions run in the same process, global scopes often
              serve as shared memory between them. Threading is commonly used
              for long-running tasks in GUIs, to implement nonblocking
              operations in general and to leverage CPU capacity. It is also
              beyond this book’s scope; see the Python library manual, as well
              as the follow-up texts listed in the Preface (such as O’Reilly’s
              <em class="epub__citetitle">Programming
              Python</em>), for more details.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[39] </sup>In the section Function Gotchas at
                the end of this part of the book, we’ll also see that there is
                an issue with using mutable objects like lists and
                dictionaries for default arguments (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">def f(a=[])</code>)—because defaults are
                implemented as single objects attached to functions, mutable
                defaults retain state from call to call, rather then being
                initialized anew on each call. Depending on whom you ask, this
                is either considered a feature that supports state retention,
                or a strange wart on the language. More on this at the end of
                Chapter 20.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[40] </sup>Function attributes are supported in both Python 2.6 and
                3.X. We'll explore them further in Chapter 19, and revisit all
                the state options introduced here in Chapter 38 in a more
                realistic context. Also note that it's possible to change a
                mutable object in the enclosing scope in 2.X and 3.X without
                declaring its name nonlocal (e.g, <code class="epub__literal">state=[start]</code> in <code class="epub__literal">tester</code>, <code class="epub__literal">state[0]+=1</code> in <code class="epub__literal">nested</code>), though it's perhaps more
                obscure than either function attributes or 3.X's
                nonlocal.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
