<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Special Argument-Matching Modes</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="special_argument-matching_modes"></a>Special Argument-Matching Modes</h1>
<p>As <a id="ch18argumentsargumentmatchingmodes"></a>we’ve just seen, arguments are always passed by
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>assignment</em></span> in Python; names in the <code class="epub__literal">def</code> header are assigned to passed-in
        objects. On top of this model, though, Python provides additional
        tools that alter the way the argument objects in a call are
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>matched</em></span> with argument names in the header prior
        to assignment. These tools are all optional, but they allow us to
        write functions that support more flexible calling patterns, and you
        may encounter some libraries that require them.</p>
<p>By default, arguments are matched by position, from left to
        right, and you must pass exactly as many arguments as there are
        argument names in the function header. However, you can also specify matching
        by name, default values, and collectors for extra arguments.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The Basics"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_basics-id3"></a>The Basics</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Before we go into the syntactic details, I want to stress that
          these special modes are optional and only have to do with matching
          objects to names; the underlying passing mechanism after the
          matching takes place is still assignment. In fact, some of these
          tools are intended more for people writing libraries than for
          application developers. But because you may stumble across these
          modes even if you don’t code them yourself, here’s a <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e45141"></a>synopsis of the available tools:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Positionals: matched from left to right</span></dt><dd>
<p>The normal case, which we’ve mostly been using so far,
                is to match passed argument values to argument names in a
                function header by position, from left to right.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Keywords: matched by argument name</span></dt><dd>
<p>Alternatively, callers can specify which argument in the
                function is to receive a value by using the argument’s name in
                the call, with the <code class="epub__literal">name=value</code> syntax.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Defaults: specify values for arguments that aren’t
              passed</span></dt><dd>
<p>Functions themselves can specify default values for
                arguments to receive if the call passes too few values, again
                using the <code class="epub__literal">name=value</code>
                syntax.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Varargs collecting: collect arbitrarily many positional or
              keyword arguments</span></dt><dd>
<p>Functions can use special arguments preceded with one or
                two <code class="epub__literal">*</code> characters to collect
                an arbitrary number of extra arguments (this feature is often
                referred to as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>varargs</em></span>, after the varargs
                feature in the C language, which also supports variable-length
                argument lists).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Varargs unpacking: pass arbitrarily many positional or
              keyword arguments</span></dt><dd>
<p>Callers can also use the <code class="epub__literal">*</code> syntax to unpack argument
                collections into discrete, separate arguments. This is the
                inverse of a <code class="epub__literal">*</code> in a
                function header—in the header it means collect arbitrarily
                many arguments, while in the call it means pass arbitrarily
                many arguments.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Keyword-only arguments: arguments that must be passed by
              name</span></dt><dd>
<p>In Python 3.0 (but not 2.6), functions can also specify
                arguments that must be passed by name with keyword arguments,
                not by position. Such arguments are typically used to define
                configuration options in addition to actual
                arguments.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Matching Syntax"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="matching_syntax"></a>Matching Syntax</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Table 18-1 summarizes
          the <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e45211"></a>syntax <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e45219"></a>that invokes the special argument-matching
          modes.</p><div class="epub__table"><a id="function_argument-matching_forms"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Table 18-1. Function argument-matching forms</p><div class="epub__table-contents">
<table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; " summary="Function argument-matching forms">
<colgroup><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Syntax</p></th><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Location</p></th><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Interpretation</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">func(value)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Caller</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Normal argument:
                  matched by position</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">func(name=value)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Caller</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Keyword argument:
                  matched by name</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">func(*sequence)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Caller</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Pass all objects in
                  sequence as individual positional arguments</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">func(**dict)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Caller</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Pass all key/value
                  pairs in <code class="epub__literal">dict</code> as
                  individual keyword arguments</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">def func(name)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Function</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Normal argument:
                  matches any passed value by position or name</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">def
                  func(name=value)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Function</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Default argument
                  value, if not passed in the call</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">def func(*name)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Function</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Matches and collects
                  remaining positional arguments in a tuple</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">def func(**name)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Function</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Matches and collects
                  remaining keyword arguments in a dictionary</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">def func(*args, name)</code></p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">def func(*,
                  name=value)</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Function</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Arguments that must
                  be passed by keyword only in calls (3.0)</p></td></tr></tbody>
</table>
</div>
</div>
<p>These special matching modes break down into function calls
          and definitions as follows:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>function call</em></span> (the first four
              rows of the table), simple values are matched by position, but
              using the <code class="epub__literal">name=value</code> form
              tells Python to match by name to arguments instead; these are
              called <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>keyword arguments</em></span>. Using a <code class="epub__literal">*sequence</code> or <code class="epub__literal">**dict</code> in a call allows us to package
              up arbitrarily many positional or keyword objects in sequences
              and dictionaries, respectively, and unpack them as separate,
              individual arguments when they are passed to the
              function.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>function header</em></span> (the rest of the
              table), a simple <code class="epub__literal">name</code> is
              matched by position or name depending on how the caller passes
              it, but the <code class="epub__literal">name=value</code> form
              specifies a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>default value</em></span>. The <code class="epub__literal">*name</code> form collects any extra
              unmatched positional arguments in a tuple, and the <code class="epub__literal">**name</code> form collects extra keyword
              arguments in a dictionary. In Python 3.0 and later, any normal
              or defaulted argument names following a <code class="epub__literal">*name</code> or a bare <code class="epub__literal">*</code> are
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>keyword-only</em></span> arguments and must be passed
              by keyword in calls.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Of these, keyword arguments and defaults are probably the most
          commonly used in Python code. We’ve informally used both of these
          earlier in this book:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>We’ve already used <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>keywords</em></span> to
              specify options to the 3.0 <code class="epub__literal">print</code> function, but they are more
              general—keywords allow us to label any argument with its name,
              to make calls more informational.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>We met <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>defaults</em></span> earlier, too, as a
              way to pass in values from the enclosing function’s scope, but
              they are also more general—they allow us to make any argument
              optional, providing its default value in a function
              definition.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>As we’ll see, the combination of
          defaults in a function header and keywords in a call further allows
          us to pick and choose which defaults to override.</p>
<p>In short, special argument-matching modes let you be fairly
          liberal about how many arguments must be passed to a function. If a
          function specifies defaults, they are used if you pass <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>too
          few</em></span> arguments. If a function uses the <code class="epub__literal">*</code> variable argument list forms, you can
          pass <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>too many</em></span> arguments; the <code class="epub__literal">*</code> names collect the extra arguments in
          data structures for processing in the function.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The Gritty Details"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_gritty_details"></a>The Gritty Details</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>If you choose to use and combine the special argument-matching
          modes, Python will ask you to follow these <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e45443"></a>ordering rules:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In a function <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>call</em></span>, arguments must
              appear in this order: any positional arguments (<code class="epub__literal">value</code>), followed by a combination of
              any keyword arguments (<code class="epub__literal">name=value</code>) and the <code class="epub__literal">*sequence</code> form, followed by the
              <code class="epub__literal">**dict</code> form.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In a function <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>header</em></span>, arguments must
              appear in this order: any normal arguments (<code class="epub__literal">name</code>), followed by any default
              arguments (<code class="epub__literal">name=value</code>),
              followed by the <code class="epub__literal">*name</code> (or
              <code class="epub__literal">*</code> in 3.0) form if present,
              followed by any <code class="epub__literal">name</code> or
              <code class="epub__literal">name=value</code> keyword-only
              arguments (in 3.0), followed by the <code class="epub__literal">**name</code> form.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>In both the call and header, the <code class="epub__literal">**arg</code> form must appear last if present. If
          you mix arguments in any other order, you will get a syntax error
          because the combinations can be ambiguous. The steps that Python
          internally carries out to match arguments before assignment can
          roughly be described as follows:</p><div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Assign nonkeyword arguments by position.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Assign keyword arguments by matching names.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Assign extra nonkeyword arguments to <code class="epub__literal">*name</code> tuple.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Assign extra keyword arguments to <code class="epub__literal">**name</code> dictionary.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Assign default values to unassigned arguments in
              header.</p></li></ol>
</div>
<p>After this, Python checks to make sure each argument is passed
          just one value; if not, an error is raised. When all matching is
          complete, Python assigns argument names to the objects passed to
          them.</p>
<p>The actual matching algorithm Python
          uses is a bit more complex (it must also account for keyword-only
          arguments in 3.0, for instance), so we’ll defer to Python’s standard
          language manual for a more exact description. It’s not required
          reading, but tracing Python’s matching algorithm may help you to
          understand some convoluted cases, especially when modes are
          mixed.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p>In Python 3.0, argument names in a function header can also
            have <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>annotation</em></span> values, specified as <code class="epub__literal">name:value</code> (or <code class="epub__literal">name:value=default</code> when defaults are
            present). This is simply additional syntax for arguments and does
            not augment or change the argument-ordering rules described here.
            The function itself can also have an annotation value, given as
            <code class="epub__literal">def
            f()-&gt;value</code>. See the discussion of function
            annotation in Chapter 19 for more
            details.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Keyword and Default Examples"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="keyword_and_default_examples"></a>Keyword and Default Examples</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>This is all simpler in code than the preceding descriptions
          may imply. If you don’t use any special matching syntax, Python
          matches names by position from left to right, like most other
          languages. For instance, if you define a function that requires
          three arguments, you must call it with three arguments:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e45553"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def f(a, b, c): print(a, b, c)</code></strong>
...</pre>
<p>Here, we pass them by position—<code class="epub__literal">a</code> is matched to <code class="epub__literal">1</code>, <code class="epub__literal">b</code> is
          matched to <code class="epub__literal">2</code>, and so on (this
          works the same in Python 3.0 and 2.6, but extra tuple parentheses
          are displayed in 2.6 because we’re using 3.0 <code class="epub__literal">print</code> calls):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e45575"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f(1, 2, 3)</code></strong>
1 2 3</pre>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Keywords"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="keywords"></a>Keywords</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e45585"></a>Python, though, you can be more specific about what
            goes where when you call a function. Keyword arguments allow us to
            match by <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>name</em></span>, instead of by position:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e45596"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f(c=3, b=2, a=1)</code></strong>
1 2 3</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">c=3</code> in this call, for
            example, means send <code class="epub__literal">3</code> to the
            argument named <code class="epub__literal">c</code>. More
            formally, Python matches the name <code class="epub__literal">c</code> in the call to the argument named
            <code class="epub__literal">c</code> in the function definition’s
            header, and then passes the value <code class="epub__literal">3</code> to that argument. The net effect of
            this call is the same as that of the prior call, but notice that
            the left-to-right order of the arguments no longer matters when
            keywords are used because arguments are matched by name, not by
            position. It’s even possible to combine positional and keyword
            arguments in a single call. In this case, all positionals are
            matched first from left to right in the header, before keywords
            are matched by name:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e45622"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f(1, c=3, b=2)</code></strong>
1 2 3</pre>
<p>When most people see this the first time, they wonder why
            one would use such a tool. Keywords typically have two roles in
            Python. First, they make your calls a bit more self-documenting
            (assuming that you use better argument names than <code class="epub__literal">a</code>, <code class="epub__literal">b</code>,
            and <code class="epub__literal">c</code>). For example, a call of
            this form:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e45638"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">func(name='Bob', age=40, job='dev')</pre>
<p>is much more meaningful than a call with three naked values
            separated by commas—the keywords serve as labels for the data in
            the call. The second major use of keywords occurs in conjunction
            with defaults, which we turn to next.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Defaults"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="defaults"></a>Defaults</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>We <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e45647"></a>talked about defaults in brief earlier, when
            discussing nested function scopes. In short, defaults allow us to
            make selected function arguments optional; if not passed a value,
            the argument is assigned its default before the function runs. For
            example, here is a function that requires one argument and
            defaults two:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e45655"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def f(a, b=2, c=3): print(a, b, c)</code></strong>
...</pre>
<p>When we call this function, we must provide a value for
            <code class="epub__literal">a</code>, either by position or by
            keyword; however, providing values for <code class="epub__literal">b</code> and <code class="epub__literal">c</code> is optional. If we don’t pass values
            to <code class="epub__literal">b</code> and <code class="epub__literal">c</code>, they default to <code class="epub__literal">2</code> and <code class="epub__literal">3</code>, respectively:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e45684"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f(1)</code></strong>
1 2 3
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f(a=1)</code></strong>
1 2 3</pre>
<p>If we pass two values, only <code class="epub__literal">c</code> gets its default, and with three
            values, no defaults are used:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e45697"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f(1, 4)</code></strong>
1 4 3
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f(1, 4, 5)</code></strong>
1 4 5</pre>
<p>Finally, here is how the keyword and default features
            interact. Because they subvert the normal left-to-right positional
            mapping, keywords allow us to essentially skip over arguments with
            defaults:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e45707"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f(1, c=6)</code></strong>
1 2 6</pre>
<p>Here, <code class="epub__literal">a</code> gets <code class="epub__literal">1</code> by position, <code class="epub__literal">c</code> gets <code class="epub__literal">6</code> by keyword, and <code class="epub__literal">b</code>, in between, defaults to <code class="epub__literal">2</code>.</p>
<p>Be careful not to confuse the special <code class="epub__literal">name=value</code> syntax in a function header
            and a function call; in the call it means a match-by-name keyword
            argument, while in the header it specifies a default for an
            optional argument. In both cases, this is not an assignment
            statement (despite its appearance); it is special syntax for these
            two contexts, which modifies the default argument-matching
            mechanics.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Combining keywords and defaults"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="combining_keywords_and_defaults"></a>Combining keywords and defaults</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Here <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e45743"></a>is a slightly larger example that demonstrates
            keywords and defaults in action. In the following, the caller must
            always pass at least two arguments (to match <code class="epub__literal">spam</code> and <code class="epub__literal">eggs</code>), but the other two are optional.
            If they are omitted, Python assigns <code class="epub__literal">toast</code> and <code class="epub__literal">ham</code> to the defaults specified in the
            header:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e45763"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def func(spam, eggs, toast=0, ham=0):   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># First 2 required</span></em>
    print((spam, eggs, toast, ham))

func(1, 2)                              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Output: (1, 2, 0, 0)</span></em>
func(1, ham=1, eggs=0)                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Output: (1, 0, 0, 1)</span></em>
func(spam=1, eggs=0)                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Output: (1, 0, 0, 0)</span></em>
func(toast=1, eggs=2, spam=3)           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Output: (3, 2, 1, 0)</span></em>
func(1, 2, 3, 4)                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Output: (1, 2, 3, 4)</span></em></pre>
<p>Notice again that when keyword arguments are used in the
            call, the order in which the arguments are listed doesn’t matter;
            Python matches by name, not by position. The caller must supply
            values for <code class="epub__literal">spam</code> and <code class="epub__literal">eggs</code>, but they can be matched by
            position or by name. Again, keep in mind that the form <code class="epub__literal">name=value</code> means different things in the
            call and the <code class="epub__literal">def</code>: a keyword in
            the call and a default in the header.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Arbitrary Arguments Examples"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="arbitrary_arguments_examples"></a>Arbitrary Arguments Examples</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <a id="ch18argumentsmatchingargsarbargexamples"></a>last two matching extensions, <code class="epub__literal">*</code> and <code class="epub__literal">**</code>, are designed to support functions that
          take any number of arguments. Both can appear in either the function
          definition or a function call, and they have related purposes in the
          two locations.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Collecting arguments"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="collecting_arguments"></a>Collecting arguments</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e45821"></a>first use, in the function definition, collects
            unmatched <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>positional</em></span> arguments into a
            tuple:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e45830"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def f(*args): print(args)</code></strong>
...</pre>
<p>When this function is called, Python collects all the
            positional arguments into a new tuple and assigns the variable
            <code class="epub__literal">args</code> to that tuple. Because it
            is a normal tuple object, it can be indexed, stepped through with
            a <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop, and so on:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e45843"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f()</code></strong>
()
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f(1)</code></strong>
(1,)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f(1, 2, 3, 4)</code></strong>
(1, 2, 3, 4)</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">**</code> feature is
            similar, but it only works for <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>keyword</em></span>
            arguments—it collects them into a new dictionary, which can then
            be processed with normal dictionary tools. In a sense, the
            <code class="epub__literal">**</code> form allows you to convert
            from keywords to dictionaries, which you can then step through
            with <code class="epub__literal">keys</code> calls, dictionary
            iterators, and the like:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e45868"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def f(**args): print(args)</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f()</code></strong>
{}
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f(a=1, b=2)</code></strong>
{'a': 1, 'b': 2}</pre>
<p>Finally, function headers can combine normal arguments, the
            <code class="epub__literal">*</code>, and the <code class="epub__literal">**</code> to implement wildly flexible call
            signatures. For instance, in the following, <code class="epub__literal">1</code> is passed to <code class="epub__literal">a</code> by position, <code class="epub__literal">2</code> and <code class="epub__literal">3</code> are collected into the <code class="epub__literal">pargs</code> positional tuple, and <code class="epub__literal">x</code> and <code class="epub__literal">y</code> wind up in the <code class="epub__literal">kargs</code> keyword dictionary:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e45912"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def f(a, *pargs, **kargs): print(a, pargs, kargs)</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f(1, 2, 3, x=1, y=2)</code></strong>
1 (2, 3) {'y': 2, 'x': 1}</pre>
<p>In fact, these features can be combined in even more complex
            ways that may seem ambiguous at first glance—an idea we will
            revisit later in this chapter. First, though, let’s see what
            happens when <code class="epub__literal">*</code> and <code class="epub__literal">**</code> are coded in function calls instead
            of definitions.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Unpacking arguments"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="unpacking_arguments"></a>Unpacking arguments</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In recent <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e45933"></a>Python releases, we can use the <code class="epub__literal">*</code> syntax when we call a function, too.
            In this context, its meaning is the inverse of its meaning in the
            function definition—it unpacks a collection of arguments, rather
            than building a collection of arguments. For example, we can pass
            four arguments to a function in a tuple and let Python unpack them
            into individual arguments:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e45942"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def func(a, b, c, d): print(a, b, c, d)</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>args = (1, 2)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>args += (3, 4)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>func(*args)</code></strong>
1 2 3 4</pre>
<p>Similarly, the <code class="epub__literal">**</code> syntax
            in a function call unpacks a dictionary of key/value pairs into
            separate keyword arguments:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e45961"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>args = {'a': 1, 'b': 2, 'c': 3}</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>args['d'] = 4</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>func(**args)</code></strong>
1 2 3 4</pre>
<p>Again, we can combine normal, positional, and keyword
            arguments in the call in very flexible ways:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e45974"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>func(*(1, 2), **{'d': 4, 'c': 4})</code></strong>
1 2 4 4

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>func(1, *(2, 3), **{'d': 4})</code></strong>
1 2 3 4

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>func(1, c=3, *(2,), **{'d': 4})</code></strong>
1 2 3 4

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>func(1, *(2, 3), d=4)</code></strong>
1 2 3 4

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>func(1, *(2,), c=3, **{'d':4})</code></strong>
1 2 3 4</pre>
<p>This sort of code is convenient when you cannot predict the
            number of arguments that will be passed to a function when you
            write your script; you can build up a collection of arguments at
            runtime instead and call the function generically this way. Again,
            don’t confuse the <code class="epub__literal">*</code>/<code class="epub__literal">**</code> syntax in the function header and the
            function call—in the header it collects any number of arguments,
            while in the call it unpacks any number of arguments.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p>As we saw in Chapter 14, the
              <code class="epub__literal">*pargs</code> form in a call is an
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>iteration context</em></span>, so technically it
              accepts any iterable object, not just tuples or other sequences
              as shown in the examples here. For instance, a file object works
              after the <code class="epub__literal">*</code>, and unpacks its
              lines into individual arguments (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">func(*open('fname')</code>).</p>
<p>This generality is supported in both Python 3.0 and 2.6,
              but it holds true only for <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>calls</em></span>—a <code class="epub__literal">*pargs</code> in a call allows any iterable,
              but the same form in a <code class="epub__literal">def</code>
              header always bundles extra arguments into a
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>tuple</em></span>. This header behavior is similar in
              spirit and syntax to the <code class="epub__literal">*</code> in
              Python 3.0 extended sequence unpacking assignment forms we met
              in Chapter 11
              (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">x, *y = z</code>), though
              that feature always creates lists, not tuples.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Applying functions generically"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="applying_functions_generically"></a>Applying functions generically</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e46047"></a>prior section’s examples may seem obtuse, but they
            are used more often than you might expect. Some programs need to
            call arbitrary functions in a generic fashion, without knowing
            their names or arguments ahead of time. In fact, the real power of
            the special “varargs” call syntax is that you don’t need to know
            how many arguments a function call requires before you write a
            script. For example, you can use <code class="epub__literal">if</code> logic to select from a set of
            functions and argument lists, and call any of them
            generically:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e46056"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">if &lt;test&gt;:
    action, args = func1, (1,)             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Call func1 with 1 arg in this case</span></em>
else:
    action, args = func2, (1, 2, 3)        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Call func2 with 3 args here</span></em>
...
action(*args)                              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Dispatch generically</span></em></pre>
<p>More generally, this varargs call syntax is useful any time
            you cannot predict the arguments list. If your user selects an
            arbitrary function via a user interface, for instance, you may be
            unable to hardcode a function call when writing your script. To
            work around this, simply build up the arguments list with sequence
            operations, and call it with starred names to unpack the
            arguments:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e46068"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>args = (2,3)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>args += (4,)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>args</code></strong>
(2, 3, 4)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>func(*args)</code></strong></pre>
<p>Because the arguments list is passed in as a tuple here, the
            program can build it at runtime. This technique also comes in
            handy for functions that test or time other functions. For
            instance, in the following code we support any function with any
            arguments by passing along whatever arguments were sent in:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e46083"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def tracer(func, *pargs, **kargs):         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Accept arbitrary arguments</span></em>
    print('calling:', func.__name__)
    return func(*pargs, **kargs)           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Pass along arbitrary arguments</span></em>

def func(a, b, c, d):
    return a + b + c + d

print(tracer(func, 1, 2, c=3, d=4))</pre>
<p>When this code is run, arguments are collected by the tracer
            and then <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>propagated</em></span> with varargs call
            syntax:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e46096"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">calling: func
10</pre>
<p>We’ll see larger examples of such roles later in this book;
            see especially the sequence timing example in Chapter 20 and the
            various decorator tools we will code in Chapter 38.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="The defunct apply built-in (Python 2.6)"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="the_defunct_apply_built-in_open_parenth"></a>The defunct apply built-in (Python 2.6)</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Prior to Python 3.0, <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e46109"></a>the <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e46113"></a>effect of the <code class="epub__literal">*args</code> and <code class="epub__literal">**args</code> varargs call syntax could be
            achieved with a built-in function named <code class="epub__literal">apply</code>. This original technique has been
            removed in 3.0 because it is now redundant (3.0 cleans up many
            such dusty tools that have been subsumed over the years). It’s
            still available in Python 2.6, though, and you may come across it
            in older 2.X code.</p>
<p>In short, the following are equivalent prior to Python
            3.0:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e46130"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><strong class="epub__userinput"><code>func(*pargs, **kargs)</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Newer call syntax: func(*sequence, **dict)</span></em>

<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>apply(func, pargs, kargs)</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Defunct built-in:  apply(func, sequence, dict)</span></em></pre>
<p>For example, consider the following function, which accepts
            any number of positional or keyword arguments:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e46144"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def echo(*args, **kwargs): print(args, kwargs)</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>echo(1, 2, a=3, b=4)</code></strong>
(1, 2) {'a': 3, 'b': 4}</pre>
<p>In Python 2.6, we can call it
            generically with <code class="epub__literal">apply</code>, or with
            the call syntax that is now required in 3.0:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e46158"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pargs = (1, 2)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>kargs = {'a':3, 'b':4}</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>apply(echo, pargs, kargs)</code></strong>
(1, 2) {'a': 3, 'b': 4}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>echo(*pargs, **kargs)</code></strong>
(1, 2) {'a': 3, 'b': 4}</pre>
<p>The unpacking call syntax form is newer than the <code class="epub__literal">apply</code> function, is preferred in general,
            and is required in 3.0. Apart from its symmetry with the <code class="epub__literal">*pargs</code> and <code class="epub__literal">**kargs</code> collector forms in <code class="epub__literal">def</code> headers, and the fact that it
            requires fewer keystrokes overall, the newer call syntax also
            allows us to pass along additional arguments without having to
            manually extend argument sequences or dictionaries:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e46186"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>echo(0, c=5, *pargs, **kargs)</code></strong>      # Normal, keyword, *sequence, **dictionary
(0, 1, 2) {'a': 3, 'c': 5, 'b': 4}</pre>
<p>That is, the call syntax form is <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>more
            general</em></span>. Since it’s required in 3.0, you should now
            disavow all knowledge of <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e46197"></a>apply</code> (unless, of course, it appears in
            2.X code you must use or maintain...).</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Python 3.0 Keyword-Only Arguments"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="python_3.0_keyword-only_arguments"></a>Python 3.0 Keyword-Only Arguments</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Python <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e46206"></a>3.0 generalizes the ordering rules in function headers
          to allow us to specify <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e46215"></a>keyword-only arguments</em></span>—arguments that must
          be passed by keyword only and will never be filled in by a
          positional argument. This is useful if we want a function to both
          process any number of arguments and accept possibly optional
          configuration options.</p>
<p>Syntactically, keyword-only arguments are coded as named
          arguments that appear after <code class="epub__literal">*args</code>
          in the arguments list. All such arguments must be passed using
          keyword syntax in the call. For example, in the following, <code class="epub__literal">a</code> may be passed by name or position,
          <code class="epub__literal">b</code> collects any extra positional
          arguments, and <code class="epub__literal">c</code> must be passed
          by keyword only:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e46234"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def kwonly(a, *b, c):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(a, b, c)</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>kwonly(1, 2, c=3)</code></strong>
1 (2,) 3
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>kwonly(a=1, c=3)</code></strong>
1 () 3
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>kwonly(1, 2, 3)</code></strong>
TypeError: kwonly() needs keyword-only argument c</pre>
<p>We can also use a <code class="epub__literal">*</code>
          character by itself in the arguments list to indicate that a
          function does not accept a variable-length argument list but still
          expects all arguments following the <code class="epub__literal">*</code> to be passed as keywords. In the next
          function, <code class="epub__literal">a</code> may be passed by
          position or name again, but <code class="epub__literal">b</code> and
          <code class="epub__literal">c</code> must be keywords, and no extra
          positionals are allowed:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e46268"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def kwonly(a, *, b, c):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(a, b, c)</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>kwonly(1, c=3, b=2)</code></strong>
1 2 3
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>kwonly(c=3, b=2, a=1)</code></strong>
1 2 3
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>kwonly(1, 2, 3)</code></strong>
TypeError: kwonly() takes exactly 1 positional argument (3 given)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>kwonly(1)</code></strong>
TypeError: kwonly() needs keyword-only argument b</pre>
<p>You can still use defaults for keyword-only arguments, even
          though they appear after the <code class="epub__literal">*</code> in
          the function header. In the following code, <code class="epub__literal">a</code> may be passed by name or position, and
          <code class="epub__literal">b</code> and <code class="epub__literal">c</code> are optional but must be passed by
          keyword if used:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e46303"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def kwonly(a, *, b='spam', c='ham'):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(a, b, c)</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>kwonly(1)</code></strong>
1 spam ham
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>kwonly(1, c=3)</code></strong>
1 spam 3
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>kwonly(a=1)</code></strong>
1 spam ham
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>kwonly(c=3, b=2, a=1)</code></strong>
1 2 3
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>kwonly(1, 2)</code></strong>
TypeError: kwonly() takes exactly 1 positional argument (2 given)</pre>
<p>In fact, keyword-only arguments with defaults are optional,
          but those without defaults effectively become required keywords for
          the function:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e46329"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def kwonly(a, *, b, c='spam'):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(a, b, c)</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>kwonly(1, b='eggs')</code></strong>
1 eggs spam
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>kwonly(1, c='eggs')</code></strong>
TypeError: kwonly() needs keyword-only argument b
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>kwonly(1, 2)</code></strong>
TypeError: kwonly() takes exactly 1 positional argument (2 given)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def kwonly(a, *, b=1, c, d=2):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(a, b, c, d)</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>kwonly(3, c=4)</code></strong>
3 1 4 2
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>kwonly(3, c=4, b=5)</code></strong>
3 5 4 2
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>kwonly(3)</code></strong>
TypeError: kwonly() needs keyword-only argument c
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>kwonly(1, 2, 3)</code></strong>
TypeError: kwonly() takes exactly 1 positional argument (3 given)</pre>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Ordering rules"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="ordering_rules"></a>Ordering rules</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Finally, <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e46370"></a>note that keyword-only arguments must be specified
            after a single star, not two—named arguments cannot appear
            after the <code class="epub__literal">**args</code> arbitrary
            keywords form, and a <code class="epub__literal">**</code> can’t
            appear by itself in the arguments list. Both attempts generate a
            syntax error:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e46385"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def kwonly(a, **pargs, b, c):</code></strong>
SyntaxError: invalid syntax
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def kwonly(a, **, b, c):</code></strong>
SyntaxError: invalid syntax</pre>
<p>This means that in a function <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>header</em></span>,
            keyword-only arguments must be coded before the <code class="epub__literal">**args</code> arbitrary keywords form and after
            the <code class="epub__literal">*args</code> arbitrary positional
            form, when both are present. Whenever an argument name appears
            before <code class="epub__literal">*args</code>, it is a possibly
            default positional argument, not keyword-only:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e46407"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def f(a, *b, **d, c=6): print(a, b, c, d)</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Keyword-only before **!</span></em>
SyntaxError: invalid syntax

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def f(a, *b, c=6, **d): print(a, b, c, d)</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Collect args in header</span></em>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f(1, 2, 3, x=4, y=5)</code></strong>                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Default used</span></em>
1 (2, 3) 6 {'y': 5, 'x': 4}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f(1, 2, 3, x=4, y=5, c=7)</code></strong>                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Override default</span></em>
1 (2, 3) 7 {'y': 5, 'x': 4}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f(1, 2, 3, c=7, x=4, y=5)</code></strong>                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Anywhere in keywords</span></em>
1 (2, 3) 7 {'y': 5, 'x': 4}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def f(a, c=6, *b, **d): print(a, b, c, d)</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># c is not keyword-only!</span></em>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; f(1, 2, 3, x=4)
1 (3,) 2 {'x': 4}</pre>
<p>In fact, similar ordering rules hold true in function
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>calls</em></span>: when keyword-only arguments are
            passed, they must appear before a <code class="epub__literal">**args</code> form. The keyword-only argument
            can be coded either before or after the <code class="epub__literal">*args</code>, though, and may be included in
            <code class="epub__literal">**args</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e46461"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def f(a, *b, c=6, **d): print(a, b, c, d)</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># KW-only between * and **</span></em>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f(1, *(2, 3), **dict(x=4, y=5))</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Unpack args at call</span></em>
1 (2, 3) 6 {'y': 5, 'x': 4}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f(1, *(2, 3), **dict(x=4, y=5), c=7)</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Keywords before **args!</span></em>
SyntaxError: invalid syntax

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f(1, *(2, 3), c=7, **dict(x=4, y=5))</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Override default</span></em>
1 (2, 3) 7 {'y': 5, 'x': 4}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f(1, c=7, *(2, 3), **dict(x=4, y=5))</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># After or before *</span></em>
1 (2, 3) 7 {'y': 5, 'x': 4}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f(1, *(2, 3), **dict(x=4, y=5, c=7))</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Keyword-only in **</span></em>
1 (2, 3) 7 {'y': 5, 'x': 4}</pre>
<p>Trace through these cases on your own, in conjunction with
            the general argument-ordering rules described formally earlier.
            They may appear to be worst cases in the artificial examples here,
            but they can come up in real practice, especially for people who
            write libraries and tools for other Python programmers to
            use.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Why keyword-only arguments?"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="why_keyword-only_arguments_question"></a>Why keyword-only arguments?</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>So why <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e46509"></a>care about keyword-only arguments? In short, they
            make it easier to allow a function to accept both any number of
            positional arguments to be processed, and configuration options
            passed as keywords. While their use is optional, without
            keyword-only arguments extra work may be required to provide
            defaults for such options and to verify that no superfluous
            keywords were passed.</p>
<p>Imagine a function that processes a set of passed-in objects
            and allows a tracing flag to be passed:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e46517"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">process(X, Y, Z)                    # use flag's default
process(X, Y, notify=True)          # override flag default</pre>
<p>Without keyword-only arguments we have to use both <code class="epub__literal">*args</code> and <code class="epub__literal">**args</code> and manually inspect the
            keywords, but with keyword-only arguments less code is required.
            The following guarantees that no positional argument will be
            incorrectly matched against <code class="epub__literal">notify</code> and requires that it be a keyword
            if passed:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e46530"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def process(*args, notify=False): ...</pre>
<p>Since we’re going to see a more realistic example of this
            later in this chapter, in Emulating the Python 3.0 print Function, I’ll
            postpone the rest of this story until then. For an additional
            example of keyword-only arguments in action, see the iteration
            options timing case study in Chapter 20. And for
            additional function definition enhancements in Python 3.0, stay
            tuned for the discussion of function annotation syntax <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e46538"></a>in Chapter 19.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="The min Wakeup Call!"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
