<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>The min Wakeup Call!</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="the_min_wakeup_call_exclamation"></a>The min Wakeup Call!</h1>
<p>Time for something more realistic. To make this chapter’s
        concepts more concrete, let’s work through an exercise that
        demonstrates a practical application of <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e46548"></a>argument-matching tools.</p>
<p>Suppose you want to code a function that is able to compute the
        minimum value from an arbitrary set of arguments and an arbitrary set
        of object data types. That is, the function should accept zero or more
        arguments, as many as you wish to pass. Moreover, the function should
        work for all kinds of Python object types: numbers, strings, lists,
        lists of dictionaries, files, and even <code class="epub__literal">None</code>.</p>
<p>The first requirement provides a natural example of how the
        <code class="epub__literal">*</code> feature can be put to good use—we
        can collect arguments into a tuple and step over each of them in turn
        with a simple <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop. The second
        part of the problem definition is easy: because every object type
        supports comparisons, we don’t have to specialize the function per
        type (an application of polymorphism); we can simply compare objects
        blindly and let Python worry about what sort of comparison to
        perform.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Full Credit"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="full_credit"></a>Full Credit</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The following <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e46572"></a>file shows three ways to code this operation, at least
          one of which was suggested by a student in one of my courses:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The first function fetches the first argument (<code class="epub__literal">args</code> is a tuple) and traverses the
              rest by slicing off the first (there’s no point in comparing an
              object to itself, especially if it might be a large
              structure).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The second version lets Python pick off the first and rest
              of the arguments automatically, and so avoids an index and
              slice.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The third converts from a tuple to a list with the
              built-in <code class="epub__literal">list</code> call and
              employs the list <code class="epub__literal">sort</code>
              method.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e46602"></a>sort</code> method is coded in C, so it can be
          quicker than the other approaches at times, but the linear scans of
          the first two techniques will make them faster most of the
          time.<sup>[41]</sup> The file <em class="epub__filename"><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e46623"></a>mins.py</em> contains the code for all three
          solutions:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e46628"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def min1(*args):
    res = args[0]
    for arg in args[1:]:
        if arg &lt; res:
            res = arg
    return res

def min2(first, *rest):
    for arg in rest:
        if arg &lt; first:
            first = arg
    return first

def min3(*args):
    tmp = list(args)            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Or, in Python 2.4+: return sorted(args)[0]</span></em>
    tmp.sort()
    return tmp[0]

print(min1(3,4,1,2))
print(min2("bb", "aa"))
print(min3([2,2], [1,1], [3,3]))</pre>
<p>All three solutions produce the same result when the file is
          run. Try typing a few calls interactively to experiment with these
          on your own:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e46635"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python mins.py</code></strong>
1
aa
[1, 1]</pre>
<p>Notice that none of these three variants tests for the case
          where no arguments are passed in. They could, but there’s no point
          in doing so here—in all three solutions, Python will automatically
          raise an exception if no arguments are passed in. The first variant
          raises an exception when we try to fetch item 0, the second when
          Python detects an argument list mismatch, and the third when we try
          to return item 0 at the end.</p>
<p>This is exactly what we want to happen—because these functions
          support any data type, there is no valid sentinel value that we
          could pass back to designate an error. There are exceptions to this
          rule (e.g., if you have to run expensive actions before you reach
          the error), but in general it’s better to assume that arguments will
          work in your functions’ code and let Python raise errors for you
          when they do not.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Bonus Points"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="bonus_points"></a>Bonus Points</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>You <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e46649"></a>can get bonus points here for changing these functions
          to compute the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>maximum</em></span>, rather than minimum,
          values. This one’s easy: the first two versions only require
          changing <code class="epub__literal">&lt;</code> to <code class="epub__literal">&gt;</code>, and the third simply requires that
          we return <code class="epub__literal">tmp[−1]</code> instead of
          <code class="epub__literal">tmp[0]</code>. For an extra point, be
          sure to set the function name to “max” as well (though this part is
          strictly optional).</p>
<p>It’s also possible to generalize a single function to compute
          either a minimum <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>or</em></span> a maximum value, by
          evaluating comparison expression strings with a tool like the
          <code class="epub__literal">eval</code> built-in function (see the
          library manual) or passing in an arbitrary comparison function. The
          file <em class="epub__filename">minmax.py</em> shows how to
          implement the latter scheme:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e46684"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def minmax(test, *args):
    res = args[0]
    for arg in args[1:]:
        if test(arg, res):
            res = arg
    return res

def lessthan(x, y): return x &lt; y                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># See also: lambda</span></em>
def grtrthan(x, y): return x &gt; y

print(minmax(lessthan, 4, 2, 1, 5, 6, 3))       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Self-test code</span></em>
print(minmax(grtrthan, 4, 2, 1, 5, 6, 3))

% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python minmax.py</code></strong>
1
6</pre>
<p>Functions are another kind of object that can be passed into a
          function like this one. To make this a <code class="epub__literal">max</code> (or other) function, for example, we
          could simply pass in the right sort of <code class="epub__literal">test</code> function. This may seem like extra
          work, but the main point of generalizing functions this way (instead
          of cutting and pasting to change just a single character) is that
          we’ll only have one version to change in the future, not two.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The Punch Line..."><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_punch_line"></a>The Punch Line...</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Of course, all this was just a coding exercise. There’s really
          no reason to code <code class="epub__literal">min</code> or <code class="epub__literal">max</code> functions, because both are built-ins
          in Python! We met them briefly in Chapter 5
          in conjunction with numeric tools, and again in Chapter 14 when exploring
          iteration contexts. The built-in versions work almost exactly like
          ours, but they’re coded in C for optimal speed and accept either a
          single iterable or multiple arguments. Still, though it’s
          superfluous in this context, the general coding pattern we used here
          might be useful in other scenarios.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Generalized Set Functions"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
