<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Generalized Set Functions</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="generalized_set_functions"></a>Generalized Set Functions</h1>
<p>Let’s <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e46723"></a>look at a more useful example of special
        argument-matching modes at work. At the end of Chapter 16, we wrote a function that returned the
        intersection of two sequences (it picked out items that appeared in
        both). Here is a version that intersects an arbitrary number of
        sequences (one or more) by using the varargs matching form <code class="epub__literal">*args</code> to collect all the passed-in
        arguments. Because the arguments come in as a tuple, we can process
        them in a simple <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop. Just for
        fun, we’ll code a <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e46738"></a>union</code> function that also accepts an arbitrary
        number of arguments to collect items that appear in any of the
        operands:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e46743"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def intersect(*args):
    res = []
    for x in args[0]:                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Scan first sequence</span></em>
        for other in args[1:]:         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># For all other args</span></em>
            if x not in other: break   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Item in each one?</span></em>
        else:                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># No: break out of loop</span></em>
            res.append(x)              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Yes: add items to end</span></em>
    return res

def union(*args):
    res = []
    for seq in args:                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># For all args</span></em>
        for x in seq:                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># For all nodes</span></em>
            if not x in res:
                res.append(x)          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Add new items to result</span></em>
    return res</pre>
<p>Because these are tools worth reusing (and they’re too big to
        retype interactively), we’ll store the functions in a module file
        called <em class="epub__filename">inter2.py</em> (if you’ve
        forgotten how modules and imports work, see the introduction in Chapter 3, or stay tuned for in-depth coverage
        in Part V). In both functions, the arguments
        passed in at the call come in as the <code class="epub__literal">args</code> tuple. As in the original <code class="epub__literal">intersect</code>, both work on any kind of
        sequence. Here, they are processing strings, mixed types, and more
        than two sequences:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e46785"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from inter2 import intersect, union</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>s1, s2, s3 = "SPAM", "SCAM", "SLAM"</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>intersect(s1, s2), union(s1, s2)</code></strong>           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Two operands</span></em>
(['S', 'A', 'M'], ['S', 'P', 'A', 'M', 'C'])

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>intersect([1,2,3], (1,4))</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Mixed types</span></em>
[1]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>intersect(s1, s2, s3)</code></strong>                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Three operands</span></em>
['S', 'A', 'M']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>union(s1, s2, s3)</code></strong>
['S', 'P', 'A', 'M', 'C', 'L']</pre><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p>I should note that because Python now has a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>set
          object type</em></span> (described in Chapter 5), none of the set-processing examples in
          this book are strictly required anymore; they are included only as
          demonstrations of coding techniques. Because it’s constantly
          improving, Python has an uncanny way of conspiring to make my book
          examples obsolete over time!</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Emulating the Python 3.0 print Function"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
