<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Emulating the Python 3.0 print Function</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="emulating_the_python_3.0_print_function"></a>Emulating the Python 3.0 print Function</h1>
<p>To <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e46831"></a>round out the chapter, let’s look at one last example of
        argument matching at work. <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e46837"></a>The code you’ll see here is intended for use in Python
        2.6 or earlier (it works in 3.0, too, but is pointless there): it uses
        both the <code class="epub__literal">*args</code> arbitrary positional
        tuple and the <code class="epub__literal">**args</code> arbitrary
        keyword-arguments dictionary to simulate most of what the Python 3.0
        <code class="epub__literal">print</code> function does.</p>
<p>As we learned in Chapter 11, this isn’t
        actually required, because 2.6 programmers can always enable the 3.0
        <code class="epub__literal">print</code> function with an import of
        this form:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e46859"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from __future__ import print_function</pre>
<p>To demonstrate argument matching in general, though, the
        following file, <em class="epub__filename">print30.py</em>, does
        the same job in a small amount of reusable code:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e46867"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
Emulate most of the 3.0 print function for use in 2.X
call signature: print30(*args, sep=' ', end='\n', file=None)
"""
import sys

def print30(*args, **kargs):
    sep  = kargs.get('sep', ' ')             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Keyword arg defaults</span></em>
    end  = kargs.get('end', '\n')
    file = kargs.get('file', sys.stdout)
    output = ''
    first  = True
    for arg in args:
        output += ('' if first else sep) + str(arg)
        first = False
    file.write(output + end)</pre>
<p>To test it, import this into another file or the interactive
        prompt, and use it like the 3.0 <code class="epub__literal">print</code> function. Here is a test script,
        <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e46877"></a><em class="epub__filename">testprint30.py</em>
        (notice that the function must be called “print30”, because “print” is
        a reserved word in 2.6):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e46883"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from print30 import print30
print30(1, 2, 3)
print30(1, 2, 3, sep='')                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Suppress separator</span></em>
print30(1, 2, 3, sep='...')
print30(1, [2], (3,), sep='...')             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Various object types</span></em>

print30(4, 5, 6, sep='', end='')             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Suppress newline</span></em>
print30(7, 8, 9)
print30()                                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Add newline (or blank line)</span></em>

import sys
print30(1, 2, 3, sep='??', end='.\n', file=sys.stderr)    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Redirect to file</span></em></pre>
<p>When run under 2.6, we get the same results as 3.0’s <code class="epub__literal">print</code> function:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e46904"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python26\python testprint30.py</code></strong>
1 2 3
123
1...2...3
1...[2]...(3,)
4567 8 9

1??2??3.</pre>
<p>Although pointless in 3.0, the results are the same when run
        there. As usual, the generality of Python’s design allows us to
        prototype or develop concepts in the Python language itself. In this
        case, argument-matching tools are as flexible in Python code as they
        are in Python’s internal implementation.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Using Keyword-Only Arguments"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="using_keyword-only_arguments"></a>Using Keyword-Only Arguments</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>It’s <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e46917"></a>interesting to notice <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e46925"></a>that this example could be coded with Python 3.0
          keyword-only arguments,
          described earlier in this chapter, to automatically validate
          configuration arguments:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e46936"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Use keyword-only args</span></em>

def print30(*args, sep=' ', end='\n', file=sys.stdout):
    output = ''
    first  = True
    for arg in args:
        output += ('' if first else sep) + str(arg)
        first = False
    file.write(output + end)</pre>
<p>This version works the same as the original, and it’s a prime
          example of how keyword-only arguments come in handy. The original
          version assumes that all positional arguments are to be printed, and all
          keywords are for options only. That’s almost sufficient, but any
          extra keyword arguments are silently ignored. A call like the
          following, for instance, will generate an exception with the
          keyword-only form:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e46945"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print30(99, name='bob')</code></strong>
TypeError: print30() got an unexpected keyword argument 'name'</pre>
<p>but will silently ignore the <code class="epub__literal">name</code> argument in the original version. To
          detect superfluous keywords manually, we could use <code class="epub__literal">dict.pop()</code> to delete fetched entries, and
          check if the dictionary is not empty. Here is an equivalent to the
          keyword-only version:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e46958"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Use keyword args deletion with defaults</span></em>

def print30(*args, **kargs):
    sep  = kargs.pop('sep', ' ')
    end  = kargs.pop('end', '\n')
    file = kargs.pop('file', sys.stdout)
    if kargs: raise TypeError('extra keywords: %s' % kargs)
    output = ''
    first  = True
    for arg in args:
        output += ('' if first else sep) + str(arg)
        first = False
    file.write(output + end)</pre>
<p>This works as before, but it now catches extraneous keyword
          arguments, too:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e46964"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print30(99, name='bob')</code></strong>
TypeError: extra keywords: {'name': 'bob'}</pre>
<p>This version of the function runs
          under Python 2.6, but it requires four more lines of code than the
          keyword-only version. Unfortunately, the extra code is required in
          this case—the keyword-only version only works on 3.0, which negates
          most of the reason that I wrote this example in the first place (a
          3.0 emulator that only works on 3.0 isn’t incredibly useful!). In
          programs written to run on 3.0, though, keyword-only arguments can
          simplify a specific category of functions that accept both arguments
          and options. For another example of 3.0 keyword-only arguments, be
          sure to see the upcoming iteration timing case study in Chapter 20.</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="why_you_will_care_colon_keyword_argumen"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Why You Will Care: Keyword Arguments</p>
<p>As <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e46979"></a>you <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e46983"></a>can probably tell, advanced argument-matching modes
            can be complex. They are also entirely optional; you can get by
            with just simple positional matching, and it’s probably a good
            idea to do so when you’re starting out. However, because some
            Python tools make use of them, some general knowledge of these
            modes is important.</p>
<p>For example, keyword arguments play an important role in
            <code class="epub__literal">tkinter</code>, the de facto standard
            GUI API for Python (this module’s name is <code class="epub__literal">Tkinter</code> in Python 2.6). We touch on
            <code class="epub__literal">tkinter</code> only briefly at various
            points in this book, but in terms of its call patterns, keyword
            arguments set configuration options when GUI components are built.
            For instance, a call of the form:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e47000"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from tkinter import *
widget = Button(text="Press me", command=someFunction)</pre>
<p>creates a new button and specifies its text and callback
            function, using the <code class="epub__literal">text</code> and
            <code class="epub__literal">command</code> keyword arguments.
            Since the number of configuration options for a widget can be
            large, keyword arguments let you pick and choose which to apply.
            Without them, you might have to either list all the possible
            options by position or hope for a judicious positional argument
            defaults protocol that would handle every possible option
            arrangement.</p>
<p>Many built-in functions in Python expect us to use keywords
            for usage-mode options as well, which may or may not have
            defaults. As we learned in Chapter 8, for instance, the <code class="epub__literal">sorted</code> built-in:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e47017"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">sorted(iterable, key=None, reverse=False)</pre>
<p>expects us to pass an iterable object to be sorted, but also
            allows us to pass in optional keyword arguments to specify a
            dictionary sort key and a reversal flag, which default to <code class="epub__literal">None</code> and <code class="epub__literal">False</code>, respectively. Since we normally
            don’t use these options, they may be omitted to use
            defaults.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Chapter Summary"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
