<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_answers-id17"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</h1>
<div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The output here is <code class="epub__literal">'1 2
            5'</code>, because <code class="epub__literal">1</code> and
            <code class="epub__literal">2</code> are passed to <code class="epub__literal">a</code> and <code class="epub__literal">b</code> by position, and <code class="epub__literal">c</code> is omitted in the call and defaults to
            <code class="epub__literal">5</code>.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The output this time is <code class="epub__literal">'1 2
            3'</code>: <code class="epub__literal">1</code> is passed to
            <code class="epub__literal">a</code> by position, and <code class="epub__literal">b</code> and <code class="epub__literal">c</code> are passed <code class="epub__literal">2</code> and <code class="epub__literal">3</code> by name (the left-to-right order
            doesn’t matter when keyword arguments are used like this).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>This code prints <code class="epub__literal">'1 (2,
            3)'</code>, because <code class="epub__literal">1</code> is
            passed to <code class="epub__literal">a</code> and the <code class="epub__literal">*pargs</code> collects the remaining positional
            arguments into a new tuple object. We can step through the extra
            positional arguments tuple with any iteration tool (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">for arg in pargs: ...</code>).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>This time the code prints <code class="epub__literal">'1 {'c':
            3, 'b': 2}'</code>, because <code class="epub__literal">1</code> is passed to <code class="epub__literal">a</code> by name and the <code class="epub__literal">**kargs</code> collects the remaining keyword
            arguments into a dictionary. We could step through the extra
            keyword arguments dictionary by key with any iteration tool (e.g.,
            <code class="epub__literal">for key in kargs: ...</code>).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The output here is <code class="epub__literal">'1 5 6
            4'</code>: <code class="epub__literal">1</code> matches
            <code class="epub__literal">a</code> by position, <code class="epub__literal">5</code> and <code class="epub__literal">6</code> match <code class="epub__literal">b</code> and <code class="epub__literal">c</code> by <code class="epub__literal">*name</code> positionals (<code class="epub__literal">6</code> overrides <code class="epub__literal">c</code>’s default), and <code class="epub__literal">d</code> defaults to <code class="epub__literal">4</code> because it was not passed a
            value.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Functions can send back results with <code class="epub__literal">return</code> statements, by changing passed-in
            mutable arguments, and by setting global variables. Globals are
            generally frowned upon (except for very special cases, like
            multithreaded programs) because they can make code more difficult
            to understand and use. <code class="epub__literal">return</code>
            statements are usually best, but changing mutables is fine, if
            expected. Functions may also communicate with system devices such
            as files and sockets, but these are beyond our scope here.</p></li></ol>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[41] </sup>Actually, this is fairly complicated. The Python <code class="epub__literal">sort</code> routine is coded in C and uses a
              highly optimized algorithm that attempts to take advantage of
              partial ordering in the items to be sorted. It’s named “timsort”
              after Tim Peters, its creator, and in its documentation it
              claims to have “supernatural performance” at times (pretty good,
              for a sort!). Still, sorting is an inherently exponential
              operation (it must chop up the sequence and put it back together
              many times), and the other versions simply perform one linear
              left-to-right scan. The net effect is that sorting is quicker if
              the arguments are partially ordered, but is likely to be slower
              otherwise. Even so, Python performance can change over time, and
              the fact that sorting is implemented in the C language can help
              greatly; for an exact analysis, you should time the alternatives
              with the <code class="epub__literal">time</code> or <code class="epub__literal">timeit</code> modules we’ll meet in Chapter 20.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
