<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recursive Functions</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="recursive_functions"></a>Recursive Functions</h1>
<p>While <a id="ch19recursivefunctions"></a>discussing <a id="ch19funcrecursivefunctions"></a>scope rules near the start of Chapter 17,
        we briefly noted that Python supports <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>recursive
        functions</em></span>—functions that call themselves either directly or
        indirectly in order to loop. Recursion is a somewhat advanced topic,
        and it’s relatively rare to see in Python. Still, it’s a useful
        technique to know about, as it allows programs to traverse structures
        that have arbitrary and unpredictable shapes. Recursion is even an
        alternative for simple loops and iterations, though not necessarily
        the simplest or most efficient one.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Summation with Recursion"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="summation_with_recursion"></a>Summation with Recursion</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Let’s <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e47424"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e47429"></a>look at some examples. To sum a list (or other
          sequence) of numbers, we can either use the built-in <code class="epub__literal">sum</code> function or write a more custom
          version of our own. Here’s what a custom summing function might look
          like when coded with recursion:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e47440"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def mysum(L):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if not L:</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return 0</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>else:</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return L[0] + mysum(L[1:])</code></strong>           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Call myself</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mysum([1, 2, 3, 4, 5])</code></strong>
15</pre>
<p>At each level, this function calls itself recursively to
          compute the sum of the rest of the list, which is later added to the
          item at the front. The recursive loop ends and zero is returned when
          the list becomes empty. When using recursion like this, each open
          level of call to the function has its own copy of the function’s
          local scope on the runtime call stack—here, that means <code class="epub__literal">L</code> is different in each level.</p>
<p>If this is difficult to understand (and it often is for new
          programmers), try adding a <code class="epub__literal">print</code>
          of <code class="epub__literal">L</code> to the function and run it
          again, to trace the current list at each call level:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e47477"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def mysum(L):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(L)</code></strong>                                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Trace recursive levels</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if not L:</code></strong>                                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># L shorter at each level</span></em>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return 0</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>else:</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return L[0] + mysum(L[1:])</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mysum([1, 2, 3, 4, 5])</code></strong>
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
[2, 3, 4, 5]
[3, 4, 5]
[4, 5]
[5]
[]
15</pre>
<p>As you can see, the list to be summed grows smaller at each
          recursive level, until it becomes empty—the termination of the
          recursive loop. The sum is computed as the recursive calls
          unwind.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Coding Alternatives"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="coding_alternatives"></a>Coding Alternatives</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Interestingly, <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e47514"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e47519"></a>we can also use Python’s <code class="epub__literal">if</code>/<code class="epub__literal">else</code>
          ternary expression (described in Chapter 12) to save some code
          real-estate here. We can also generalize for any summable type
          (which is easier if we assume at least one item in the input, as we
          did in Chapter 18’s minimum value example) and use
          Python 3.0’s extended sequence assignment to make the first/rest
          unpacking simpler (as covered in Chapter 11):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e47540"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def mysum(L):
    return 0 if not L else L[0] + mysum(L[1:])           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Use ternary expression</span></em>

def mysum(L):
    return L[0] if len(L) == 1 else L[0] + mysum(L[1:])  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Any type, assume one</span></em>

def mysum(L):
    first, *rest = L
    return first if not rest else first + mysum(rest)    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Use 3.0 ext seq assign</span></em></pre>
<p>The latter two of these fail for empty lists but allow for
          sequences of any object type that supports <code class="epub__literal">+</code>, not just numbers:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e47555"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mysum([1])</code></strong>                              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># mysum([]) fails in last 2</span></em>
1
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mysum([1, 2, 3, 4, 5])</code></strong>
15
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mysum(('s', 'p', 'a', 'm'))</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># But various types now work</span></em>
'spam'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mysum(['spam', 'ham', 'eggs'])</code></strong>
'spamhameggs'</pre>
<p>If you study these three variants, you’ll find that the latter
          two also work on a single string argument (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">mysum ('spam'))</code>, because strings are
          sequences of one-character strings; the third variant works on
          arbitary iterables, including open input files, but the others do
          not because they index; and the function header <code class="epub__literal">def mysum(first, *
          rest)</code>, although similar to the third variant, wouldn’t
          work at all, because it expects individual arguments, not a single
          iterable.</p>
<p>Keep in mind that <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e47586"></a>recursion can be <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e47592"></a>direct, as in the examples so far, or
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>indirect</em></span>, as in the following (a function that
          calls another function, which calls back to its caller). The net
          effect is the same, though there are two function calls at each
          level instead of one:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e47599"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def mysum(L):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if not L: return 0</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return nonempty(L)</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Call a function that calls me</span></em>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def nonempty(L):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return L[0] + mysum(L[1:])</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Indirectly recursive</span></em>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mysum([1.1, 2.2, 3.3, 4.4])</code></strong>
11.0</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Loop Statements Versus Recursion"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="loop_statements_versus_recursion"></a>Loop Statements Versus Recursion</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Though <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e47631"></a>recursion <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e47639"></a>works <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e47645"></a>for summing in the prior sections’ examples, it’s
          probably overkill in this context. In fact, recursion is not used
          nearly as often in Python as in more esoteric languages like Prolog
          or Lisp, because Python emphasizes simpler procedural statements
          like loops, which are usually more natural. The <code class="epub__literal">while</code>, for example, often makes things a
          bit more concrete, and it doesn’t require that a function be defined
          to allow recursive calls:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e47652"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sum = 0</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>while L:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sum += L[0]</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = L[1:]</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sum</code></strong>
15</pre>
<p>Better yet, <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops
          iterate for us automatically, making recursion largely extraneous in
          most cases (and, in all likelihood, less efficient in terms of
          memory space and execution time):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e47678"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sum = 0</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for x in L: sum += x</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sum</code></strong>
15</pre>
<p>With looping statements, we don’t require a fresh copy of a
          local scope on the call stack for each iteration, and we avoid the
          speed costs associated with function calls in general. (Stay tuned
          for Chapter 20’s
          timer case study for ways to compare the execution times of
          alternatives like these.)</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Handling Arbitrary Structures"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="handling_arbitrary_structures"></a>Handling Arbitrary Structures</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>On <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e47701"></a>the <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e47709"></a>other hand, recursion (or equivalent explicit
          stack-based algorithms, which we’ll finesse here) can be required to
          traverse arbitrarily shaped structures. As a simple example of
          recursion’s role in this context, consider the task of computing the
          sum of all the numbers in a nested sublists structure like
          this:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e47715"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">[1, [2, [3, 4], 5], 6, [7, 8]]                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Arbitrarily nested sublists</span></em></pre>
<p>Simple looping statements won’t work here because this not a
          linear iteration. Nested looping statements do not suffice either,
          because the sublists may be nested to arbitrary depth and in an
          arbitrary shape. Instead, the following code accommodates such
          general nesting by using recursion to visit sublists along the
          way<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e49523"></a>:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e47721"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def sumtree(L):
    tot = 0
    for x in L:                                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># For each item at this level</span></em>
        if not isinstance(x, list):
            tot += x                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Add numbers directly</span></em>
        else:
            tot += sumtree(x)                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Recur for sublists</span></em>
    return tot

L = [1, [2, [3, 4], 5], 6, [7, 8]]               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Arbitrary nesting</span></em>
print(sumtree(L))                                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Prints 36</span></em>


<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Pathological cases</span></em>

print(sumtree([1, [2, [3, [4, [5]]]]]))          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Prints 15 (right-heavy)</span></em>

print(sumtree([[[[[1], 2], 3], 4], 5]))          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Prints 15 (left-heavy)</span></em></pre>
<p>Trace through the test cases at the bottom of this script to
          see how recursion traverses their nested lists. Although this
          example is artificial, it is representative of a larger class of
          programs; inheritance trees and module import chains, for example,
          can exhibit similarly general structures. In fact, we will use
          recursion again in such roles in more realistic examples later in
          this book:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In Chapter 24’s <em class="epub__filename">reloadall.py</em>, to traverse import
              chains</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In Chapter 28’s <em class="epub__filename">classtree.py</em>, to traverse class
              inheritance trees</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In Chapter 30’s <em class="epub__filename">lister.py</em>, to traverse class
              inheritance trees again</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Although you should generally prefer looping statements to
          recursion for linear iterations on the grounds of simplicity and
          efficiency, we’ll find that recursion is essential in scenarios like
          those in these later examples.</p>
<p>Moreover, you sometimes need to be aware of the potential of
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>unintended</em></span> recursion in your programs. As
          you’ll also see later in the book, some operator overloading methods
          in classes such as <code class="epub__literal">__setattr__</code>
          and <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> have the
          potential to recursively loop if used incorrectly. Recursion is a
          powerful tool, but it tends to be best when expected<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e47787"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e47788"></a>!</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Function Objects: Attributes and Annotations"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
