<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Function Objects: Attributes and Annotations</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="function_objects_colon_attributes_and_a"></a>Function Objects: Attributes and Annotations</h1>
<p>Python <a id="ch19functionsattribannotat"></a>functions are more flexible than you might think. As
        we’ve seen in this part of the book, functions in Python are much more
        than code-generation specifications for a compiler—Python functions
        are full-blown <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>objects</em></span>, stored in pieces of
        memory all their own. As such, they can be freely passed around a
        program and called indirectly. They also support operations that have
        little to do with calls at all—attribute storage and
        annotation.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Indirect Function Calls"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="indirect_function_calls"></a>Indirect Function Calls</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Because <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e47809"></a>Python functions are objects, you can write programs
          <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e47815"></a>that process them generically. Function objects may be
          assigned to other names, passed to other functions, embedded in data
          structures, returned from one function to another, and more, as if
          they were simple numbers or strings. Function objects also happen to
          support a special operation: they can be called by listing arguments
          in parentheses after a function expression. Still, functions belong
          to the same general category as other objects.</p>
<p>We’ve seen some of these generic use cases for functions in
          earlier examples, but a quick review helps to underscore the object
          model. For example, there’s really nothing special about the name
          used in a <code class="epub__literal">def</code> statement: it’s
          just a variable assigned in the current scope, as if it had appeared
          on the left of an <code class="epub__literal">=</code> sign. After a
          <code class="epub__literal">def</code> runs, the function name is
          simply a reference to an object—you can
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>reassign</em></span> that object to other names freely and
          call it through any reference:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e47833"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def echo(message):</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Name echo assigned to function object</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(message)</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>echo('Direct call')</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Call object through original name</span></em>
Direct call

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = echo</code></strong>                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Now x references the function too</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x('Indirect call!')</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Call object through name by adding ()</span></em>
Indirect call!</pre>
<p>Because arguments are passed by assigning objects, it’s just
          as easy to <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>pass</em></span> functions to other functions as
          arguments. The callee may then call the passed-in function just by
          adding arguments in parentheses:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e47868"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def indirect(func, arg):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>func(arg)</code></strong>                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Call the passed-in object by adding ()</span></em>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>indirect(echo, 'Argument call!')</code></strong>     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Pass the function to another function</span></em>
Argument call!</pre>
<p>You can even stuff function objects into data structures, as
          though they were integers or strings. The following, for example,
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>embeds</em></span> the function twice in a list of tuples,
          as a sort of actions table. Because Python compound types like these
          can contain any sort of object, there’s no special case here,
          either:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e47890"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>schedule = [ (echo, 'Spam!'), (echo, 'Ham!') ]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for (func, arg) in schedule:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>func(arg)</code></strong>                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Call functions embedded in containers</span></em>
...
Spam!
Ham!</pre>
<p>This code simply steps through the <code class="epub__literal">schedule</code> list, calling the <code class="epub__literal">echo</code> function with one argument each time
          through (notice the tuple-unpacking assignment in the <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop header, introduced in Chapter 13). As we saw in Chapter 17’s examples, functions can also be created and
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>returned</em></span> for use elsewhere:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e47923"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def make(label):</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Make a function but don't call it</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def echo(message):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(label + ':' + message)</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return echo</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F = make('Spam')</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Label in enclosing scope is retained</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F('Ham!')</code></strong>                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Call the function that make returned</span></em>
Spam:Ham!
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>F('Eggs!')</code></strong>
Spam:Eggs!</pre>
<p>Python’s universal object model and lack of type declarations
          make for an incredibly flexible programming language.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Function Introspection"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="function_introspection"></a>Function Introspection</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Because <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e47963"></a>they are objects, we can also process functions with
          normal object tools. In fact, functions are more flexible than you
          might expect. For instance, once we make a function, we can call it
          as usual:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e47969"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def func(a):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>b = 'spam'</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return b * a</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>func(8)</code></strong>
'spamspamspamspamspamspamspamspam'</pre>
<p>But the call expression is just one operation defined to work
          on function objects. We can also inspect their attributes
          generically (the following is run in Python 3.0, but 2.6 results are
          similar):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e47985"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>func.__name__</code></strong>
'func'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dir(func)</code></strong>
['__annotations__', '__call__', '__class__', '__closure__', '__code__',
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...more omitted...</code></em>
'__repr__', '__setattr__', '__sizeof__', '__str__', '__subclasshook__']</pre>
<p>Introspection tools allow us to explore implementation details
          too—functions have attached <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>code objects</em></span>, for
          example, which provide details on aspects such as the functions’
          local variables and arguments:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e48001"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>func.__code__</code></strong>
&lt;code object func at 0x0257C9B0, file "&lt;stdin&gt;", line 1&gt;

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dir(func.__code__)</code></strong>
['__class__', '__delattr__', '__doc__', '__eq__', '__format__', '__ge__',
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...more omitted...</code></em>
'co_argcount', 'co_cellvars', 'co_code', 'co_consts', 'co_filename',
'co_firstlineno', 'co_flags', 'co_freevars', 'co_kwonlyargcount', 'co_lnotab',
'co_name', 'co_names', 'co_nlocals', 'co_stacksize', 'co_varnames']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>func.__code__.co_varnames</code></strong>
('a', 'b')
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>func.__code__.co_argcount</code></strong>
1</pre>
<p>Tool writers can make use of such information to manage
          functions (in fact, we will too in Chapter 38, to
          implement validation of function arguments in decorators).</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Function Attributes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="function_attributes"></a>Function Attributes</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Function<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e48063"></a> <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e48027"></a>objects are not limited to the system-defined
          attributes listed in the prior section, though. As we learned in
          Chapter 17, it’s possible to attach arbitrary
          user-defined attributes to them as well:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e48035"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>func</code></strong>
&lt;function func at 0x0257C738&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>func.count = 0</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>func.count += 1</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>func.count</code></strong>
1
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>func.handles = 'Button-Press'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>func.handles</code></strong>
'Button-Press'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dir(func)</code></strong>
['__annotations__', '__call__', '__class__', '__closure__', '__code__',
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...more omitted...</code></em>
__str__', '__subclasshook__', 'count', 'handles']</pre>
<p>As we saw in that chapter, such attributes can be used to
          attach <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>state information</em></span> to function objects
          directly, instead of using other techniques such as globals,
          nonlocals, and classes. Unlike nonlocals, such attributes are
          accessible anywhere the function itself is. In a sense, this is also
          a way to emulate “static locals” in other languages—variables whose
          names are local to a function, but whose values are retained after a
          function exits. Attributes are related to objects instead of scopes,
          but the net effect is similar.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Function Annotations in 3.0"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="function_annotations_in_3.0"></a>Function Annotations in 3.0</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e48072"></a>Python 3.0 <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e48078"></a>(but not 2.6), it’s also possible to attach
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e48085"></a>annotation information</em></span>—arbitrary user-defined data about a
          function’s arguments and result—to a function object. Python
          provides special syntax for specifying annotations, but it doesn’t
          do anything with them itself; annotations are completely optional,
          and when present are simply attached to the function object’s
          <code class="epub__literal">__annotations__</code> attribute for use
          by other tools.</p>
<p>We met Python 3.0’s keyword-only arguments in the prior
          chapter; annotations generalize function header syntax further.
          Consider the following nonannotated function, which is coded with
          three arguments and returns a result:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e48098"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def func(a, b, c):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return a + b + c</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>func(1, 2, 3)</code></strong>
6</pre>
<p>Syntactically, function annotations are coded in <code class="epub__literal">def</code> header lines, as arbitrary expressions
          associated with arguments and return values. For arguments, they
          appear after a colon immediately following the argument’s name; for
          return values, they are written after a <code class="epub__literal">-&gt;</code> following the arguments list. This
          code, for example, annotates all three of the prior function’s
          arguments, as well as its return value:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e48117"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def func(a: 'spam', b: (1, 10), c: float) -&gt; int:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return a + b + c</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>func(1, 2, 3)</code></strong>
6</pre>
<p>Calls to an annotated function work as usual, but when
          annotations are present Python collects them in a
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>dictionary</em></span> and attaches it to the function
          object itself. Argument names become keys, the return value
          annotation is stored under key “return” if coded, and the values of
          annotation keys are assigned to the results of the annotation
          expressions:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e48135"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>func.__annotations__</code></strong>
{'a': 'spam', 'c': &lt;class 'float'&gt;, 'b': (1, 10), 'return': &lt;class 'int'&gt;}</pre>
<p>Because they are just Python objects attached to a Python
          object, annotations are straightforward to process. The following
          annotates just two of three arguments and steps through the attached
          annotations generically:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e48142"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def func(a: 'spam', b, c: 99):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return a + b + c</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>func(1, 2, 3)</code></strong>
6
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>func.__annotations__</code></strong>
{'a': 'spam', 'c': 99}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for arg in func.__annotations__:</code></strong>
...    <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(arg, '=&gt;', func.__annotations__[arg])</code></strong>
...
a =&gt; spam
c =&gt; 99</pre>
<p>There are two fine points to note here. First, you can still
          use <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>defaults</em></span> for arguments if you code
          annotations—the annotation (and its <code class="epub__literal">:</code> character) appear before the default
          (and its <code class="epub__literal">=</code> character). In the
          following, for example, <code class="epub__literal">a: 'spam' =
          4</code> means that argument <code class="epub__literal">a</code>
          defaults to <code class="epub__literal">4</code> and is annotated
          with the string <code class="epub__literal">'spam'</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e48188"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def func(a: 'spam' = 4, b: (1, 10) = 5, c: float = 6) -&gt; int:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return a + b + c</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>func(1, 2, 3)</code></strong>
6
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>func()</code></strong>                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 4 + 5 + 6   (all defaults)</span></em>
15
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>func(1, c=10)</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 1 + 5 + 10  (keywords work normally)</span></em>
16
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>func.__annotations__</code></strong>
{'a': 'spam', 'c': &lt;class 'float'&gt;, 'b': (1, 10), 'return': &lt;class 'int'&gt;}</pre>
<p>Second, note that the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>blank spaces</em></span> in the
          prior example are all optional—you can use spaces between components
          in function headers or not, but omitting them might degrade your
          code’s readability to some observers:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e48220"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def func(a:'spam'=4, b:(1,10)=5, c:float=6)-&gt;int:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return a + b + c</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>func(1, 2)</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 1 + 2 + 6</span></em>
9
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>func.__annotations__</code></strong>
{'a': 'spam', 'c': &lt;class 'float'&gt;, 'b': (1, 10), 'return': &lt;class 'int'&gt;}</pre>
<p>Annotations are a new feature in 3.0, and some of their
          potential uses remain to be uncovered. It’s easy to imagine
          annotations being used to specify constraints for argument types or
          values, though, and larger APIs might use this feature as a way to
          register function interface information. In fact, we’ll see a
          potential application in Chapter 38, where we’ll
          look at annotations as an alternative to <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>function
          decorator arguments</em></span> (a more general concept in which
          information is coded outside the function header and so is not
          limited to a single role). Like Python itself, annotation is a tool
          whose roles are shaped by your imagination.</p>
<p>Finally, note that annotations work only in <code class="epub__literal">def</code> statements, not <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code> expressions, because <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>’s syntax already limits the utility
          of the functions it defines. Coincidentally, this brings us to our
          next <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e48255"></a>topic.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Anonymous Functions: lambda"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
