<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Anonymous Functions: lambda</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="anonymous_functions_colon_lambda"></a>Anonymous Functions: lambda</h1>
<p>Besides <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e48263"></a>the <code class="epub__literal">def</code> <a id="ch19lambdaexp"></a>statement, Python also provides an expression form that
        generates function objects. Because of its similarity to a tool in the
        Lisp language, it’s called <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>.<sup>[42]</sup> Like <code class="epub__literal">def</code>, this
        expression creates a function to be called later, but it returns the
        function instead of assigning it to a name. This is why <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>s are sometimes known as
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e48299"></a>anonymous</em></span> (i.e., unnamed) functions. In
        practice, they are often used as a way to inline a function
        definition, or to defer execution of a piece of code.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="lambda Basics"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="lambda_basics"></a>lambda Basics</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e48310"></a>lambda</code>’s general form is the keyword
          <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>, followed by one or more
          arguments (exactly like the arguments list you enclose in
          parentheses in a <code class="epub__literal">def</code> header),
          followed by an expression after a colon:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e48323"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">lambda <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>argument1</code></em>, <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>argument2</code></em>,... <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>argumentN</code></em> :<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>expression using arguments</code></em></pre>
<p>Function objects returned by running <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code> expressions work exactly the same
          as those created and assigned by <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s, but there are a few differences that
          make <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>s useful in
          specialized roles:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><strong class="epub__userinput"><code>lambda</code></strong> <span class="epub__strong"><strong>is an expression, not a statement</strong></span>.
              Because of this, a <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code> can
              appear in places a <code class="epub__literal">def</code> is not
              allowed by Python’s syntax—inside a list literal or a function
              call’s arguments, for example. As an expression, <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code> returns a value (a new
              function) that can optionally be assigned a name. In contrast,
              the <code class="epub__literal">def</code> statement always
              assigns the new function to the name in the header, instead of
              returning it as a result.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><strong class="epub__userinput"><code>lambda</code></strong><span class="epub__strong"><strong>’s body is a single expression, not a block of
              statements</strong></span>. The <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>’s body is similar to what you’d
              put in a <code class="epub__literal">def</code> body’s <code class="epub__literal">return</code> statement; you simply type the
              result as a naked expression, instead of explicitly returning
              it. Because it is limited to an expression, a <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code> is less general than a <code class="epub__literal">def</code>—you can only squeeze so much logic
              into a <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code> body without
              using statements such as <code class="epub__literal">if</code>.
              This is by design, to limit program nesting: <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code> is designed for coding simple
              functions, and <code class="epub__literal">def</code> handles
              larger tasks.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Apart from those distinctions,
          <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s and <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>s do the same sort of work. For
          instance, we’ve seen how to make a function with a <code class="epub__literal">def</code> statement:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e48415"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def func(x, y, z): return x + y + z</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>func(2, 3, 4)</code></strong>
9</pre>
<p>But you can achieve the same effect with a <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code> expression by explicitly assigning
          its result to a name through which you can later call the
          function:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e48428"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f = lambda x, y, z: x + y + z</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f(2, 3, 4)</code></strong>
9</pre>
<p>Here, <code class="epub__literal">f</code> is assigned the
          function object the <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>
          expression creates; this is how <code class="epub__literal">def</code> works, too, but its assignment is
          automatic.</p>
<p>Defaults work on <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>
          arguments, just like in a <code class="epub__literal">def</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e48456"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = (lambda a="fee", b="fie", c="foe": a + b + c)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x("wee")</code></strong>
'weefiefoe'</pre>
<p>The code in a <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code> body
          also follows the same scope lookup rules as code inside a <code class="epub__literal">def</code>. <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code> expressions introduce a local scope
          much like a nested <code class="epub__literal">def</code>, which
          automatically sees names in enclosing functions, the module, and the
          built-in scope (via the LEGB rule):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e48478"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def knights():</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>title = 'Sir'</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>action = (lambda x: title + ' ' + x)</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Title in enclosing def</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return action</code></strong>                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Return a function</span></em>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>act = knights()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>act('robin')</code></strong>
'Sir robin'</pre>
<p>In this example, prior to Release 2.2, the value for the name
          <code class="epub__literal">title</code> would typically have been
          passed in as a default argument value instead; flip back to the
          scopes coverage in Chapter 17 if you’ve forgotten
          why.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Why Use lambda?"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="why_use_lambda_question"></a>Why Use lambda?</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Generally speaking, <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e48518"></a>lambda</code>s come in handy as a sort of function
          shorthand that allows you to embed a function’s definition within
          the code that uses it. They are entirely optional (you can always
          use <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s instead), but they tend
          to be simpler coding constructs in scenarios where you just need to
          embed small bits of executable code.</p>
<p>For instance, we’ll see later that callback handlers are
          frequently coded as inline <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>
          expressions embedded directly in a registration call’s arguments
          list, instead of being defined with a <code class="epub__literal">def</code> elsewhere in a file and referenced by
          name (see the sidebar Why You Will Care: Callbacks for an
          example).</p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>s are also commonly
          used to code <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e48543"></a>jump tables</em></span>, which are lists or
          dictionaries of actions to be performed on demand. For
          example:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e48548"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">L = [lambda x: x ** 2,               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Inline function definition</span></em>
     lambda x: x ** 3,
     lambda x: x ** 4]               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># A list of 3 callable functions</span></em>

for f in L:
    print(f(2))                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Prints 4, 8, 16</span></em>

print(L[0](3))                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Prints 9</span></em></pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code> expression is
          most useful as a shorthand for <code class="epub__literal">def</code>, when you need to stuff small pieces
          of executable code into places where statements are illegal
          syntactically. This code snippet, for example, builds up a list of
          three functions by embedding <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code> expressions inside a list literal;
          a <code class="epub__literal">def</code> won’t work inside a list
          literal like this because it is a statement, not an expression. The
          equivalent <code class="epub__literal">def</code> coding would
          require temporary function names and function definitions outside
          the context of intended use:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e48578"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def f1(x): return x ** 2
def f2(x): return x ** 3             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Define named functions</span></em>
def f3(x): return x ** 4

L = [f1, f2, f3]                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Reference by name</span></em>

for f in L:
    print(f(2))                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Prints 4, 8, 16</span></em>

print(L[0](3))                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Prints 9</span></em></pre>
<p>In fact, you can do the same sort of thing with dictionaries
          and other data structures in Python to build up more general sorts
          of action tables. Here’s another example to illustrate, at the
          interactive prompt:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e48593"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>key = 'got'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>{'already': (lambda: 2 + 2),</code></strong>
...  <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'got':     (lambda: 2 * 4),</code></strong>
...  <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'one':     (lambda: 2 ** 6)}[key]()</code></strong>
8</pre>
<p>Here, when Python makes the temporary dictionary, each of the
          nested <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>s generates and
          leaves behind a function to be called later. Indexing by key fetches
          one of those functions, and parentheses force the fetched function
          to be called. When coded this way, a dictionary becomes a more
          general multiway branching tool than what I could show you in Chapter 12’s coverage of <code class="epub__literal">if</code> statements.</p>
<p>To make this work without <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>, you’d need to instead code three
          <code class="epub__literal">def</code> statements somewhere else in
          your file, outside the dictionary in which the functions are to be
          used, and reference the functions by name:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e48626"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def f1(): return 2 + 2</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def f2(): return 2 * 4</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def f3(): return 2 ** 6</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>key = 'one'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>{'already': f1, 'got': f2, 'one': f3}[key]()</code></strong>
64</pre>
<p>This works, too, but your <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s may be arbitrarily far away in your
          file, even if they are just little bits of code. The <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>code
          proximity</em></span> that <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>s
          provide is especially useful for functions that will only be used in
          a single context—if the three functions here are not useful anywhere
          else, it makes sense to embed their definitions within the
          dictionary as <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>s. Moreover,
          the <code class="epub__literal">def</code> form requires you to make
          up names for these little functions that may clash with other names
          in this file (perhaps unlikely, but always possible).</p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>s also come in handy
          in function-call argument lists as a way to inline temporary
          function definitions not used anywhere else in your program; we’ll
          see some examples of such other uses later in this chapter, when we
          study <code class="epub__literal">map</code>.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="How (Not) to Obfuscate Your Python Code"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="how_open_parenthesis_not_close_parenthe"></a>How (Not) to Obfuscate Your Python Code</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The fact that the body of a <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e48673"></a>lambda</code> has to be a single expression (not a
          series of statements) would seem to place severe limits on how much
          logic you can pack into a <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>.
          If you know what you’re doing, though, you can code most statements
          in Python as expression-based equivalents.</p>
<p>For example, if you want to print from the body of a lambda
          function, simply say <code class="epub__literal">print(X)</code> in
          Python 3.X (where this becomes a call expression instead of a
          statement), but say <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdout.write(str(x)+'\n') </code>in either
          Python 2.X or 3.X to make sure it's an expression portably (recall
          from Chapter 11 that
          this is what print really does). Similarly, to nest logic in a
          <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>, you can use the <code class="epub__literal">if</code>/<code class="epub__literal">else</code>
          ternary expression introduced in Chapter 12, or the equivalent but
          trickier <code class="epub__literal">and</code>/<code class="epub__literal">or</code> combination also described there. As
          you learned earlier, the following statement:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e48717"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">if a:
    b
else:
    c</pre>
<p>can be emulated by either of these roughly equivalent
          expressions:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e48721"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">b if a else c
((a and b) or c)</pre>
<p>Because expressions like these can be placed inside a <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>, they may be used to implement
          selection logic within a <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>
          function:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e48731"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>lower = (lambda x, y: x if x &lt; y else y)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>lower('bb', 'aa')</code></strong>
'aa'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>lower('aa', 'bb')</code></strong>
'aa'</pre>
<p>Furthermore, if you need to perform loops within a <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>, you can also embed things like
          <code class="epub__literal">map</code> calls and list comprehension
          expressions (tools we met in earlier chapters and will revisit in
          this and the next chapter):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e48750"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import sys</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>showall = lambda x: list(map(sys.stdout.write, x))</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Use list in 3.0</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>t = showall(['spam\n', 'toast\n', 'eggs\n'])</code></strong>
spam
toast
eggs

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>showall = lambda x: [sys.stdout.write(line) for line in x]</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>t = showall(('bright\n', 'side\n', 'of\n', 'life\n'))</code></strong>
bright
side
of
life</pre>
<p>Now that I’ve shown you these tricks, I am required by law to
          ask you to please only use them as a last resort. Without due care,
          they can lead to unreadable (a.k.a. <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>obfuscated</em></span>)
          Python code. In general, simple is better than complex, explicit is
          better than implicit, and full statements are better than arcane
          expressions. That’s why <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code> is
          limited to expressions. If you have larger logic to code, use
          <code class="epub__literal">def</code>; <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code> is for small pieces of inline code.
          On the other hand, you may find these techniques useful in
          moderation.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Nested lambdas and Scopes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="nested_lambdas_and_scopes"></a>Nested lambdas and Scopes</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p><code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>s <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e48792"></a>are the main beneficiaries of nested function scope
          lookup (the E in the LEGB scope rule we studied in Chapter 17). In the following, for example, the <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code> appears inside a <code class="epub__literal">def</code>—the typical case—and so can access the
          value that the name <code class="epub__literal">x</code> had in the
          enclosing function’s scope at the time that the enclosing function
          was called:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e48809"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def action(x):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return (lambda y: x + y)</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Make and return function, remember x</span></em>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>act = action(99)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>act</code></strong>
&lt;function &lt;lambda&gt; at 0x00A16A88&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>act(2)</code></strong>                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Call what action returned</span></em>
101</pre>
<p>What wasn’t illustrated in the prior discussion of nested
          function scopes is that a <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>
          also has access to the names in any enclosing <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>. This case is somewhat obscure, but
          imagine if we recoded the prior <code class="epub__literal">def</code> with a <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e48847"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>action = (lambda x: (lambda y: x + y))</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>act = action(99)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>act(3)</code></strong>
102
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>((lambda x: (lambda y: x + y))(99))(4)</code></strong>
103</pre>
<p>Here, the nested <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>
          structure makes a function that makes a function when called. In
          both cases, the nested <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>’s
          code has access to the variable <code class="epub__literal">x</code>
          in the enclosing <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>. This
          works, but it’s fairly convoluted code; in the interest of
          readability, nested <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>s are
          generally best avoided.</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="why_you_will_care_colon_callbacks"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Why You Will Care: Callbacks</p>
<p>Another very common application of <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e48884"></a>lambda</code> is to define inline callback
            functions for Python’s <code class="epub__literal">tkinter</code>
            GUI API (this module is named <code class="epub__literal">Tkinter</code> in Python 2.6). For example, the
            following creates a button that prints a message on the console
            when pressed, assuming <code class="epub__literal">tkinter</code>
            is available on your computer (it is by default on Windows and
            other OSs):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e48900"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import sys
from tkinter import Button, mainloop     # Tkinter in 2.6
x = Button(
        text ='Press me',
        command=(lambda:sys.stdout.write('Spam\n')))
x.pack()
mainloop()</pre>
<p>Here, the callback handler is registered by passing a
            function generated with a <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code> to the <code class="epub__literal">command</code> keyword argument. The advantage
            of <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code> over <code class="epub__literal">def</code> here is that the code that handles a
            button press is right here, embedded in the button-creation
            call.</p>
<p>In effect, the <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>defers</em></span> execution of the handler until the
            event occurs: the <code class="epub__literal">write</code> call
            happens on button presses, not when the button is created.</p>
<p>Because the nested function scope rules apply to <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>s as well, they are also easier to
            use as callback handlers, as of Python 2.2—they automatically see
            names in the functions in which they are coded and no longer
            require passed-in defaults in most cases. This is especially handy
            for accessing the special <code class="epub__literal">self</code>
            instance argument that is a local variable in enclosing class
            method functions (more on classes in Part VI):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e48937"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class MyGui:
    def makewidgets(self):
        Button(command=(lambda: self.onPress("spam")))
    def onPress(self, message):
        ...<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>use message</code></em>...</pre>
<p>In prior releases, even <code class="epub__literal">self</code> had to be passed in to a <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code> with <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e48950"></a>defaults.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Mapping Functions over Sequences: map"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
