<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Mapping Functions over Sequences: map</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="mapping_functions_over_sequences_colon"></a>Mapping Functions over Sequences: map</h1>
<p>One <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e48958"></a>of the <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e48962"></a>more common things programs do with lists and other
        sequences is apply an operation to each item and collect the results.
        For instance, updating all the counters in a list can be done easily
        with a <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e48971"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>counters = [1, 2, 3, 4]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>updated = []</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for x in counters:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>updated.append(x + 10)</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Add 10 to each item</span></em>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>updated</code></strong>
[11, 12, 13, 14]</pre>
<p>But because this is such a common operation, Python actually
        provides a built-in that does most of the work for you. The <code class="epub__literal">map</code> function applies a passed-in function to
        each item in an iterable object and returns a list containing all the
        function call results. For example:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e48997"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def inc(x): return x + 10</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Function to be run</span></em>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(map(inc, counters))</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Collect results</span></em>
[11, 12, 13, 14]</pre>
<p>We met <code class="epub__literal">map</code> briefly in
        Chapters 13 and 14, as a way to apply a built-in
        function to items in an iterable. Here, we make better use of it by
        passing in a user-defined function to be applied to each item in the
        list—<code class="epub__literal">map</code> calls <code class="epub__literal">inc</code> on each list item and collects all the
        return values into a new list. Remember that <code class="epub__literal">map</code> is an iterable in Python 3.0, so a
        <code class="epub__literal">list</code> call is used to force it to
        produce all its results for display here; this isn’t necessary in
        2.6.</p>
<p>Because <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e49036"></a>map</code> expects a function to be passed in, it
        also happens to be one of the places where <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code> commonly appears:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e49046"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(map((lambda x: x + 3), counters))</code></strong>     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Function expression</span></em>
[4, 5, 6, 7]</pre>
<p>Here, the function adds 3 to each item in the <code class="epub__literal">counters</code> list; as this little function isn’t
        needed elsewhere, it was written inline as a <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>. Because such uses of <code class="epub__literal">map</code> are equivalent to <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops, with a little extra code you can
        always code a general mapping utility yourself:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e49068"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def mymap(func, seq):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res = []</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for x in seq: res.append(func(x))</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return res</code></strong></pre>
<p>Assuming the function <code class="epub__literal">inc</code> is
        still as it was when it was shown previously, we can map it across a
        sequence with the built-in or our equivalent:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e49087"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(map(inc, [1, 2, 3]))</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Built-in is an iterator</span></em>
[11, 12, 13]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mymap(inc, [1, 2, 3])</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Ours builds a list (see generators)</span></em>
[11, 12, 13]</pre>
<p>However, as <code class="epub__literal">map</code> is a
        built-in, it’s always available, always works the same way, and has
        some performance benefits (as we’ll prove in the next chapter, it’s
        usually faster than a manually coded <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop). Moreover, <code class="epub__literal">map</code> can be used in more advanced ways than
        shown here. For instance, given multiple sequence arguments, it sends
        items taken from sequences in parallel as distinct arguments to the
        function:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e49112"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pow(3, 4)</code></strong>                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 3**4</span></em>
81
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(map(pow, [1, 2, 3], [2, 3, 4]))</code></strong>  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 1**2, 2**3, 3**4</span></em>
[1, 8, 81]</pre>
<p>With multiple sequences, <code class="epub__literal">map</code>
        expects an N-argument function for N sequences. Here, the <code class="epub__literal">pow</code> function takes two arguments on each
        call—one from each sequence passed to <code class="epub__literal">map</code>. It’s not much extra work to simulate
        this multiple-sequence generality in code, too, but we’ll postpone
        doing so until later in the next chapter, after we’ve met some
        additional iteration tools.</p>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">map</code> call is similar to
        the list comprehension expressions we studied in Chapter 14 and will meet
        again in the next chapter, but <code class="epub__literal">map</code>
        applies a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>function</em></span> call to each item instead of
        an arbitrary <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>expression</em></span>. Because of this
        limitation, it is a somewhat less general tool. However, in some cases
        <code class="epub__literal">map</code> may be faster to run than a
        list comprehension (e.g., when mapping a built-in function), and it
        may also require less coding.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Functional Programming Tools: filter and reduce"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
