<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Functional Programming Tools: filter and reduce</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="functional_programming_tools_colon_filt"></a>Functional Programming Tools: filter and reduce</h1>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e49162"></a><code class="epub__literal">map</code> function is the
        simplest representative of a class of Python built-ins used for
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>functional programming</em></span>—tools that apply functions
        to sequences and other iterables. Its relatives filter out items based
        on a test function (<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e49171"></a><code class="epub__literal">filter</code>) and apply
        functions to pairs of items and running results (<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e49177"></a><code class="epub__literal">reduce</code>). Because they
        return iterables, <code class="epub__literal">range</code> and
        <code class="epub__literal">filter</code> both require <code class="epub__literal">list</code> calls to display all their results in
        3.0. For example, the following <code class="epub__literal">filter</code> call picks out items in a sequence
        that are greater than zero:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e49196"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(range(−5, 5))</code></strong>                                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># An iterator in 3.0</span></em>
[−5, −4, −3, −2, −1, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(filter((lambda x: x &gt; 0), range(−5, 5)))</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># An iterator in 3.0</span></em>
[1, 2, 3, 4]</pre>
<p>Items in the sequence or iterable for which the function returns
        a true result are added to the result list. Like <code class="epub__literal">map</code>, this function is roughly equivalent to
        a <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop, but it is built-in and
        fast:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e49218"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res = []</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for x in range(−5, 5):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if x &gt; 0:</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res.append(x)</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res</code></strong>
[1, 2, 3, 4]</pre>
<p><code class="epub__literal">reduce</code>, which is a simple
        built-in function in 2.6 but lives in the <code class="epub__literal">functools</code> module in 3.0, is more complex. It
        accepts an iterator to process, but it’s not an iterator itself—it
        returns a single result. Here are two <code class="epub__literal">reduce</code> calls that compute the sum and
        product of the items in a list:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e49245"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from functools import reduce</code></strong>      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Import in 3.0, not in 2.6</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>reduce((lambda x, y: x + y), [1, 2, 3, 4])</code></strong>
10
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>reduce((lambda x, y: x * y), [1, 2, 3, 4])</code></strong>
24</pre>
<p>At each step, <code class="epub__literal">reduce</code> passes
        the current sum or product, along with the next item from the list, to
        the passed-in <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code> function. By
        default, the first item in the sequence initializes the starting
        value. To illustrate, here’s the <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop equivalent to the first of these
        calls, with the addition hardcoded inside the loop:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e49270"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = [1,2,3,4]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res = L[0]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for x in L[1:]:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res = res + x</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; res
10</pre>
<p>Coding your own version of <code class="epub__literal">reduce</code> is actually fairly straightforward.
        The following function emulates most of the built-in’s behavior and
        helps demystify its operation in general:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e49289"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def myreduce(function, sequence):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>tally = sequence[0]</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for next in sequence[1:]:</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>tally = function(tally, next)</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return tally</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>myreduce((lambda x, y: x + y), [1, 2, 3, 4, 5])</code></strong>
15
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>myreduce((lambda x, y: x * y), [1, 2, 3, 4, 5])</code></strong>
120</pre>
<p>The built-in <code class="epub__literal">reduce</code> also
        allows an optional third argument placed before the items in the
        sequence to serve as a default result when the sequence is empty, but
        we’ll leave this extension as a suggested exercise.</p>
<p>If this coding technique has sparked your interest, you might
        also be interested in the standard library <code class="epub__literal">operator</code> module, which provides functions
        that correspond to built-in expressions and so comes in handy for some
        uses of functional tools (see Python’s library manual for more details
        on this module):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e49324"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import operator, functools</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>functools.reduce(operator.add, [2, 4, 6])</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Function-based +</span></em>
12
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>functools.reduce((lambda x, y: x + y), [2, 4, 6])</code></strong>
12</pre>
<p>Together with <code class="epub__literal">map</code>, <code class="epub__literal">filter</code> and <code class="epub__literal">reduce</code> support powerful functional
        programming techniques. Some observers might also extend the
        functional programming toolset in Python to include <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>, discussed earlier, as well as list
        comprehensions—a topic we will return to in the next chapter.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Chapter Summary"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
