<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_answers-id18"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</h1>
<div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Both <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code> and <code class="epub__literal">def</code> create function objects to be called
            later. Because <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code> is an
            expression, though, it returns a function object instead of
            assigning it to a name, and it can be used to nest a function
            definition in places where a <code class="epub__literal">def</code> will not work syntactically. A
            <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code> only allows for a single
            implicit return value expression, though; because it does not
            support a block of statements, it is not ideal for larger
            functions.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>s allow us to
            “inline” small units of executable code, defer its execution, and
            provide it with state in the form of default arguments and
            enclosing scope variables. Using a <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code> is never required; you can always
            code a <code class="epub__literal">def</code> instead and
            reference the function by name. <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>s come in handy, though, to embed
            small pieces of deferred code that are unlikely to be used
            elsewhere in a program. They commonly appear in callback-based
            program such as GUIs, and they have a natural affinity with
            function tools like <code class="epub__literal">map</code> and
            <code class="epub__literal">filter</code> that expect a processing
            function.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>These three built-in functions all apply another function to
            items in a sequence (iterable) object and collect results.
            <code class="epub__literal">map</code> passes each item to the
            function and collects all results, <code class="epub__literal">filter</code> collects items for which the
            function returns a <code class="epub__literal">True</code> value,
            and <code class="epub__literal">reduce</code> computes a single
            value by applying the function to an accumulator and successive
            items. Unlike the other two, <code class="epub__literal">reduce</code> is available in the <code class="epub__literal">functools</code> module in 3.0, not the
            built-in scope.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Function annotations, available in 3.0 and later, are
            syntactic embellishments of a function’s arguments and result,
            which are collected into a dictionary assigned to the function’s
            <code class="epub__literal">__annotations__</code> attribute.
            Python places no semantic meaning on these annotations, but simply
            packages them for potential use by other tools.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Recursive functions call themselves either directly or
            indirectly in order to loop. They may be used to traverse
            arbitrarily shaped structures, but they can also be used for
            iteration in general (though the latter role is often more simply
            and efficiently coded with looping statements).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Functions should generally be small, as self-contained as
            possible, have a single unified purpose, and communicate with
            other components through input arguments and return values. They
            may use mutable arguments to communicate results too if changes
            are expected, and some types of programs imply other communication
            mechanisms.</p></li></ol>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[42] </sup>The <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code> tends to
            intimidate people more than it should. This reaction seems to stem
            from the name “lambda” itself—a name that comes from the Lisp
            language, which got it from lambda calculus, which is a form of
            symbolic logic. In Python, though, it’s really just a keyword that
            introduces the expression syntactically. Obscure mathematical
            heritage aside, <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code> is
            simpler to use than you may think.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
