<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 20. Iterations and Comprehensions, Part 2</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 20. Iterations and Comprehensions, Part 2"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h1 class="epub__title"><a id="iterations_and_comprehensions_comma_pa"></a>Chapter 20. Iterations and Comprehensions, Part 2</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>This chapter continues the advanced function topics theme, with a
      reprisal of the comprehension and iteration concepts introduced in Chapter 14. Because list
      comprehensions are as much related to the prior chapter’s functional
      tools (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">map</code> and <code class="epub__literal">filter</code>) as they are to <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops, we’ll revisit them in this context
      here. We’ll also take a second look at iterators in order to study
      generator functions and their generator expression
      relatives—user-defined ways to produce results on demand.</p>
<p><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e49509"></a>Iteration in Python also encompasses user-defined classes,
      but we’ll defer that final part of this story until Part VI, when we study operator overloading. As
      this is the last pass we’ll make over built-in iteration tools, though,
      we will summarize the various tools we’ve met thus far, and time the
      relative performance of some of them. Finally, because this is the last
      chapter in the part of the book, we’ll close with the usual sets of
      “gotchas” and exercises to help you start coding the ideas you’ve read
      about.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="List Comprehensions Revisited: Functional Tools"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
