<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>List Comprehensions Revisited: Functional Tools</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="list_comprehensions_revisited_colon_fun"></a>List Comprehensions Revisited: Functional Tools</h1>
<p>In the prior chapter, <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e49520"></a>we studied functional programming tools like <code class="epub__literal">map</code> and <code class="epub__literal">filter</code>, which map operations over sequences
        and collect results. Because this is such a common task in Python
        coding, Python eventually sprouted a new expression—the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>list
        comprehension</em></span>—that is even more flexible than the tools we
        just studied. In short, list comprehensions apply an arbitrary
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>expression</em></span> to items in an iterable, rather than
        applying a function. As such, they can be more general tools.</p>
<p>We met list comprehensions in Chapter 14, in conjunction
        with looping statements. Because they’re also related to functional
        programming tools like the <code class="epub__literal">map</code> and
        <code class="epub__literal">filter</code> calls, though, we’ll
        resurrect the topic here for one last look. Technically, this feature
        is not tied to functions—as we’ll see, list comprehensions can be a
        more general tool than <code class="epub__literal">map</code> and
        <code class="epub__literal">filter</code>—but it is sometimes best
        understood by analogy to function-based alternatives.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="List Comprehensions Versus map"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="list_comprehensions_versus_map"></a>List Comprehensions Versus map</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Let’s <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e49557"></a>work through <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e49563"></a>an example that demonstrates the basics. As we saw in
          Chapter 7, Python’s built-in <code class="epub__literal">ord</code> function returns the ASCII integer
          code of a single character (the <code class="epub__literal">chr</code> built-in is the converse—it returns
          the character for an ASCII integer code):</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e49577"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>ord('s')</code></strong>
115</pre>
<p>Now, suppose we wish to collect the ASCII codes of
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>all</em></span> characters in an entire string. Perhaps the
          most straightforward approach is to use a simple <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop and append the results to a
          list:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e49590"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res = []</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for x in 'spam'</code></strong>:
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res.append(ord(x))</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res</code></strong>
[115, 112, 97, 109]</pre>
<p>Now that we know about <code class="epub__literal">map</code>,
          though, we can achieve similar results with a single function call
          without having to manage list construction in the code:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e49609"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res = list(map(ord, 'spam'))</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Apply function to sequence</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res</code></strong>
[115, 112, 97, 109]</pre>
<p>However, we can get the same results from a list comprehension
          expression—while <code class="epub__literal">map</code> maps a
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>function</em></span> over a sequence, list comprehensions
          map an <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>expression</em></span> over a sequence:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e49631"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res = [ord(x) for x in 'spam']</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Apply expression to sequence</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res</code></strong>
[115, 112, 97, 109]</pre>
<p>List comprehensions collect the results of applying an
          arbitrary expression to a sequence of values and return them in a
          new list. Syntactically, list comprehensions are enclosed in
          <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e49644"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e49649"></a>square brackets (to remind you that they construct
          lists). In their simple form, within the brackets you code an
          expression that names a variable followed by what looks like a
          <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop header that names the
          same variable. Python then collects the expression’s results for
          each iteration of the implied loop.</p>
<p>The effect of the preceding example is similar to that of the
          manual <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop and the <code class="epub__literal">map</code> call. List comprehensions become more
          convenient, though, when we wish to apply an arbitrary expression to
          a sequence:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e49667"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[x ** 2 for x in range(10)]</code></strong>
[0, 1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, 49, 64, 81]</pre>
<p>Here, we’ve collected the squares of the numbers 0 through 9
          (we’re just letting the interactive prompt print the resulting list;
          assign it to a variable if you need to retain it). To do similar
          work with a <code class="epub__literal">map</code> call, we would
          probably need to invent a little function to implement the square
          operation. Because we won’t need this function elsewhere, we’d
          typically (but not necessarily) code it inline, with a <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>, instead of using a <code class="epub__literal">def</code> statement elsewhere:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e49683"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(map((lambda x: x ** 2), range(10)))</code></strong>
[0, 1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, 49, 64, 81]</pre>
<p>This does the same job, and it’s only a few keystrokes longer
          than the equivalent list comprehension. It’s also only marginally
          more complex (at least, once you understand the <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>). For more advanced kinds of
          expressions, though, list comprehensions will often require
          considerably less typing. The next section shows why.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Adding Tests and Nested Loops: filter"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="adding_tests_and_nested_loops_colon_fil"></a>Adding Tests and Nested Loops: filter</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>List comprehensions <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e49698"></a>are even more general than shown so far. For instance,
          as we learned in Chapter 14, you can code
          an <code class="epub__literal">if</code> clause after the <code class="epub__literal">for</code> to add selection logic. List
          comprehensions with <code class="epub__literal">if</code> clauses
          can be thought of as analogous to the <code class="epub__literal">filter</code> built-in discussed in the prior
          chapter—they skip sequence items for which the <code class="epub__literal">if</code> clause is not true.</p>
<p>To demonstrate, here are both schemes picking up even numbers
          from 0 to 4; like the <code class="epub__literal">map</code> list
          comprehension alternative of the prior section, the <code class="epub__literal">filter</code> version here must invent a little
          <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code> function for the test
          expression. For comparison, the equivalent <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop is shown here as well:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e49736"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[x for x in range(5) if x % 2 == 0]</code></strong>
[0, 2, 4]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(filter((lambda x: x % 2 == 0), range(5)))</code></strong>
[0, 2, 4]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res = []</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for x in range(5):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if x % 2 == 0:</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res.append(x)</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res</code></strong>
[0, 2, 4]</pre>
<p>All of these use the modulus (remainder of division) operator,
          <code class="epub__literal">%</code>, to detect even numbers: if
          there is no remainder after dividing a number by 2, it must be even.
          The <code class="epub__literal">filter</code> call here is not much
          longer than the list comprehension either. However, we can combine
          an <code class="epub__literal">if</code> clause and an arbitrary
          expression in our list comprehension, to give it the effect of a
          <code class="epub__literal">filter</code> <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>and</em></span> a
          <code class="epub__literal">map</code>, in a single
          expression:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e49781"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[x ** 2 for x in range(10) if x % 2 == 0]</code></strong>
[0, 4, 16, 36, 64]</pre>
<p>This time, we collect the squares of the even numbers from 0
          through 9: the <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop skips
          numbers for which the attached <code class="epub__literal">if</code>
          clause on the right is false, and the expression on the left
          computes the squares. The equivalent <code class="epub__literal">map</code> call would require a lot more work on
          our part—we would have to combine <code class="epub__literal">filter</code> selections with <code class="epub__literal">map</code> iteration, making for a noticeably
          more complex expression:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e49803"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(</code></strong> <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>map((lambda x: x**2), filter((lambda x: x % 2 == 0), range(10))) )</code></strong>
[0, 4, 16, 36, 64]</pre>
<p>In fact, list comprehensions are more general still. You can
          code any number of nested <code class="epub__literal">for</code>
          loops in a list comprehension, and each may have an optional
          associated <code class="epub__literal">if</code> test. The general
          structure of list comprehensions looks like this:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e49819"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">[ expression for <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>target1</code></em> in <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>iterable1</code></em> [if <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>condition1</code></em>]
             for <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>target2</code></em> in <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>iterable2</code></em> [if <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>condition2</code></em>] ...
             for <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>targetN</code></em> in <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>iterableN</code></em> [if <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>conditionN</code></em>] ]</pre>
<p>When <code class="epub__literal">for</code> clauses are nested
          within a list comprehension, they work like equivalent nested
          <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop statements. For example,
          the following:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e49858"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res = [x + y for x in [0, 1, 2] for y in [100, 200, 300]]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res</code></strong>
[100, 200, 300, 101, 201, 301, 102, 202, 302]</pre>
<p>has the same effect as this substantially more verbose
          equivalent:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e49868"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res = []</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for x in [0, 1, 2]:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for y in [100, 200, 300]:</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res.append(x + y)</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res</code></strong>
[100, 200, 300, 101, 201, 301, 102, 202, 302]</pre>
<p>Although list comprehensions construct lists, remember that
          they can iterate over any sequence or other iterable type. Here’s a
          similar bit of code that traverses strings instead of lists of
          numbers, and so collects concatenation results:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e49887"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[x + y for x in 'spam' for y in 'SPAM']</code></strong>
['sS', 'sP', 'sA', 'sM', 'pS', 'pP', 'pA', 'pM',
'aS', 'aP', 'aA', 'aM', 'mS', 'mP', 'mA', 'mM']</pre>
<p>Finally, here is a much more complex list comprehension that
          illustrates the effect of attached <code class="epub__literal">if</code> selections on nested <code class="epub__literal">for</code> clauses:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e49900"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[(x, y) for x in range(5) if x % 2 == 0 for y in range(5) if y % 2 == 1]</code></strong>
[(0, 1), (0, 3), (2, 1), (2, 3), (4, 1), (4, 3)]</pre>
<p>This expression permutes even numbers from 0 through 4 with
          odd numbers from 0 through 4. The <code class="epub__literal">if</code> clauses filter out items in each
          sequence iteration. Here is the equivalent statement-based
          code:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e49910"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res = []</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for x in range(5):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if x % 2 == 0:</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for y in range(5):</code></strong>
...             <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if y % 2 == 1:</code></strong>
...                 <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res.append((x, y))</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res</code></strong>
[(0, 1), (0, 3), (2, 1), (2, 3), (4, 1), (4, 3)]</pre>
<p>Recall that if you’re confused about what a complex list
          comprehension does, you can always nest the list comprehension’s
          <code class="epub__literal">for</code> and <code class="epub__literal">if</code> clauses inside each other (indenting
          successively further to the right) to derive the equivalent
          statements. The result is longer, but perhaps clearer.</p>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">map</code> and <code class="epub__literal">filter</code> equivalent would be wildly complex
          and deeply nested, so I won’t even try showing it here. I’ll leave
          its coding as an exercise for Zen masters, ex-Lisp programmers, and
          the criminally insane....</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="List Comprehensions and Matrixes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="list_comprehensions_and_matrixes"></a>List Comprehensions and Matrixes</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Not all <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e49955"></a>list comprehensions are so artificial, of course.
          Let’s look at one more application to stretch a few synapses. One
          basic way to code matrixes (a.k.a. multidimensional arrays) in
          Python is with nested list structures. The following, for example,
          defines two 3 × 3 matrixes as lists of nested lists:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e49961"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>M = [[1, 2, 3],</code></strong>
...      <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[4, 5, 6],</code></strong>
...      <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[7, 8, 9]]</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>N = [[2, 2, 2],</code></strong>
...      <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[3, 3, 3],</code></strong>
...      <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[4, 4, 4]]</code></strong></pre>
<p>Given this structure, we can always index rows, and columns
          within rows, using normal index operations:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e49983"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>M[1]</code></strong>
<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[4, 5, 6]</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>M[1][2]</code></strong>
6</pre>
<p>List comprehensions are powerful tools for processing such
          structures, though, because they automatically scan rows and columns
          for us. For instance, although this structure stores the matrix by
          rows, to collect the second column we can simply iterate across the
          rows and pull out the desired column, or iterate through positions
          in the rows and index as we go:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e49996"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[row[1] for row in M]</code></strong>
[2, 5, 8]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[M[row][1] for row in (0, 1, 2)]</code></strong>
[2, 5, 8]</pre>
<p>Given positions, we can also easily perform tasks such as
          pulling out a diagonal. The following expression uses <code class="epub__literal">range</code> to generate the list of offsets and
          then indexes with the row and column the same, picking out <code class="epub__literal">M[0][0]</code>, then <code class="epub__literal">M[1][1]</code>, and so on (we assume the matrix
          has the same number of rows and columns):</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e50015"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[M[i][i] for i in range(len(M))]</code></strong>
[1, 5, 9]</pre>
<p>Finally, with a bit of creativity, we can also use list
          comprehensions to combine multiple matrixes. The following first
          builds a flat list that contains the result of multiplying the
          matrixes pairwise, and then builds a nested list structure having
          the same values by nesting list comprehensions:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e50022"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[M[row][col] * N[row][col] for row in range(3) for col in range(3)]</code></strong>
[2, 4, 6, 12, 15, 18, 28, 32, 36]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[[M[row][col] * N[row][col] for col in range(3)] for row in range(3)]</code></strong>
[[2, 4, 6], [12, 15, 18], [28, 32, 36]]</pre>
<p>This last expression works because the row iteration is an
          outer loop: for each row, it runs the nested column iteration to
          build up one row of the result matrix. It’s equivalent to this
          statement-based code:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e50033"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res = []</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for row in range(3):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>tmp = []</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for col in range(3):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>tmp.append(M[row][col] * N[row][col])</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res.append(tmp)</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res</code></strong>
[[2, 4, 6], [12, 15, 18], [28, 32, 36]]</pre>
<p>Compared to these statements, the list comprehension version
          requires only one line of code, will probably run substantially
          faster for large matrixes, and just might make your head explode!
          Which brings us to the next section.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Comprehending List Comprehensions"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="comprehending_list_comprehensions"></a>Comprehending List Comprehensions</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>With <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e50064"></a>such generality, list comprehensions can quickly
          become, well, incomprehensible, especially when nested.
          Consequently, my advice is typically to use simple <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops when getting started with
          Python, and <code class="epub__literal">map</code> or comprehensions
          in isolated cases where they are easy to apply. The “keep it simple”
          rule applies here, as always: code conciseness is a much less
          important goal than code readability.</p>
<p>However, in this case, there is currently a substantial
          performance advantage to the
          extra complexity: based on tests run under Python today,
          <code class="epub__literal">map</code> calls are roughly twice as
          fast as equivalent <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops, and
          list comprehensions are usually slightly faster than <code class="epub__literal">map</code> calls.<sup>[43]</sup> This speed difference is generally due to the fact
          that <code class="epub__literal">map</code> and list comprehensions run at C language speed
          inside the interpreter, which is much faster than stepping through
          Python <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop code within the
          PVM.</p>
<p>Because <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops make
          logic more explicit, I recommend them in general on the grounds of
          simplicity. However, <code class="epub__literal">map</code> and list
          comprehensions are worth knowing and using for simpler kinds of
          iterations, and if your application’s speed is an important
          consideration. In addition, because <code class="epub__literal">map</code> and list comprehensions are both
          expressions, they can show up syntactically in places that <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop statements cannot, such as in the
          bodies of <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code> functions,
          within list and dictionary literals, and more. Still, you should try
          to keep your <code class="epub__literal">map</code> calls and list
          comprehensions simple; for more complex tasks, use full statements
          instead.</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="why_you_will_care_colon_list_comprehens"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Why You Will Care: List Comprehensions and map</p>
<p>Here’s a <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e50157"></a>more <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e50163"></a>realistic example of list comprehensions and
            <code class="epub__literal">map</code> in action (we solved this
            problem with list comprehensions in Chapter 14, but we’ll
            revive it here to add <code class="epub__literal">map</code>-based
            alternatives). Recall that the file <code class="epub__literal">readlines</code> method returns lines with
            <code class="epub__literal">\n</code> end-of-line characters at
            the ends:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e50184"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('myfile').readlines()</code></strong>
['aaa\n', 'bbb\n', 'ccc\n']</pre>
<p>If you don’t want the end-of-line characters, you can slice
            them off all the lines in a single step with a list comprehension
            or a <code class="epub__literal">map</code> call (<code class="epub__literal">map</code> results are iterables in Python 3.0,
            so we must run them through <code class="epub__literal">list</code> to see all their results at
            once):</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e50200"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[line.rstrip() for line in open('myfile').readlines()]</code></strong>
['aaa', 'bbb', 'ccc']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[line.rstrip() for line in open('myfile')]</code></strong>
['aaa', 'bbb', 'ccc']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(map((lambda line: line.rstrip()), open('myfile')))</code></strong>
['aaa', 'bbb', 'ccc']</pre>
<p>The last two of these make use of <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>file
            iterators</em></span> (which essentially means that you don’t need
            a method call to grab all the lines in iteration contexts such as
            these). The <code class="epub__literal">map</code> call is
            slightly longer than the list comprehension, but neither has to
            manage result list construction explicitly.</p>
<p>A list comprehension can also be used as a sort of column
            projection operation. Python’s standard SQL database API returns
            query results as a list of tuples much like the following—the list
            is the table, tuples are rows, and items in tuples are column
            values:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e50221"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">listoftuple = [('bob', 35, 'mgr'), ('mel', 40, 'dev')]</pre>
<p>A <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop could pick up
            all the values from a selected column manually, but <code class="epub__literal">map</code> and list comprehensions can do it in
            a single step, and faster:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e50231"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[age for (name, age, job) in listoftuple]</code></strong>
[35, 40]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(map((lambda row: row[1]), listoftuple))</code></strong>
[35, 40]</pre>
<p>The first of these makes use of <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>tuple
            assignment</em></span><a name="second uses"></a> to unpack row tuples in the list, and the
            second uses indexing. In Python 2.6 (but not in 3.0—see the note
            on 2.6 argument unpacking in Chapter 18),
            <code class="epub__literal">map</code> can use tuple unpacking on
            its argument, too:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e50250"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 2.6 only</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(map((lambda (name, age, job): age), listoftuple))</code></strong>
[35, 40]</pre>
<p>See other books and resources for more on Python’s database
            API.</p>
<p>Beside the distinction between running functions versus
            expressions, the biggest difference between <code class="epub__literal">map</code> and list comprehensions in Python
            3.0 is that <code class="epub__literal">map</code> is an
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>iterator</em></span>, generating results on demand; to
            achieve the same memory economy, list comprehensions must be coded
            as generator expressions (one of the topics of this
            chapter).</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Iterators Revisited: Generators"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
