<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Iterators Revisited: Generators</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="iterators_revisited_colon_generators"></a>Iterators Revisited: Generators</h1>
<p>Python <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e50275"></a>today supports procrastination much more than it did in
        the past—it provides tools that produce results only when needed,
        instead of all at once. In particular, two language constructs delay
        result creation whenever possible:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Generator functions</em></span> <a id="ch20generatorfunctions"></a>are coded as normal <code class="epub__literal">def</code> statements but use <code class="epub__literal">yield</code> statements to return results one
            at a time, suspending and resuming their state between
            each.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Generator expressions</em></span> <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e50304"></a>are similar to the list comprehensions of the prior
            section, but they return an object that produces results on demand
            instead of building a result list.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Because neither constructs a result list all at once, they save
        memory space and allow computation time to be split across result
        requests. As we’ll see, both of these ultimately perform their
        delayed-results magic by implementing the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>iteration
        protocol</em></span> we studied in Chapter 14.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Generator Functions: yield Versus return"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="generator_functions_colon_yield_versus"></a>Generator Functions: yield Versus return</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In this part of the book, we’ve learned about coding normal
          functions that receive input parameters and send back a single
          result immediately. It is also possible, however, to write functions
          that may send back a value and later be resumed, picking up where
          they left off. Such functions are known as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>generator
          functions</em></span> because they generate a sequence of values over
          time.</p>
<p>Generator functions are like normal functions in most
          respects, and in fact are coded with normal <code class="epub__literal">def</code> statements. However, when created,
          they are automatically made to implement the iteration protocol so
          that they can appear in iteration contexts. We studied iterators in
          Chapter 14; here,
          we’ll revisit them to see how they relate to generators.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="State suspension"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="state_suspension"></a>State suspension</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Unlike <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e50338"></a>normal functions that return a value and exit,
            generator functions automatically suspend and resume their
            execution and state around the point of value generation. Because
            of that, they are often a useful alternative to both computing an
            entire series of values up front and manually saving and restoring
            state in classes. Because the state that generator functions
            retain when they are suspended includes their entire local scope,
            their local variables retain information and make it available
            when the functions are resumed.</p>
<p>The chief code difference between generator and normal
            functions is that a generator <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>yields</em></span> a value,
            rather than <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>returning</em></span> one—the <code class="epub__literal">yield</code> statement suspends the function
            and sends a value back to the caller, but retains enough state to
            enable the function to resume from where it left off. When
            resumed, the function continues execution immediately after the
            last <code class="epub__literal">yield</code> run. From the
            function’s perspective, this allows its code to produce a series
            of values over time, rather than computing them all at once and
            sending them back in something like a list.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Iteration protocol integration"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="iteration_protocol_integration"></a>Iteration protocol integration</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e50363"></a>truly understand generator functions, you need to
            know that they are closely bound up with the notion of the
            <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e50369"></a>iteration protocol in <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e50373"></a>Python. As we’ve seen, iterable objects define a
            <code class="epub__literal">__next__</code> method, which either
            returns the next item in the iteration, or raises the special
            <code class="epub__literal">StopIteration</code> exception to end
            the iteration. An object’s iterator is fetched with the <code class="epub__literal">iter</code> built-in function.</p>
<p>Python <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops, and all
            other iteration contexts, use this iteration protocol to step
            through a sequence or value generator, if the protocol is
            supported; if not, iteration falls back on repeatedly indexing
            sequences instead.</p>
<p>To support this protocol, functions containing a <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e50397"></a>yield</code> statement are compiled specially as
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>generators</em></span>. When called, they return a
            generator object that supports the iteration interface with an
            automatically created method named <code class="epub__literal">__next__</code> to resume execution. Generator
            functions may also have a <code class="epub__literal">return</code> statement that, along with
            falling off the end of the <code class="epub__literal">def</code>
            block, simply terminates the generation of values—technically, by
            raising a <code class="epub__literal">StopIteration</code>
            exception after any normal function exit actions. From the
            caller’s perspective, the generator’s <code class="epub__literal">__next__</code> method resumes the function and
            runs until either the next <code class="epub__literal">yield</code> result is returned or a <code class="epub__literal">StopIteration</code> is raised.</p>
<p>The net effect is that generator functions, coded as
            <code class="epub__literal">def</code> statements containing
            <code class="epub__literal">yield</code> statements, are
            automatically made to support the iteration protocol and thus may
            be used in any iteration context to produce results over time and
            on demand.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p>As noted in Chapter 14, in Python
              2.6 and earlier, iterable objects define a method named <code class="epub__literal">next</code> instead of <code class="epub__literal">__next__</code>. This includes the generator
              objects we are using here. In 3.0 this method is renamed to
              <code class="epub__literal">__next__</code>. The <code class="epub__literal">next</code> built-in function is provided as
              a convenience and portability tool: <code class="epub__literal">next(I)</code> is the same as <code class="epub__literal">I.__next__()</code> in 3.0 and <code class="epub__literal">I.next()</code> in 2.6. Prior to 2.6,
              programs simply call <code class="epub__literal">I.next()</code>
              instead to iterate manually.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Generator functions in action"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="generator_functions_in_action"></a>Generator functions in action</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To illustrate <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e50472"></a>generator basics, let’s turn to some code. The
            following code defines a generator function that can be used to
            generate the squares of a series of numbers over time:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e50478"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def gensquares(N):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for i in range(N):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>yield i ** 2</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Resume here later</span></em>
...</pre>
<p>This function yields a value, and so returns to its caller,
            each time through the loop; when it is resumed, its prior state is
            restored and control picks up again immediately after the <code class="epub__literal">yield</code> statement. For example, when it’s
            used in the body of a <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop,
            control returns to the function after its <code class="epub__literal">yield</code> statement each time through the
            loop:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e50503"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for i in gensquares(5):</code></strong>     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Resume the function</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(i, end=' : ')</code></strong>     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Print last yielded value</span></em>
...
0 : 1 : 4 : 9 : 16 :
&gt;&gt;&gt;</pre>
<p>To end the generation of values, functions either use a
            <code class="epub__literal">return</code> statement with no value
            or simply allow control to fall off the end of the function
            body.</p>
<p>If you want to see what is going on inside the <code class="epub__literal">for</code>, call the generator function
            directly:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e50527"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = gensquares(4)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x</code></strong>
&lt;generator object at 0x0086C378&gt;</pre>
<p>You get back a generator object that supports the iteration
            protocol we met in Chapter 14—the generator
            object has a <code class="epub__literal">__next__</code> method
            that starts the function, or resumes it from where it last yielded
            a value, and raises a <code class="epub__literal">StopIteration</code> exception when the end of
            the series of values is reached. For convenience, the <code class="epub__literal">next(X)</code> built-in calls an object’s
            <code class="epub__literal">X.__next__()</code> method for
            us:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e50551"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(x)</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same as x.__next__() in 3.0</span></em>
0
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(x)</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Use x.next() or next() in 2.6</span></em>
1
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(x)</code></strong>
4
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(x)</code></strong>
9
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(x)</code></strong>

Traceback (most recent call last):
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...more text omitted...</code></em>
StopIteration</pre>
<p>As we learned in Chapter 14, <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops (and other iteration contexts)
            work with generators in the same way—by calling the <code class="epub__literal">__next__</code> method repeatedly, until an
            exception is caught. If the object to be iterated over does not
            support this protocol, <code class="epub__literal">for</code>
            loops instead use the indexing protocol to iterate.</p>
<p>Note that in this example, we could also simply build the
            list of yielded values all at once:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e50594"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def buildsquares(n):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>res = []</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for i in range(n): res.append(i ** 2)</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return res</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for x in buildsquares(5): print(x, end=' : ')</code></strong>
...
0 : 1 : 4 : 9 : 16 :</pre>
<p>For that matter, we could use any of the <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop, <code class="epub__literal">map</code>, or list comprehension
            techniques:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e50619"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for x in [n ** 2 for n in range(5)]:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(x, end=' : ')</code></strong>
...
0 : 1 : 4 : 9 : 16 :

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for x in map((lambda n: n ** 2), range(5)):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(x, end=' : ')</code></strong>
...
0 : 1 : 4 : 9 : 16 :</pre>
<p>However, generators can be better in terms of both memory
            use and performance. They allow functions to avoid doing all the
            work up front, which is especially useful when the result lists
            are large or when it takes a lot of computation to produce each
            value. Generators distribute the time required to produce the
            series of values among loop iterations.</p>
<p>Moreover, for more advanced uses, generators can provide a
            simpler alternative to manually saving the state between
            iterations in class objects—with generators, variables accessible in the function’s
            scopes are saved and restored automatically.<sup>[44]</sup> We’ll discuss class-based iterators in more detail
            in Part VI.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Extended generator function protocol: send versus next"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="extended_generator_function_protocol_co"></a>Extended generator function protocol: send versus
            next</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In Python 2.5, a <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e50673"></a>send</code> method was added to the <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e50678"></a>generator function protocol. The <code class="epub__literal">send</code> method advances to the next item in
            the series of results, just like <code class="epub__literal">__next__</code>, but also provides a way for
            the caller to communicate with the generator, to affect its
            operation.</p>
<p>Technically, <code class="epub__literal">yield</code> is now
            an expression form that returns the item passed to <code class="epub__literal">send</code>, not a statement (though it can be
            called either way—as <code class="epub__literal">yield X</code>,
            or <code class="epub__literal">A = (yield X)</code>). The
            expression must be enclosed in parentheses unless it’s the only
            item on the right side of the assignment statement. For example,
            <code class="epub__literal">X = yield Y</code> is OK, as is
            <code class="epub__literal">X = (yield Y) + 42</code>.</p>
<p>When this extra protocol is used, values are sent into a
            generator <code class="epub__literal">G</code> by calling <code class="epub__literal">G.send(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>value</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code>. The generator’s code is then resumed,
            and the <code class="epub__literal">yield</code> expression in the
            generator returns the value passed to <code class="epub__literal">send</code>. If the regular <code class="epub__literal">G.__next__()</code> method (or its <code class="epub__literal">next(G)</code> equivalent) is called to
            advance, the <code class="epub__literal">yield</code> simply
            returns <code class="epub__literal">None</code>. For
            example:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e50742"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def gen():</code></strong>
...    <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for i in range(10):</code></strong>
...        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = yield i</code></strong>
...        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(X)</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>G = gen()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(G)</code></strong>              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Must call next() first, to start generator</span></em>
0
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>G.send(77)</code></strong>           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Advance, and send value to yield expression</span></em>
77
1
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>G.send(88)</code></strong>
88
2
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(G)</code></strong>              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># next() and X.__next__() send None</span></em>
None
3</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">send</code> method can be
            used, for example, to code a generator that its caller can
            terminate by sending a termination code, or redirect by passing a
            new position. In addition, generators in 2.5 also support a
            <code class="epub__literal">throw(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>type</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code> method to raise an exception inside
            the generator at the latest <code class="epub__literal">yield</code>, and a <code class="epub__literal">close</code> method that raises a special
            <code class="epub__literal">GeneratorExit</code> exception inside
            the generator to terminate the iteration. These are advanced
            features that we won’t delve into in more detail here; see
            reference texts and Python’s standard manuals for more
            information.</p>
<p>Note that while Python 3.0 provides a <code class="epub__literal">next(X)</code> convenience built-in that calls
            the <code class="epub__literal">X.__next__()</code> method of an
            object, other generator methods, like <code class="epub__literal">send</code>, must be called as methods of
            generator objects directly (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">G.send(X)</code>). This makes sense if you
            realize that these extra methods are implemented on built-in
            generator objects only, whereas the <code class="epub__literal">__next__</code> method applies to all iterable
            objects (both built-in types and user-defined classes).</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Generator Expressions: Iterators Meet Comprehensions"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="generator_expressions_colon_iterators_m"></a>Generator Expressions: Iterators Meet Comprehensions</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e50826"></a>all recent versions of Python, the notions of
          iterators and list comprehensions are combined in a new feature of
          the language, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>generator expressions</em></span>.
          Syntactically, generator expressions are just like normal list
          comprehensions, but they are enclosed in <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e50833"></a>parentheses<a id="I_indexterm5_d1e50839"></a> instead of square brackets:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e50845"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[x ** 2 for x in range(4)]</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># List comprehension: build a list</span></em>
[0, 1, 4, 9]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>(x ** 2 for x in range(4))</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Generator expression: make an iterable</span></em>
&lt;generator object at 0x011DC648&gt;</pre>
<p>In fact, at least on a function basis, coding a list
          comprehension is essentially the same as wrapping a generator
          expression in a <code class="epub__literal">list</code> built-in
          call to force it to produce all its results in a list at
          once:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e50864"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(x ** 2 for x in range(4))</code></strong>      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># List comprehension equivalence</span></em>
[0, 1, 4, 9]</pre>
<p>Operationally, however, generator expressions are very
          different—instead of building the result list in memory, they return
          a generator object, which in turn supports the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>iteration
          protocol</em></span> to yield one piece of the result list at a time
          in any iteration context:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e50877"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>G = (x ** 2 for x in range(4))</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(G)</code></strong>
0
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(G)</code></strong>
1
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(G)</code></strong>
4
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(G)</code></strong>
9
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(G)</code></strong>

Traceback (most recent call last):
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...more text omitted...</code></em>
StopIteration</pre>
<p>We don’t typically see the <code class="epub__literal">next</code> iterator machinery under the hood of
          a generator expression like this because <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops trigger it for us
          automatically:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e50909"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for num in (x ** 2 for x in range(4)):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('%s, %s' % (num, num / 2.0))</code></strong>
...
0, 0.0
1, 0.5
4, 2.0
9, 4.5</pre>
<p>As we’ve already learned, every iteration context does this,
          including the <code class="epub__literal">sum</code>, <code class="epub__literal">map</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">sorted</code> built-in functions; list
          comprehensions; and other iteration contexts we learned about in
          Chapter 14, such as
          the <code class="epub__literal">any</code>, <code class="epub__literal">all</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">list</code> built-in functions.</p>
<p>Notice that the parentheses are not required around a
          generator expression if they are the sole item enclosed in other
          parentheses, like those of a function call. Extra parentheses are
          required, however, in the second call to <code class="epub__literal">sorted</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e50946"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sum(x ** 2 for x in range(4))</code></strong>
14

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sorted(x ** 2 for x in range(4))</code></strong>
[0, 1, 4, 9]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sorted((x ** 2 for x in range(4)), reverse=True)</code></strong>
[9, 4, 1, 0]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import math</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(</code></strong> <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>map(math.sqrt, (x ** 2 for x in range(4))) )</code></strong>
[0.0, 1.0, 2.0, 3.0]</pre>
<p>Generator expressions are primarily a memory-space
          optimization—they do not require the entire result list to be
          constructed all at once, as the square-bracketed list comprehension
          does. They may also run slightly slower in practice, so they are
          probably best used only for very large result sets. A more
          authoritative statement about performance, though, will have to
          await the timing script we’ll code later in this chapter.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Generator Functions Versus Generator Expressions"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="generator_functions_versus_generator_ex"></a>Generator Functions Versus Generator Expressions</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e50973"></a>Interestingly, the same iteration can often be coded
          with either a generator function or a generator expression. The
          following <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>generator expression</em></span>, for example,
          repeats each character in a string four times:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e50982"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>G = (c * 4 for c in 'SPAM')</code></strong>           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Generator expression</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(G)</code></strong>                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Force generator to produce all results</span></em>
['SSSS', 'PPPP', 'AAAA', 'MMMM']</pre>
<p>The equivalent <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>generator function</em></span>
          requires slightly more code, but as a multistatement function it
          will be able to code more logic and use more state information if
          needed:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e51001"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def timesfour(S):</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Generator function</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for c in S:</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>yield c * 4</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>G = timesfour('spam')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(G)</code></strong>                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Iterate automatically</span></em>
['ssss', 'pppp', 'aaaa', 'mmmm']</pre>
<p>Both expressions and functions support both automatic and
          manual iteration—the prior <code class="epub__literal">list</code>
          call iterates automatically, and the following iterate
          manually:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e51030"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>G = (c * 4 for c in 'SPAM'</code></strong>)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>I = iter(G)</code></strong>                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Iterate manually</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(I)</code></strong>
'SSSS'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(I)</code></strong>
'PPPP'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>G = timesfour('spam')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>I = iter(G)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(I)</code></strong>
'ssss'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(I)</code></strong>
'pppp'</pre>
<p>Notice that we make new generators here to iterate again—as
          explained in the next section, generators are one-shot
          iterators.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Generators Are Single-Iterator Objects"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="generators_are_single-iterator_objects"></a>Generators Are Single-Iterator Objects</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Both <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e51067"></a>generator functions and generator expressions are
          their own iterators and thus support just <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>one active
          iteration</em></span>—unlike some built-in types, you can’t have
          multiple iterators of either positioned at different locations in
          the set of results. For example, using the prior section’s generator
          expression, a generator’s iterator is the generator itself (in fact,
          calling <code class="epub__literal">iter</code> on a generator is a
          no-op):</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e51077"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>G = (c * 4 for c in 'SPAM')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>iter(G) is G</code></strong>                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># My iterator is myself: G has __next__</span></em>
True</pre>
<p>If you iterate over the results stream manually with multiple
          iterators, they will all point to the same position:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e51090"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>G = (c * 4 for c in 'SPAM')</code></strong>           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Make a new generator</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>I1 = iter(G)</code></strong>                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Iterate manually</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(I1)</code></strong>
'SSSS'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(I1)</code></strong>
'PPPP'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>I2 = iter(G)</code></strong>                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Second iterator at same position!</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(I2)</code></strong>
'AAAA'</pre>
<p>Moreover, once any iteration runs to completion, all are
          exhausted—we have to make a new generator to start again:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e51122"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(I1)</code></strong>                              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Collect the rest of I1's items</span></em>
['MMMM']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(I2)</code></strong>                              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Other iterators exhausted too</span></em>
StopIteration

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>I3 = iter(G)</code></strong>                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Ditto for new iterators</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(I3)</code></strong>
StopIteration

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>I3 = iter(c * 4 for c in 'SPAM')</code></strong>      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># New generator to start over</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(I3)</code></strong>
'SSSS'</pre>
<p>The same holds true for generator
          functions—the following <code class="epub__literal">def</code>
          statement-based equivalent supports just one active iterator and is
          exhausted after one pass:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e51161"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def timesfour(S):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for c in S:</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>yield c * 4</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>G = timesfour('spam')</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Generator functions work the same way</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>iter(G) is G</code></strong>
True
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>I1, I2 = iter(G), iter(G)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(I1)</code></strong>
'ssss'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(I1)</code></strong>
'pppp'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(I2)</code></strong>                              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># I2 at same position as I1</span></em>
'aaaa'</pre>
<p>This is different from the behavior of some built-in types,
          which support multiple iterators and passes and reflect their
          in-place changes in active iterators:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e51199"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>L = [1, 2, 3, 4]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>I1, I2 = iter(L), iter(L)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(I1)</code></strong>
1
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(I1)</code></strong>
2
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(I2)</code></strong>                              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Lists support multiple iterators</span></em>
1
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>del L[2:]</code></strong>                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Changes reflected in iterators</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(I1)</code></strong>
StopIteration</pre>
<p>When we begin coding class-based iterators in Part VI, we’ll see that it’s up to us to decide
          how many iterations we wish to support for our objects, if
          any.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Emulating zip and map with Iteration Tools"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="emulating_zip_and_map_with_iteration_to"></a>Emulating zip and map with Iteration Tools</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To <a id="ch20genfuncitertoolsemzipmapfunc"></a>demonstrate the power of iteration tools in action,
          let’s turn to some more advanced use case examples. Once you know
          about list comprehensions, generators, and other iteration tools, it
          turns out that emulating many of Python’s functional built-ins is
          both straightforward and instructive.</p>
<p>For example, we’ve already seen how the built-in <code class="epub__literal">zip</code> and <code class="epub__literal">map</code> functions combine iterables and
          project functions across them, respectively. With multiple sequence
          arguments, <code class="epub__literal">map</code> projects the
          function across items taken from each sequence in much the same way
          that <code class="epub__literal">zip</code> pairs them up:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e51261"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S1 = 'abc'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S2 = 'xyz123'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(zip(S1, S2))</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># zip pairs items from iterables</span></em>
[('a', 'x'), ('b', 'y'), ('c', 'z')]

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># zip pairs items, truncates at shortest</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(zip([−2, −1, 0, 1, 2]))</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Single sequence: 1-ary tuples</span></em>
[(−2,), (−1,), (0,), (1,), (2,)]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(zip([1, 2, 3], [2, 3, 4, 5]))</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># N sequences: N-ary tuples</span></em>
[(1, 2), (2, 3), (3, 4)]

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># map passes paired itenms to a function, truncates</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(map(abs, [−2, −1, 0, 1, 2]))</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Single sequence: 1-ary function</span></em>
[2, 1, 0, 1, 2]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(map(pow, [1, 2, 3], [2, 3, 4, 5]))</code></strong>    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># N sequences: N-ary function</span></em>
[1, 8, 81]</pre>
<p>Though they’re being used for different purposes, if you study
          these examples long enough, you might notice a relationship between
          <code class="epub__literal">zip</code> results and mapped function
          arguments that our next example can exploit.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Coding your own map(func, ...)"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="coding_your_own_map_open_parenthesis_fu"></a>Coding your own map(func, ...)</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e51316"></a>Although the <code class="epub__literal">map</code>
            and <code class="epub__literal">zip</code> built-ins are fast and
            convenient, it’s always possible to emulate them in code of our
            own. In the preceding chapter, for example, we saw a function that
            emulated the <code class="epub__literal">map</code> built-in for a
            single sequence argument. It doesn’t take much more work to allow
            for multiple sequences, as the built-in does:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e51333"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># map(func, seqs...) workalike with zip</span></em>

def mymap(func, *seqs):
    res = []
    for args in zip(*seqs):
        res.append(func(*args))
    return res

print(mymap(abs, [−2, −1, 0, 1, 2]))
print(mymap(pow, [1, 2, 3], [2, 3, 4, 5]))</pre>
<p>This version relies heavily upon the special <code class="epub__literal">*args</code> argument-passing syntax—it
            collects multiple sequence (really, iterable) arguments, unpacks
            them as <code class="epub__literal">zip</code> arguments to
            combine, and then unpacks the paired <code class="epub__literal">zip</code> results as arguments to the
            passed-in function. That is, we’re using the fact that the zipping
            is essentially a nested operation in mapping. The test code at the
            bottom applies this to both one and two sequences to produce this
            output (the same we would get with the built-in <code class="epub__literal">map</code>):</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e51351"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">[2, 1, 0, 1, 2]
[1, 8, 81]</pre>
<p>Really, though, the prior version exhibits the classic
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>list comprehension pattern</em></span>, building a list
            of operation results within a <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop. We can code our map more
            concisely as an equivalent one-line list comprehension:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e51361"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Using a list comprehension</span></em>

def mymap(func, *seqs):
    return [func(*args) for args in zip(*seqs)]

print(mymap(abs, [−2, −1, 0, 1, 2]))
print(mymap(pow, [1, 2, 3], [2, 3, 4, 5]))</pre>
<p>When this is run the result is the same as before, but the
            code is more concise and might run faster (more on performance in
            the section Timing Iteration Alternatives).
            Both of the preceding <code class="epub__literal">mymap</code>
            versions build result lists all at once, though, and this can
            waste memory for larger lists. Now that we know about
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>generator functions and expressions</em></span>, it’s
            simple to recode both these alternatives to produce results on
            demand instead:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e51375"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Using generators: yield and (...)</span></em>

def mymap(func, *seqs):
    res = []
    for args in zip(*seqs):
        yield func(*args)

def mymap(func, *seqs):
    return (func(*args) for args in zip(*seqs))</pre>
<p>These versions produce the same results but return
            generators designed to support the iteration protocol—the first
            yields one result at a time, and the second returns a generator
            expression’s result to do the same. They produce the same results
            if we wrap them in <code class="epub__literal">list</code> calls
            to force them to produce their values all at once:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e51384"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">print(list(mymap(abs, [−2, −1, 0, 1, 2])))
print(list(mymap(pow, [1, 2, 3], [2, 3, 4, 5])))</pre>
<p>No work is really done here until the <code class="epub__literal">list</code> calls force the generators to run,
            by activating the iteration protocol. The generators returned by
            these functions themselves, as well as that returned by the Python
            3.0 flavor of the <code class="epub__literal">zip</code> built-in
            they use, produce results only on demand.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Coding your own zip(...) and map(None, ...)"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="coding_your_own_zip_open_parenthesis"></a>Coding your own zip(...) and map(None, ...)</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Of <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e51400"></a>course, much of the magic in the examples shown so
            far lies in their use of the <code class="epub__literal">zip</code> built-in to pair arguments from
            multiple sequences. You’ll also note that our <code class="epub__literal">map</code> workalikes are really emulating the
            behavior of the Python 3.0 <code class="epub__literal">map</code>—they truncate at the length of the
            shortest sequence, and they do not support the notion of padding
            results when lengths differ, as <code class="epub__literal">map</code> does in Python 2.X with a <code class="epub__literal">None</code> argument:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e51424"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python26\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>map(None, [1, 2, 3], [2, 3, 4, 5])</code></strong>
[(1, 2), (2, 3), (3, 4), (None, 5)]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>map(None, 'abc', 'xyz123')</code></strong>
[('a', 'x'), ('b', 'y'), ('c', 'z'), (None, '1'), (None, '2'), (None, '3')]</pre>
<p>Using iteration tools, we can code workalikes that emulate
            both truncating <code class="epub__literal">zip</code> and 2.6’s
            padding <code class="epub__literal">map</code>—these turn out to
            be nearly the same in code:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e51443"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># zip(seqs...) and 2.6 map(None, seqs...) workalikes</span></em>

def myzip(*seqs):
    seqs = [list(S) for S in seqs]
    res  = []
    while all(seqs):
        res.append(tuple(S.pop(0) for S in seqs))
    return res

def mymapPad(*seqs, pad=None):
    seqs = [list(S) for S in seqs]
    res  = []
    while any(seqs):
        res.append(tuple((S.pop(0) if S else pad) for S in seqs))
    return res

S1, S2 = 'abc', 'xyz123'
print(myzip(S1, S2))
print(mymapPad(S1, S2))
print(mymapPad(S1, S2, pad=99))</pre>
<p>Both of the functions coded here work on any type of
            iterable object, because they run their arguments through the
            <code class="epub__literal">list</code> built-in to force result
            generation (e.g., files would work as arguments, in addition to
            sequences like strings). <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e53256"></a>Notice the use of the <code class="epub__literal">all</code> and <code class="epub__literal">any</code> built-ins here—these return <code class="epub__literal">True</code> if all and any items in an iterable
            are <code class="epub__literal">True</code> (or equivalently,
            nonempty), respectively. These built-ins are used to stop looping
            when any or all of the listified arguments become empty after
            deletions.</p>
<p>Also note the use of the Python 3.0
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>keyword-only</em></span> argument, <code class="epub__literal">pad</code>; unlike the 2.6 <code class="epub__literal">map</code>, our version will allow any pad
            object to be specified (if you’re using 2.6, use a <code class="epub__literal">**kargs</code> form to support this option
            instead; see Chapter 18 for details). When these
            functions are run, the following results are printed—a <code class="epub__literal">zip</code>, and two padding <code class="epub__literal">map</code>s:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e51487"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">[('a', 'x'), ('b', 'y'), ('c', 'z')]
[('a', 'x'), ('b', 'y'), ('c', 'z'), (None, '1'), (None, '2'), (None, '3')]
[('a', 'x'), ('b', 'y'), ('c', 'z'), (99, '1'), (99, '2'), (99, '3')]</pre>
<p>These functions aren’t amenable to list comprehension
            translation because their loops are too specific. As before,
            though, while our <code class="epub__literal">zip</code> and
            <code class="epub__literal">map</code> workalikes currently build
            and return result lists, it’s just as easy to turn them into
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>generators</em></span> with <code class="epub__literal">yield</code> so that they each return one piece
            of their result set at a time. The results are the same as before,
            but we need to use <code class="epub__literal">list</code> again
            to force the generators to yield their values for display:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e51506"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Using generators: yield</span></em>

def myzip(*seqs):
    seqs = [list(S) for S in seqs]
    while all(seqs):
        yield tuple(S.pop(0) for S in seqs)

def mymapPad(*seqs, pad=None):
    seqs = [list(S) for S in seqs]
    while any(seqs):
        yield tuple((S.pop(0) if S else pad) for S in seqs)

S1, S2 = 'abc', 'xyz123'
print(list(myzip(S1, S2)))
print(list(mymapPad(S1, S2)))
print(list(mymapPad(S1, S2, pad=99)))</pre>
<p>Finally, here’s an alternative implementation of our
            <code class="epub__literal">zip</code> and <code class="epub__literal">map</code> emulators—rather than deleting
            arguments from lists with the <code class="epub__literal">pop</code> method, the following versions do
            their job by calculating the minimum and maximum
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>argument lengths</em></span>. Armed with these lengths,
            it’s easy to code nested list comprehensions to step through
            argument index ranges:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e51525"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Alternate implementation with lengths</span></em>

def myzip(*seqs):
    minlen = min(len(S) for S in seqs)
    return [tuple(S[i] for S in seqs) for i in range(minlen)]

def mymapPad(*seqs, pad=None):
    maxlen = max(len(S) for S in seqs)
    index  = range(maxlen)
    return [tuple((S[i] if len(S) &gt; i else pad) for S in seqs) for i in index]

S1, S2 = 'abc', 'xyz123'
print(myzip(S1, S2))
print(mymapPad(S1, S2))
print(mymapPad(S1, S2, pad=99))</pre>
<p>Because these use <code class="epub__literal">len</code> and
            indexing, they assume that arguments are sequences or similar, not
            arbitrary iterables. The outer comprehensions here step through
            argument index ranges, and the inner comprehensions (passed to
            <code class="epub__literal">tuple</code>) step through the
            passed-in sequences to pull out arguments in parallel. When
            they’re run, the results are as before.</p>
<p>Most strikingly, generators and iterators seem to run
            rampant in this example. The arguments passed to <code class="epub__literal">min</code> and <code class="epub__literal">max</code> are generator expressions, which run
            to completion before the nested comprehensions begin iterating.
            Moreover, the nested list comprehensions employ two levels of
            delayed evaluation—the Python 3.0 <code class="epub__literal">range</code> built-in is an iterable, as is the
            generator expression argument to <code class="epub__literal">tuple</code>.</p>
<p>In fact, no results are produced here until the <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e51553"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e51558"></a>square brackets of the list comprehensions request
            values to place in the result list—they force the comprehensions
            and generators to run. To turn these functions themselves into
            generators instead of list builders, use parentheses instead of
            square brackets again. Here’s the case for our <code class="epub__literal">zip</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e51567"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Using generators: (...)</span></em>

def myzip(*seqs):
    minlen = min(len(S) for S in seqs)
    return (tuple(S[i] for S in seqs) for i in range(minlen))

print(list(myzip(S1, S2)))</pre>
<p>In this case, it takes a <code class="epub__literal">list</code> call to activate the generators and
            iterators to produce their results. Experiment with these on your
            own for more details. Developing further coding alternatives is
            left as a suggested exercise (see also the sidebar  for investigation of one such
            option).</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="why_you_will_care_colon_one-shot_iterat"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Why You Will Care: One-Shot Iterations</p>
<p>In Chapter 14, we saw how
              some built-ins (like <code class="epub__literal">map</code>)
              <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e51588"></a>support only a single traversal and are empty
              after it occurs, and I promised to show you an example of how
              that can become subtle but important in practice. Now that we’ve
              studied a few more iteration topics, I can make good on this
              promise. Consider the following clever alternative coding for
              this chapter’s <code class="epub__literal">zip</code> emulation
              examples, adapted from one in Python’s manuals:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e51599"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def myzip(*args):
    iters = map(iter, args)
    while iters:
        res = [next(i) for i in iters]
        yield tuple(res)</pre>
<p>Because this code uses <code class="epub__literal">iter</code> and <code class="epub__literal">next</code>, it works on any type of
              iterable. Note that there is no reason to catch the <code class="epub__literal">StopIteration</code> raised by the <code class="epub__literal">next(it)</code> inside the comprehension here
              when any one of the arguments’ iterators is exhausted—allowing
              it to pass ends this generator function and has the same effect
              that a <code class="epub__literal">return</code> statement
              would. The <code class="epub__literal">while iters:</code>
              suffices to loop if at least one argument is passed, and avoids
              an infinite loop otherwise (the list comprehension would always
              return an empty list).</p>
<p>This code works fine in Python 2.6 as is:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e51624"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(myzip('abc', 'lmnop'))</code></strong>
[('a', 'l'), ('b', 'm'), ('c', 'n')]</pre>
<p>But it falls into an infinite loop and fails in Python
              3.0, because the 3.0 <code class="epub__literal">map</code>
              returns a one-shot iterable object instead of a list as in 2.6.
              In 3.0, as soon as we’ve run the list comprehension inside the
              loop once, <code class="epub__literal">iters</code> will be
              empty (and <code class="epub__literal">res</code> will be
              <code class="epub__literal">[]</code>) forever. To make this
              work in 3.0, we need to use the <code class="epub__literal">list</code> built-in function to create an
              object that can support multiple iterations:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e51646"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def myzip(*args):
    iters = list(map(iter, args))
    <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...rest as is...</code></em></pre>
<p>Run this on your own to trace its operation. The lesson
              here: wrapping <code class="epub__literal">map</code> calls in
              <code class="epub__literal">list</code> calls in 3.0 is not just
              for <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e51658"></a>display!</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Value Generation in Built-in Types and Classes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="value_generation_in_built-in_types_and"></a>Value Generation in Built-in Types and Classes</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Finally, <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e51666"></a>although we’ve focused on coding value generators
          ourselves in this section, don’t forget that many built-in types
          behave in similar ways—as we saw in Chapter 14, for example,
          dictionaries have iterators that produce keys on each
          iteration:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e51674"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D = {'a':1, 'b':2, 'c':3}</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = iter(D)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(x)</code></strong>
'a'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(x)</code></strong>
'c'</pre>
<p>Like the values produced by handcoded generators, dictionary
          keys may be iterated over both manually and with automatic iteration
          tools including <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops,
          <code class="epub__literal">map</code> calls, list comprehensions,
          and the many other contexts we met in Chapter 14:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e51698"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for key in D:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(key, D[key])</code></strong>
...
a 1
c 3
b 2</pre>
<p>As we’ve also seen, for file iterators, Python simply loads
          lines from the file on demand:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e51708"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for line in open('temp.txt'):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(line, end='')</code></strong>
...
Tis but
a flesh wound.</pre>
<p>While built-in type iterators are bound to a specific type of
          value generation, the concept is similar to generators we code with
          expressions and functions. Iteration contexts like <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops accept any iterable, whether
          user-defined or built-in.</p>
<p>Although beyond the scope of this chapter, it is also possible
          to implement arbitrary user-defined generator objects with
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>classes</em></span> that conform to the iteration protocol.
          Such classes define a special <code class="epub__literal">__iter__</code> method run by the <code class="epub__literal">iter</code> built-in function that returns an
          object having a <code class="epub__literal">__next__</code> method
          run by the <code class="epub__literal">next</code> built-in function
          (a <code class="epub__literal">__getitem__</code> indexing method is
          also available as a fallback option for iteration).</p>
<p>The instance objects created from such a class are considered
          iterable and may be used in <code class="epub__literal">for</code>
          loops and all other iteration contexts. With classes, though, we
          have access to richer logic and data structuring options than other
          generator constructs can offer.</p>
<p>The iterator story won’t really be complete until we’ve seen
          how it maps to classes, too. For now, we’ll have to settle for
          postponing its conclusion until we study <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e51749"></a>class-based iterators in Chapter 29.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="3.0 Comprehension Syntax Summary"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
