<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Function Gotchas</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="function_gotchas"></a>Function Gotchas</h1>
<p>Now <a id="ch20functiongotchas"></a>that we’ve reached the end of the function story, let’s
        review some common pitfalls. Functions have some jagged edges that you
        might not expect. They’re all obscure, and a few have started to fall
        away from the language completely in recent releases, but most have
        been known to trip up new users.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Local Names Are Detected Statically"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="local_names_are_detected_statically"></a>Local Names Are Detected Statically</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As you <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e52554"></a>know, Python classifies names assigned in a function
          as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>locals</em></span> by default; they live in the
          function’s scope and exist only while the function is running. What
          you may not realize is that Python detects locals statically, when
          it compiles the <code class="epub__literal">def</code>’s code,
          rather than by noticing assignments as they happen at runtime. This
          leads to one of the most common oddities posted on the Python
          newsgroup by beginners.</p>
<p>Normally, a name that isn’t assigned in a function is looked
          up in the enclosing module:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e52571"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = 99</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def selector():</code></strong>       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># X used but not assigned</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(X)</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># X found in global scope</span></em>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>selector()</code></strong>
99</pre>
<p>Here, the <code class="epub__literal">X</code> in the function
          resolves to the <code class="epub__literal">X</code> in the module.
          But watch what happens if you add an assignment to <code class="epub__literal">X</code> after the reference:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e52603"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def selector():</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(X)</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Does not yet exist!</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = 88</code></strong>            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># X classified as a local name (everywhere)</span></em>
...                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Can also happen for "import X", "def X"...</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>selector()</code></strong>
UnboundLocalError: local variable 'X' referenced before assignment</pre>
<p>You get the name usage error shown here, but the reason is
          subtle. Python reads and compiles this code when it’s typed
          interactively or imported from a module. While compiling, Python
          sees the assignment to <code class="epub__literal">X</code> and
          decides that <code class="epub__literal">X</code> will be a local
          name everywhere in the function. But when the function is actually
          run, because the assignment hasn’t yet happened when the <code class="epub__literal">print</code> executes, Python says you’re using
          an undefined name. According to its name rules, it should say this;
          the local <code class="epub__literal">X</code> is used before being
          assigned. In fact, any assignment in a function body makes a name
          local. Imports, <code class="epub__literal">=</code>, nested
          <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s, nested classes, and so on
          are all susceptible to this behavior.</p>
<p>The problem occurs because assigned names are treated as
          locals everywhere in a function, not just after the statements where
          they're assigned. The previous example is ambiguous: was the
          intention to print the global <code class="epub__literal">X</code>
          and create a local <code class="epub__literal">X</code>, or is this
          a real programming error? Because Python treats <code class="epub__literal">X</code> as a local everywhere, it’s seen as an
          error; if you mean to print the global <code class="epub__literal">X</code>, you need to declare it in a <code class="epub__literal">global</code> statement:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e52668"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def selector():</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>global X</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Force X to be global (everywhere)</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(X)</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = 88</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>selector()</code></strong>
99</pre>
<p>Remember, though, that this means the assignment also changes
          the global <code class="epub__literal">X</code>, not a local
          <code class="epub__literal">X</code>. Within a function, you can’t
          use both local and global versions of the same simple name. If you
          really meant to print the global and then set a local of the same
          name, you’d need to import the enclosing module and use module
          attribute notation to get to the global version:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e52697"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = 99</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def selector():</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import __main__</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Import enclosing module</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(__main__.X)</code></strong>       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Qualify to get to global version of name</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = 88</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Unqualified X classified as local</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(X)</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Prints local version of name</span></em>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>selector()</code></strong>
99
88</pre>
<p>Qualification (the <code class="epub__literal">.X</code> part)
          fetches a value from a namespace object. The interactive namespace
          is a module called <code class="epub__literal">__main__</code>, so
          <code class="epub__literal">__main__.X</code> reaches the global
          version of <code class="epub__literal">X</code>. If that isn’t
          clear, check out Chapter 17.</p>
<p>In recent versions Python has improved on this story somewhat
          by issuing for this case the more specific “unbound local” error
          message shown in the example listing (it used to simply raise a
          generic name error); this gotcha is still present in general,
          though.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Defaults and Mutable Objects"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="defaults_and_mutable_objects"></a>Defaults and Mutable Objects</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Default <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e52757"></a>argument values are evaluated and saved when a
          <code class="epub__literal">def</code> statement is run, not when
          the resulting function is called. Internally, Python saves one
          object per default argument attached to the function itself.</p>
<p>That’s usually what you want—because defaults are evaluated at
          <code class="epub__literal">def</code> time, it lets you save values
          from the enclosing scope, if needed. But because a default retains
          an object between calls, you have to be careful about changing
          mutable defaults. For instance, the following function uses an empty
          list as a default value, and then changes it in-place each time the
          function is called:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e52773"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def saver(x=[]):</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Saves away a list object</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.append(1)</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Changes same object each time!</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(x)</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>saver([2])</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Default not used</span></em>
[2, 1]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>saver()</code></strong>                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Default used</span></em>
[1]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>saver()</code></strong>                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Grows on each call!</span></em>
[1, 1]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>saver()</code></strong>
[1, 1, 1]</pre>
<p>Some see this behavior as a feature—because mutable default
          arguments retain their state between function calls, they can serve
          some of the same roles as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>static</em></span> local function
          variables in the C language. In a sense, they work sort of like
          global variables, but their names are local to the functions and so
          will not clash with names elsewhere in a program.</p>
<p>To most observers, though, this seems like a gotcha,
          especially the first time they run into it. There are better ways to
          retain state between calls in Python (e.g., using classes, which
          will be discussed in Part VI).</p>
<p>Moreover, mutable defaults are tricky to remember (and to
          understand at all). They depend upon the timing of default object
          construction. In the prior example, there is just one list object
          for the default value—the one created when the <code class="epub__literal">def</code> is executed. You don’t get a new list
          every time the function is called, so the list grows with each new
          append; it is not reset to empty on each call.</p>
<p>If that’s not the behavior you want, simply make a copy of the
          default at the start of the function body, or move the default value
          expression into the function body. As long as the value resides in
          code that’s actually executed each time the function runs, you’ll
          get a new object each time through:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e52829"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def saver(x=None):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if x is None:</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># No argument passed?</span></em>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = []</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Run code to make a new list</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.append(1)</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Changes new list object</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(x)</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>saver([2])</code></strong>
[2, 1]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>saver()</code></strong>                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Doesn't grow here</span></em>
[1]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>saver()</code></strong>
[1]</pre>
<p>By the way, the <code class="epub__literal">if</code>
          statement in this example could <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>almost</em></span> be
          replaced by the assignment <code class="epub__literal">x = x or
          []</code>, which takes advantage of the fact that Python’s
          <code class="epub__literal">or</code> returns one of its operand
          objects: if no argument was passed, <code class="epub__literal">x</code> would default to <code class="epub__literal">None</code>, so the <code class="epub__literal">or</code> would return the new empty list on the
          right.</p>
<p>However, this isn’t exactly the same. If an empty list were
          passed in, the <code class="epub__literal">or</code> expression
          would cause the function to extend and return a newly created list,
          rather than extending and returning the passed-in list like the
          <code class="epub__literal">if</code> version. (The expression
          becomes <code class="epub__literal">[] or []</code>, which evaluates
          to the new empty list on the right; see the section Truth Tests if you don’t recall why). Real program
          requirements may call for either behavior.</p>
<p>Today, another way to achieve the effect of mutable defaults
          in a possibly less confusing way is to use the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>function
          attributes</em></span> we discussed in Chapter 19:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e52914"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def saver():</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>saver.x.append(1)</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(saver.x)</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>saver.x = []</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>saver()</code></strong>
[1]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>saver()</code></strong>
[1, 1]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>saver()</code></strong>
[1, 1, 1]</pre>
<p>The function name is global to the function itself, but it
          need not be declared because it isn’t changed directly within the
          function. This isn’t used in exactly the same way, but when coded
          like this, the attachment of an object to the function is much more
          explicit (and arguably less magical).</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Functions Without returns"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="functions_without_returns"></a>Functions Without returns</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In Python <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e52945"></a>functions, <code class="epub__literal">return</code>
          (and <code class="epub__literal">yield</code>) statements are
          optional. When a function doesn’t return a value explicitly, the
          function exits when control falls off the end of the function body.
          Technically, all functions return a value; if you don’t provide a
          <code class="epub__literal">return</code> statement, your function
          returns the <code class="epub__literal">None</code> object
          automatically:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e52965"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def proc(x):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(x)</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># No return is a None return</span></em>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = proc('testing 123...')</code></strong>
testing 123...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(x)</code></strong>
None</pre>
<p>Functions such as this without a <code class="epub__literal">return</code> are Python’s equivalent of what are
          called “procedures” in some languages. They’re usually invoked as
          statements, and the <code class="epub__literal">None</code> results
          are ignored, as they do their business without computing a useful
          result.</p>
<p>This is worth knowing, because Python won’t tell you if you
          try to use the result of a function that doesn’t return one. For
          instance, assigning the result of a list <code class="epub__literal">append</code> method won’t raise an error, but
          you’ll get back <code class="epub__literal">None</code>, not the
          modified list:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e52998"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list = [1, 2, 3]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list = list.append(4)</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># append is a "procedure"</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(list)</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># append changes list in-place</span></em>
None</pre>
<p>As mentioned in Common Coding Gotchas in
          Chapter 15, such functions do
          their business as a side effect and are usually designed to be run
          as statements, not expressions.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Enclosing Scope Loop Variables"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="enclosing_scope_loop_variables"></a>Enclosing Scope Loop Variables</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>We <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e53026"></a>described this gotcha in Chapter 17’s
          discussion of enclosing function scopes, but as a reminder, be
          careful about relying on enclosing function scope lookup for
          variables that are changed by enclosing loops—all such references
          will remember the value of the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>last</em></span> loop
          iteration. Use defaults to save loop variable values instead
          <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e53039"></a>(see Chapter 17 for more details on
          this topic).</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Chapter Summary"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
