<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="chapter_summary-id19"></a>Chapter Summary</h1>
<p>This chapter wrapped up our coverage of built-in comprehension
        and iteration tools. It explored list comprehensions in the context of
        functional tools and presented generator functions and expressions as
        additional iteration protocol tools. As a finale, we also measured the
        performance of iteration alternatives, and we closed with a review of
        common function-related mistakes to help you avoid pitfalls.</p>
<p>This concludes the functions part of this book. In the next
        part, we will study <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>modules</em></span>—the topmost
        organizational structure in Python, and the structure in which our
        functions always live. After that, we will explore classes, tools that
        are largely packages of functions with special first arguments. As
        we’ll see, user-defined classes can implement objects that tap into
        the iteration protocol, just like the generators and iterables we met
        here. Everything we have learned in this part of the book will apply
        when functions pop up later in the context of class methods.</p>
<p>Before moving on to modules, though, be sure to work through
        this chapter’s quiz and the exercises for this part of the book, to
        practice what we’ve learned about <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e53056"></a>functions here.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Test Your Knowledge: Quiz"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
