<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_answers-id19"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</h1>
<div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>List comprehensions in square brackets produce the result
            list all at once in memory. When they are enclosed in parentheses
            instead, they are actually generator expressions—they have a
            similar meaning but do not produce the result list all at once.
            Instead, generator expressions return a generator object, which
            yields one item in the result at a time when used in an iteration
            context.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Generators are objects that support the iteration
            protocol—they have a <code class="epub__literal">__next__</code>
            method that repeatedly advances to the next item in a series of
            results and raises an exception at the end of the series. In
            Python, we can code generator functions with <code class="epub__literal">def</code>, generator expressions with
            parenthesized list comprehensions, and generator objects with
            classes that define a special method named <code class="epub__literal">__iter__</code> (discussed later in the
            book).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>A generator function has a <code class="epub__literal">yield</code> statement somewhere in its code.
            Generator functions are otherwise identical to normal functions
            syntactically, but they are compiled specially by Python so as to
            return an iterable object when called.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>When present, this statement makes Python compile the
            function specially as a generator; when called, the function
            returns a generator object that supports the iteration protocol.
            When the <code class="epub__literal">yield</code> statement is
            run, it sends a result back to the caller and suspends the
            function’s state; the function can then be resumed after the last
            <code class="epub__literal">yield</code> statement, in response to
            a <code class="epub__literal">next</code> built-in or <code class="epub__literal">__next__</code> method call issued by the
            caller. Generator functions may also have a <code class="epub__literal">return</code> statement, which terminates the
            generator.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">map</code> call is similar
            to a list comprehension—both build a new list by collecting the
            results of applying an operation to each item in a sequence or
            other iterable, one item at a time. The main difference is that
            <code class="epub__literal">map</code> applies a function call to
            each item, and list comprehensions apply arbitrary expressions.
            Because of this, list comprehensions are more general; they can
            apply a function call expression like <code class="epub__literal">map</code>, but <code class="epub__literal">map</code> requires a function to apply other
            kinds of expressions. List comprehensions also support extended
            syntax such as nested <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops
            and <code class="epub__literal">if</code> clauses that subsume the
            <code class="epub__literal">filter</code> built-in.</p></li></ol>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Test Your Knowledge: Part IV Exercises"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
