<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Test Your Knowledge: Part IV Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_part_iv_exerc"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Part IV Exercises</h1>
<p>In these <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e53161"></a>exercises, you’re going to start coding more
        sophisticated programs. Be sure to check the solutions in Part IV, Functions in Appendix B, and be sure to start
        writing your code in module files. You won’t want to retype these
        exercises from scratch if you make a mistake.</p><div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>The basics</em></span>. At the Python interactive
            prompt, write a function that prints its single argument to the
            screen and call it interactively, passing a variety of object
            types: string, integer, list, dictionary. Then, try calling it
            without passing any argument. What happens? What happens when you
            pass two arguments?</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Arguments</em></span>. Write a function called
            <code class="epub__literal">adder</code> in a Python module file.
            The function should accept two arguments and return the sum (or
            concatenation) of the two. Then, add code at the bottom of the
            file to call the <code class="epub__literal">adder</code> function
            with a variety of object types (two strings, two lists, two
            floating points), and run this file as a script from the system
            command line. Do you have to print the call statement results to
            see results on your screen?</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>varargs</em></span>. Generalize the <code class="epub__literal">adder</code> function you wrote in the last
            exercise to compute the sum of an arbitrary number of arguments,
            and change the calls to pass more or fewer than two arguments.
            What type is the return value sum? (Hints: a slice such as
            <code class="epub__literal">S[:0]</code> returns an empty sequence
            of the same type as <code class="epub__literal">S</code>, and the
            <code class="epub__literal">type</code> built-in function can test
            types; but see the manually coded <code class="epub__literal">min</code> examples in Chapter 18 for a simpler approach.) What happens if
            you pass in arguments of different types? What about passing in
            dictionaries?</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Keywords</em></span>. Change the <code class="epub__literal">adder</code> function from exercise 2 to accept
            and sum/concatenate three arguments: <code class="epub__literal">def
            adder(good, bad, ugly)</code>. Now, provide default values for
            each argument, and experiment with calling the function
            interactively. Try passing one, two, three, and four arguments.
            Then, try passing keyword arguments. Does the call <code class="epub__literal">adder(ugly=1, good=2)</code> work? Why?
            Finally, generalize the new <code class="epub__literal">adder</code> to accept and sum/concatenate an
            arbitrary number of keyword arguments. This is similar to what you
            did in exercise 3, but you’ll need to iterate over a dictionary,
            not a tuple. (Hint: the <code class="epub__literal">dict.keys</code> method returns a list you can
            step through with a <code class="epub__literal">for</code> or
            <code class="epub__literal">while</code>, but be sure to wrap it
            in a <code class="epub__literal">list</code> call to index it in
            3.0!)</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Write a function called <code class="epub__literal">copyDict(dict)</code> that copies its
            dictionary argument. It should return a new dictionary containing
            all the items in its argument. Use the dictionary <code class="epub__literal">keys</code> method to iterate (or, in Python
            2.2, step over a dictionary’s keys without calling <code class="epub__literal">keys</code>). Copying sequences is easy
            (<code class="epub__literal">X[:]</code> makes a top-level copy);
            does this work for dictionaries, too?</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Write a function called <code class="epub__literal">addDict(dict1, dict2)</code> that computes the
            union of two dictionaries. It should return a new dictionary
            containing all the items in both its arguments (which are assumed
            to be dictionaries). If the same key appears in both arguments,
            feel free to pick a value from either. Test your function by
            writing it in a file and running the file as a script. What
            happens if you pass lists instead of dictionaries? How could you
            generalize your function to handle this case, too? (Hint: see the
            <code class="epub__literal">type</code> built-in function used
            earlier.) Does the order of the arguments passed in matter?</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>More argument-matching examples</em></span>. First,
            define the following six functions (either interactively or in a
            module file that can be imported):</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e53271"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def f1(a, b): print(a, b)            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Normal args</span></em>
def f2(a, *b): print(a, b)           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Positional varargs</span></em>

def f3(a, **b): print(a, b)          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Keyword varargs</span></em>

def f4(a, *b, **c): print(a, b, c)   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Mixed modes</span></em>

def f5(a, b=2, c=3): print(a, b, c)  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Defaults</span></em>

def f6(a, b=2, *c): print(a, b, c)   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Defaults and positional varargs</span></em></pre>
<p>Now, test the following calls interactively, and try to
            explain each result; in some cases, you’ll probably need to fall
            back on the matching algorithm shown in Chapter 18. Do you think mixing matching modes is a
            good idea in general? Can you think of cases where it would be
            useful?</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e53295"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f1(1, 2)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f1(b=2, a=1)</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f2(1, 2, 3)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f3(1, x=2, y=3)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f4(1, 2, 3, x=2, y=3</code></strong>)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f5(1)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f5(1, 4)</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f6(1)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>f6(1, 3, 4)</code></strong></pre></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Primes revisited</em></span>. Recall the following
            code snippet from Chapter 13, which
            simplistically determines whether a positive integer is
            prime:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e53331"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">x = y // 2                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># For some y &gt; 1</span></em>
while x &gt; 1:
    if y % x == 0:                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Remainder</span></em>
      print(y, 'has factor', x)
      break                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"> # Skip else</span></em>
    x -= 1
else:                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Normal exit</span></em>
    print(y, 'is prime')</pre>
<p>Package this code as a reusable function in a module file
            (<code class="epub__literal">y</code> should be a passed-in
            argument), and add some calls to the function at the bottom of
            your file. While you’re at it, experiment with replacing the first
            line’s <code class="epub__literal">//</code> operator with
            <code class="epub__literal">/</code> to see how true division
            changes the <code class="epub__literal">/</code> operator in
            Python 3.0 and breaks this code (refer back to Chapter 5 if you need a refresher). What can you
            do about negatives, and the values <code class="epub__literal">0</code> and <code class="epub__literal">1</code>? How about speeding this up? Your
            outputs should look something like this:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e53368"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">13 is prime
13.0 is prime
15 has factor 5
15.0 has factor 5.0</pre></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>List comprehensions</em></span>. Write code to
            build a new list containing the square roots of all the numbers in
            this list: <code class="epub__literal">[2, 4, 9, 16, 25]</code>.
            Code this as a <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop first,
            then as a <code class="epub__literal">map</code> call, and finally
            as a list comprehension. Use the <code class="epub__literal">sqrt</code> function in the built-in <code class="epub__literal">math</code> module to do the calculation (i.e.,
            import <code class="epub__literal">math</code> and say <code class="epub__literal">math.sqrt(x)</code>). Of the three, which
            approach do you like best?</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Timing tools</em></span>. In Chapter 5, we saw three ways to compute square
            roots: <code class="epub__literal">math.sqrt(X)</code>, <code class="epub__literal">X ** .5</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">pow(X, .5)</code>. If your programs run a lot
            these, their relative performance might become important. To see
            which is quickest, repurpose the <em class="epub__filename">timerseqs.py</em> script we wrote in this
            chapter to time each of these three tools. Use the <em class="epub__filename">mytimer.py</em> timer module with the
            <code class="epub__literal">best</code> function (you can use
            either the 3.0-ony keyword-only variant, or the 2.6/3.0 version).
            You might also want to repackage the testing code in this script
            for better reusability—by passing a test functions tuple to a
            general tester function, for example (for this exercise a copy-and-modify approach is fine).
            Which of the three square root tools seems to run fastest on your
            machine and Python in general? Finally, how might you go about
            interactively timing the speed of dictionary comprehensions versus
            <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops?</p></li></ol>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[43] </sup>These performance generalizations can depend on call
              patterns, as well as changes and optimizations in Python itself.
              Recent Python releases have sped up the simple <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop statement, for example.
              Usually, though, list comprehensions are still substantially
              faster than <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loops and
              even faster than <code class="epub__literal">map</code> (though
              <code class="epub__literal">map</code> can still win for
              built-in functions). To time these alternatives yourself, see
              the standard library’s <code class="epub__literal">time</code>
              module’s <code class="epub__literal">time.clock</code> and
              <code class="epub__literal">time.time</code> calls, the newer
              <code class="epub__literal">timeit</code> module added in
              Release 2.4, or this chapter’s upcoming section Timing Iteration Alternatives.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[44] </sup>Interestingly, generator functions are also something of
                a “poor man’s” <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>multithreading</em></span> device—they
                interleave a function’s work with that of its caller, by
                dividing its operation into steps run between <code class="epub__literal">yield</code>s. Generators are not threads,
                though: the program is explicitly directed to and from the
                function within a single thread of control. In one sense,
                threading is more general (producers can run truly
                independently and post results to a queue), but generators may
                be simpler to code. See the second footnote in Chapter 17 for a brief introduction to Python
                multithreading tools. Note that because control is routed
                explicitly at <code class="epub__literal">yield</code> and
                <code class="epub__literal">next</code> calls, generators are
                also not <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>backtracking</em></span>, but are more
                strongly related to <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>coroutines</em></span>—formal
                concepts that are both beyond this chapter’s scope.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[45] </sup>Also note how we must pass functions in to the timer
              manually here. In Chapters 38 and 39 we'll see decorator-based
              timer alternatives with which timed functions are called
              normally.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[46] </sup>For more fun, apply a simple user-defined function like
              <code class="epub__literal">def f(I): return(I)</code> in all
              five iteration techniques timed. The results are similar to
              using a built-in function like <code class="epub__literal">abs</code>: among the five iteration
              techniques, <code class="epub__literal">map</code> is fastest
              today if all five call a function, built-in or not, but slowest
              when the others do not. That is, <code class="epub__literal">map</code> appears to be slower simply
              because it requires function calls, and function calls are
              relatively slow in general. Since <code class="epub__literal">map</code> can't avoid calling functions, it
              can lose by association.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
