<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 21. Modules: The Big Picture</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 21. Modules: The Big Picture"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h1 class="epub__title"><a id="modules_colon_the_big_picture"></a>Chapter 21. Modules: The Big Picture</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>This chapter begins our in-depth look at the Python
      <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e53440"></a>module</em></span>, the highest-level program organization
      unit, which packages program code and data for reuse. In concrete terms,
      modules usually correspond to Python program files (or extensions coded
      in external languages such as C, Java, or C#). Each file is a module,
      and modules import other modules to use the names they define. Modules
      are processed with two statements and one important function:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">import</code></span>
</dt><dd>
<p>Lets a client (importer) fetch a module as a whole</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">from</code></span>
</dt><dd>
<p>Allows clients to fetch particular names from a
            module</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">imp.reload</code></span>
</dt><dd>
<p>Provides a way to reload a module’s code without stopping
            Python</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Chapter 3 introduced module
      fundamentals, and we’ve been using them ever since. This part of the
      book begins by expanding on core module concepts, then moves on to
      explore more advanced module usage. This first chapter offers a general
      look at the role of modules in overall program structure. In the
      following chapters, we’ll dig into the coding details behind the
      theory.</p>
<p>Along the way, we’ll flesh out module details omitted so far:
      you’ll learn about reloads, the <code class="epub__literal">__name__</code> and <code class="epub__literal">__all__</code> attributes, package imports, relative
      import syntax, and so on. Because modules and classes are really just
      glorified namespaces, we’ll formalize namespace concepts here as
      well.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Why Use Modules?"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
