<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Why Use Modules?</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="why_use_modules_question"></a>Why Use Modules?</h1>
<p>In short, modules provide an easy way to organize components
        into a system by serving as self-contained packages of variables known
        as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e53484"></a>namespaces</em></span>. All the names defined at the top
        level of a <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e53489"></a>module file become attributes of the imported module
        object. As we saw in the last part of this book, imports give access
        to names in a module’s global scope. That is, the module file’s global
        scope morphs into the module object’s attribute namespace when it is
        imported. Ultimately, Python’s modules allow us to link individual
        files into a larger program system.</p>
<p>More specifically, from an abstract perspective, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e53497"></a>modules have at least three roles:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Code reuse</span></dt><dd>
<p>As discussed in Chapter 3,
              <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e53512"></a>modules let you save code in files permanently.
              Unlike code you type at the Python interactive prompt, which
              goes away when you exit Python, code in module files is
              persistent—it can be reloaded and rerun as many times as needed.
              More to the point, modules are a place to define names, known as
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>attributes</em></span>, which may be referenced by
              multiple external clients.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">System namespace partitioning</span></dt><dd>
<p>Modules <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e53527"></a>are also the highest-level program organization
              unit in Python. Fundamentally, they are just packages of names.
              Modules seal up names into self-contained packages, which
              helps avoid name clashes—you can never see a name in another
              file, unless you explicitly import that file. In fact,
              everything “lives” in a module—code you execute and objects you
              create are always implicitly enclosed in modules. Because of
              that, modules are natural tools for grouping system components.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Implementing shared services or data</span></dt><dd>
<p>From an <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e53543"></a>operational perspective, modules also come in
              handy for implementing components that are shared across a
              system and hence require only a single copy. For instance, if
              you need to provide a global object that’s used by more than one
              function or file, you can code it in a module that can then be
              imported by many clients.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>For you to truly understand the role of modules in a Python
        system, though, we need to digress for a moment and explore the
        general structure of a Python program.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Python Program Architecture"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
