<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How Imports Work</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="how_imports_work"></a>How Imports Work</h1>
<p>The <a id="ch21modulesimportingofmods"></a>prior section talked about importing modules without
        really explaining what happens when you do so. Because imports are at
        the heart of program structure in Python, this section goes into more
        detail on the import operation to make this process less
        abstract.</p>
<p>Some C programmers like to compare the Python module import
        operation to a <code class="epub__literal">C #include</code>, but they
        really shouldn’t—in Python, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e53846"></a>imports are not just textual insertions of one file into
        another. They are really runtime operations that perform three
        distinct steps the first time a program imports a given file:</p><div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Find</em></span> the module’s file.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Compile</em></span> it to byte code (if
            needed).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Run</em></span> the module’s code to build the
            objects it defines.</p></li></ol>
</div>
<p>To better understand module imports, we’ll explore these steps
        in turn. Bear in mind that all three of these steps are carried out
        only the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>first time</em></span> a module is imported during a
        program’s execution; later imports of the same module bypass all of
        these steps and simply fetch the already loaded module object in
        memory. Technically, Python does this by storing loaded modules in a
        table named <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e53872"></a>sys.modules</code> and checking there at the start of
        an import operation. If the module is not present, a three-step
        process begins.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="1. Find It"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="find_it"></a>1. Find It</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>First, Python must <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e53882"></a>locate the module file referenced by an <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statement. Notice that the <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statement in the prior section’s
          example names the file without a <em class="epub__filename">.py</em> suffix and without its directory
          path: it just says <code class="epub__literal">import b</code>,
          instead of something like <code class="epub__literal">import
          c:\dir1\b.py</code>. In fact, you can only list a simple name;
          path and suffix details are omitted on purpose and Python uses a
          standard <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e53907"></a>module search path</em></span> to locate the module
          file corresponding to an <code class="epub__literal">import</code>
          statement.<sup>[47]</sup> Because this is the main part of the import operation
          that programmers must know about, we’ll return to this topic in a
          moment.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="2. Compile It (Maybe)"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="compile_it_open_parenthesis_maybe_cl"></a>2. Compile It (Maybe)</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>After finding a <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e53946"></a>source code file that matches an <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statement by traversing the module
          search path, Python next compiles it to byte code, if necessary. (We
          discussed byte code in Chapter 2.)</p>
<p>Python checks the file timestamps and, if the byte code file
          is older than the source file (i.e., if you’ve changed the source),
          automatically regenerates the byte code when the program is run. If,
          on the other hand, it finds a <em class="epub__filename"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e53962"></a>.pyc</em> byte code file that is not older than
          the corresponding <em class="epub__filename">.py</em> source
          file, it skips the source-to–byte code compile step. In addition, if
          Python finds only a byte code file on the search path and no source,
          it simply loads the byte code directly (this means you can ship a
          program as just byte code files and avoid sending source). In other
          words, the compile step is bypassed if possible to speed program
          startup. As noted in Chapter 2, imports also recreate byte code if
          its "magic" Python version number does not match.</p>
<p>Notice that compilation happens when a file is being imported.
          Because of this, you will not usually see a <em class="epub__filename">.pyc</em> byte code file for the top-level
          file of your program, unless it is also imported elsewhere—only
          imported files leave behind <em class="epub__filename">.pyc</em> files on your machine. The byte code of top-level
          files is used internally and discarded; byte code of imported files
          is saved in files to speed future imports.</p>
<p>Top-level files are often designed to be executed directly and
          not imported at all. Later, we’ll see that it is possible to design
          a file that serves both as the top-level code of a program and as a
          module of tools to be imported. Such a file may be both executed and
          imported, and thus does generate a <em class="epub__filename">.pyc</em>. To learn how this works, watch for
          the discussion of the special <code class="epub__literal">__name__</code> attribute and <code class="epub__literal">__main__</code> in Chapter 24.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="3. Run It"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="run_it"></a>3. Run It</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e53999"></a>final step of an import operation executes the byte
          code of the module. All statements in the file are executed in turn,
          from top to bottom, and any assignments made to names during this
          step generate attributes of the resulting module object. This
          execution step therefore generates all the tools that the module’s
          code defines. For instance, <code class="epub__literal">def</code>
          statements in a file are run at import time to create functions and
          assign attributes within the module to those functions. The
          functions can then be called later in the program by the file’s
          importers.</p>
<p>Because this last import step actually runs the file’s code,
          if any top-level code in a module file does real work, you’ll see
          its results at import time. For example, top-level <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statements in a module show output
          when the file is imported. Function <code class="epub__literal">def</code> statements simply define objects for
          later use.</p>
<p>As you can see, import operations involve quite a bit of
          work—they search for files, possibly run a compiler, and run Python
          code. Because of this, any given module is imported only
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>once</em></span> per process by default. Future imports
          skip all three import steps and reuse the already loaded module in
          memory. If you need to import a file again after it has already been
          loaded (for example, to support end-user customization), you have to
          force the issue with an <code class="epub__literal">imp.reload</code> call—a tool we’ll meet in the
          next <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e54026"></a>chapter.<sup>[48]</sup></p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="The Module Search Path"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
