<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>The Module Search Path</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="the_module_search_path"></a>The Module Search Path</h1>
<p>As <a id="ch21modulesmodsearchpath"></a>mentioned earlier, the part of the import procedure that
        is most important to programmers is usually the first—locating the
        file to be imported (the “find it” part). Because you may need to tell
        Python where to look to find files to import, you need to know how to
        tap into its search path in order to extend it.</p>
<p>In many cases, you can rely on the automatic nature of the
        module import search path and won’t need to configure this path at
        all. If you want to be able to import files across directory
        boundaries, though, you will need to know how the search path works in
        order to customize it. Roughly, Python’s module search path is
        composed of the concatenation of
        these major components, some of which are preset for you and some of
        which you can tailor to tell Python where to look:</p><div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The home directory of the program</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code> directories
            (if set)</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Standard library directories</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The contents of any <em class="epub__filename">.pth</em> files (if present)</p></li></ol>
</div>
<p>Ultimately, the concatenation of these four components becomes
        <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e54081"></a>sys.path</code>, a list of directory name strings
        that I’ll expand upon later in this section. The first and third
        elements of the search path are defined automatically. Because Python
        searches the concatenation of these components from first to last,
        though, the second and fourth elements can be used to extend the path
        to include your own source code directories. Here is how Python uses
        each of these path components:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Home directory</span></dt><dd>
<p>Python first <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e54093"></a>looks for the imported file in the home directory.
              The meaning of this entry depends on how you are running the
              code. When you’re running a program, this entry is the directory
              containing your program’s top-level script file. When you’re
              working interactively, this entry is the directory in which you
              are working (i.e., the current working directory).</p>
<p>Because this directory is always searched first, if a
              program is located entirely in a single directory, all of its
              imports will work automatically with no path configuration
              required. On the other hand, because this directory is searched
              first, its files will also override modules of the same name in
              directories elsewhere on the path; be careful not to
              accidentally hide library modules this way if you need them in
              your program.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code>
            directories</span></dt><dd>
<p>Next, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e54107"></a>Python searches all directories listed in your
              <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code> environment
              variable setting, from
              left to right (assuming you have set this at all). In brief,
              <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code> is simply set to a
              list of user-defined and platform-specific names of directories
              that contain Python code files. You can add all the directories
              from which you wish to be able to import, and Python will extend
              the module search path to include all the directories your
              <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code> lists.</p>
<p>Because Python searches the home directory first, this
              setting is only important when importing files across directory
              boundaries—that is, if you need to import a file that is stored
              in a different directory from the file that imports it. You’ll
              probably want to set your <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code> variable once you start
              writing substantial programs, but when you’re first starting
              out, as long as you save all your module files in the directory
              in which you’re working (i.e., the home directory, described
              earlier) your imports will work without you needing to worry
              about this setting at all.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Standard library directories</span></dt><dd>
<p>Next, Python <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e54134"></a>automatically searches the directories where the
              standard library modules are installed on your machine. Because
              these are always searched, they normally do not need to be added
              to your <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code> or
              included in path files (discussed next).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><em class="epub__filename">.pth</em> path file
            directories</span></dt><dd>
<p>Finally, a <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e54151"></a>lesser-used feature of Python allows users to add
              directories to the module search path by simply listing them,
              one per line, in a text file whose name ends with a <em class="epub__filename">.pth</em> suffix (for “path”). These path
              configuration files are a somewhat advanced installation-related
              feature; we won't cover them fully here, but they provide an
              alternative to <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code>
              settings.</p>
<p>In short, text files of directory names dropped in an
              appropriate directory can serve roughly the same role as the
              <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code> environment
              variable setting. For instance, if you’re running Windows and
              Python 3.0, a file named <em class="epub__filename">myconfig.pth</em> may be placed at the top
              level of the Python install directory (<em class="epub__filename">C:\Python30</em>) or in the <em class="epub__filename">site-packages</em> subdirectory of the
              standard library there (<em class="epub__filename">C:\Python30\Lib\site-packages</em>) to
              extend the module search path. On Unix-like systems, this file
              might be located in <em class="epub__filename">usr/local/lib/python3.0/site-packages</em>
              or <em class="epub__filename">/usr/local/lib/site-python</em> instead.</p>
<p>When present, Python will add the directories listed on
              each line of the file, from first to last, near the end of the
              module search path list. In fact, Python will collect the
              directory names in all the path files it finds and will filter
              out any duplicates and nonexistent directories. Because they are
              files rather than shell settings, path files can apply to all
              users of an installation, instead of just one user or shell.
              Moreover, for some users text files may be simpler to code than
              environment settings.</p>
<p>This feature is more sophisticated than I’ve described
              here. For more details consult the Python library manual, and
              especially its documentation for the standard library module
              <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e54193"></a>site</code>—this module allows the locations of
              Python libraries and path files to be configured, and its
              documentation describes the expected locations of path files in
              general. I recommend that beginners use <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code> or perhaps a single
              <em class="epub__filename">.pth</em> file, and then only if
              you must import across directories. Path files are used more
              often by third-party libraries, which commonly install a path
              file in Python’s <em class="epub__filename">site-packages</em> directory so that user
              settings are not required (Python’s <code class="epub__literal">distutils</code> install system, described in
              an upcoming sidebar, automates many install steps).</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Configuring the Search Path"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="configuring_the_search_path"></a>Configuring the Search Path</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The net <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e54215"></a>effect of all of this is that both the <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code> and path file components of the
          search path allow you to tailor the places where imports look for
          files. The way you set environment variables and where you store
          path files varies per platform. For instance, on Windows, you might
          use your Control Panel’s System icon to set <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code> to a list of directories
          separated by semicolons, like this:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e54229"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">c:\pycode\utilities;d:\pycode\package1</pre>
<p>Or you might instead create a text file called <em class="epub__filename">C:\Python30\pydirs.pth</em>, which looks like
          this:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e54236"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">c:\pycode\utilities
d:\pycode\package1</pre>
<p>These settings are analogous on other platforms, but the
          details can vary too widely for us to cover in this chapter. See
          Appendix A for pointers on
          extending your module search path with <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code> or <em class="epub__filename">.pth</em> files on various platforms.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Search Path Variations"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="search_path_variations"></a>Search Path Variations</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>This <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e54253"></a>description of the module search path is accurate, but
          generic; the exact configuration of the search path is prone to
          changing across platforms and Python releases. Depending on your
          platform, additional directories may automatically be added to the
          module search path as well.</p>
<p>For instance, Python may add an entry for the
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>current working directory</em></span>—the directory from
          which you launched your program—in the search path after the
          <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code> directories, and
          before the standard library entries. When you’re launching from a
          command line, the current working directory may not be the same as
          the home directory of your top-level file (i.e., the directory where
          your program file resides). Because the current working directory
          can vary each time your program runs, you normally shouldn’t depend
          on its value for import purposes. See Chapter 3 for more on launching programs
          from command lines.<sup>[49]</sup></p>
<p>To see how your Python configures the module search path on
          your platform, you can always inspect <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code>—the topic of the next
          section.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The sys.path List"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_sys.path_list"></a>The sys.path List</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>If you <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e54295"></a>want to see how the module search path is truly
          configured on your machine, you can always inspect the path as
          Python knows it by printing the built-in <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e54304"></a>sys.path</code> list (that is, the <code class="epub__literal">path</code> attribute of the standard library
          module <code class="epub__literal">sys</code>). This list of
          directory name strings is the actual search path within Python; on
          imports, Python searches each directory in this list from left to
          right.</p>
<p>Really, <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code>
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>is</em></span> the module search path. Python configures it
          at program startup, automatically merging the home directory of the
          top-level file (or an empty string to designate the current working
          directory), any <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code>
          directories, the contents of any <em class="epub__filename">.pth</em> file paths you’ve created, and the
          standard library directories. The result is a list of directory name
          strings that Python searches on each import of a new file.</p>
<p>Python exposes this list for two good reasons. First, it
          provides a way to verify the search path settings you’ve made—if you
          don’t see your settings somewhere in this list, you need to recheck
          your work. For example, here is what my module search path looks
          like on Windows under Python 3.0, with my <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code> set to <code class="epub__literal">C:\users</code> and a <em class="epub__filename">C:\Python30\mypath.pth</em> path file
          that lists <code class="epub__literal">C:\users\mark</code>. The
          empty string at the front means current directory and my two
          settings are merged in (the rest are standard library directories
          and files):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e54344"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import sys</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sys.path</code></strong>
['', 'C:\\users', 'C:\\Windows\\system32\\python30.zip', 'c:\\Python30\\DLLs',
'c:\\Python30\\lib', 'c:\\Python30\\lib\\plat-win', 'c:\\Python30',
'C:\\Users\\Mark', 'c:\\Python30\\lib\\site-packages']</pre>
<p>Second, if you know what you’re doing, this list provides a
          way for scripts to tailor their search paths manually. As you’ll see
          later in this part of the book, by modifying the <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code> list, you can modify the search
          path for all future imports. Such changes only last for the duration
          of the script, however; <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code> and <em class="epub__filename">.pth</em> files offer more permanent ways to
          modify the path.<sup>[50]</sup></p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Module File Selection"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="module_file_selection"></a>Module File Selection</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Keep <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e54386"></a>in mind that filename suffixes (e.g., <em class="epub__filename">.py</em>) are intentionally omitted from
          <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statements. Python chooses
          the first file it can find on the search path that matches the
          imported name. For example, an <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e54401"></a>import</code> statement of the form <code class="epub__literal">import b</code> might load:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>A source code file named <em class="epub__filename">b.py</em></p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>A byte code file named <em class="epub__filename">b.pyc</em></p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>A directory named <em class="epub__filename">b</em>,
              for package imports (described in Chapter 23)</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>A compiled extension module, usually coded in C or C++ and
              dynamically linked when imported (e.g., <em class="epub__filename">b.so</em> on Linux, or <em class="epub__filename">b.dll</em> or <em class="epub__filename">b.pyd</em> on Cygwin and Windows)</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>A compiled built-in module coded in C and statically
              linked into Python</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>A ZIP file component that is automatically extracted when
              imported</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>An in-memory image, for frozen executables</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>A Java class, in the Jython version of Python</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>A .NET component, in the IronPython version of
              Python</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>C extensions, Jython, and package imports all extend imports
          beyond simple files. To importers, though, differences in the loaded
          file type are completely transparent, both when importing and when
          fetching module attributes. Saying <code class="epub__literal">import
          b</code> gets whatever module <code class="epub__literal">b</code> is, according to your module search
          path, and <code class="epub__literal">b.attr</code> fetches an item
          in the module, be it a Python variable or a linked-in C function.
          Some standard modules we will use in this book are actually coded in
          C, not Python; because of this transparency, their clients don’t
          have to care.</p>
<p>If you have both a <em class="epub__filename">b.py</em>
          and a <em class="epub__filename">b.so</em> in different
          directories, Python will always load the one found in the first
          (leftmost) directory of your module search path during the
          left-to-right search of <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code>.
          But what happens if it finds both a <em class="epub__filename">b.py</em> and a <em class="epub__filename">b.so</em> in the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>same</em></span>
          directory? In this case, Python follows a standard picking order,
          though this order is not guaranteed to stay the same over time. In
          general, you should not depend on which type of file Python will
          choose within a given directory—make your module names distinct, or
          configure your module search path to make your module selection
          preferences more obvious.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Advanced Module Selection Concepts"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="advanced_module_selection_concepts"></a>Advanced Module Selection Concepts</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Normally, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e54492"></a>imports work as described in this section—they find
          and load files on your machine. However, it is possible to redefine
          much of what an import operation does in Python, using what are
          known as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e54501"></a>import hooks</em></span>. These hooks can be used to
          make imports do various useful things, such as loading files from
          archives, performing decryption, and so on.</p>
<p>In fact, Python itself makes use of these hooks to enable
          files to be directly imported from ZIP archives: archived files are
          automatically extracted at import time when a <em class="epub__filename">.zip</em> file is selected from the module
          import search path. One of the standard library directories in the
          earlier <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code> display, for
          example, is a <em class="epub__filename">.zip</em> file today.
          For more details, see the Python standard library manual’s
          description of the built-in <code class="epub__literal">__import__</code> function, the customizable tool
          that <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statements actually
          run.</p>
<p>Python also supports the notion of <em class="epub__filename">.pyo</em> optimized byte code files, created
          and run with the <code class="epub__literal">-O</code> Python
          command-line flag; because these run only slightly faster than
          normal <em class="epub__filename">.pyc</em> files (typically 5
          percent faster), however, they are infrequently used. The Psyco
          system (see Chapter 2) provides
          more substantial speedups.</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="third-party_software_colon_distutils"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Third-Party Software: distutils</p>
<p>This chapter’s description of module search path settings is
            targeted mainly at user-defined source code that you write on your
            own. <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e54541"></a>Third-party extensions for Python typically use the
            <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e54550"></a>distutils</code> tools in the standard library to
            automatically install themselves, so no path configuration is
            required to use their code.</p>
<p>Systems that use <code class="epub__literal">distutils</code> generally come with a
            <em class="epub__filename">setup.py</em> script, which is run
            to install them; this script imports and uses <code class="epub__literal">distutils</code> modules to place such systems
            in a directory that is automatically part of the module search
            path (usually in the <em class="epub__filename">Lib\site-packages</em> subdirectory of the
            Python install tree, wherever that resides on the target machine).</p>
<p>For more details on distributing and installing with
            <code class="epub__literal">distutils</code>, see the Python
            standard manual set; its use is beyond the scope of this book (for
            instance, it also provides ways to automatically compile C-coded
            extensions on the target machine). Also check out the emerging
            third-party open source <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>eggs</em></span> system, which
            adds dependency checking for installed Python <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e54580"></a>software.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Chapter Summary"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
