<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="chapter_summary-id20"></a>Chapter Summary</h1>
<p>In this chapter, we covered the basics of modules, attributes,
        and imports and explored the operation of <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statements. We learned that imports
        find the designated file on the module search path, compile it to byte
        code, and execute all of its statements to generate its contents. We
        also learned how to configure the search path to be able to import
        from directories other than the home directory and the standard
        library directories, primarily with <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code> settings.</p>
<p>As this chapter demonstrated, the import operation and modules
        are at the heart of program architecture in Python. Larger programs
        are divided into multiple files, which are linked together at runtime
        by imports. Imports in turn use the module search path to locate
        files, and modules define attributes for external use.</p>
<p>Of course, the whole point of imports and modules is to provide
        a structure to your program, which divides its logic into
        self-contained software components. Code in one module is isolated
        from code in another; in fact, no file can ever see the names defined
        in another, unless explicit <code class="epub__literal">import</code>
        statements are run. Because of this, modules minimize name collisions
        between different parts of your program.</p>
<p>You’ll see what this all means in terms of actual statements and
        code in the next chapter. Before we move on, though, let’s run through
        the chapter <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e54603"></a>quiz.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Test Your Knowledge: Quiz"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
