<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_answers-id20"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</h1>
<div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>A module’s source code file automatically becomes a module
            object when that module is imported. Technically, the module’s
            source code is run during the import, one statement at a time, and
            all the names assigned in the process become attributes of the
            module object.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>You only need to set <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code> to import from directories
            other than the one in which you are working (i.e., the current
            directory when working interactively, or the directory containing
            your top-level file).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The four major components of the module import search path
            are the top-level script’s home directory (the directory
            containing it), all directories listed in the <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code> environment variable, the
            standard library directories, and all directories listed in
            <em class="epub__filename">.pth</em> path files located in
            standard places. Of these, programmers can customize <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code> and <em class="epub__filename">.pth</em> files.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Python might load a source code (<em class="epub__filename">.py</em>) file, a byte code (<em class="epub__filename">.pyc</em>) file, a C extension module (e.g.,
            a <em class="epub__filename">.so</em> file on Linux or a
            <em class="epub__filename">.dll</em> or <em class="epub__filename">.pyd</em> file on Windows), or a directory
            of the same name for package imports. Imports may also load more
            exotic things such as ZIP file components, Java classes under the
            Jython version of Python, .NET components under IronPython, and
            statically linked C extensions that have no files present at all.
            With import hooks, imports can load anything.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>A namespace is a self-contained package of variables, which
            are known as the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>attributes</em></span> of the namespace
            object. A module’s namespace contains all the names assigned by
            code at the top level of the module file (i.e., not nested in
            <code class="epub__literal">def</code> or <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statements). Technically, a
            module’s global scope morphs into the module object’s attributes
            namespace. A module’s namespace may also be altered by assignments
            from other files that import it, though this is frowned upon (see
            Chapter 17 for more on this issue).</p></li></ol>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[47] </sup>It’s actually syntactically illegal to include path and
              suffix details in a standard <code class="epub__literal">import</code>. <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Package
              imports</em></span>, which we’ll discuss in Chapter 23, allow <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statements to include part of
              the directory path leading to a file as a set of
              period-separated names; however, package imports still rely on
              the normal module search path to locate the leftmost directory
              in a package path (i.e., they are relative to a directory in the
              search path). They also cannot make use of any platform-specific
              directory syntax in the <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statements; such syntax only
              works on the search path. Also, note that module file search
              path issues are not as relevant when you run <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>frozen
              executables</em></span> (discussed in Chapter 2); they typically embed
              byte code in the binary image.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[48] </sup>As described earlier, Python keeps already imported
              modules in the built-in <code class="epub__literal">sys.modules</code> dictionary so it can keep
              track of what’s been loaded. In fact, if you want to see which
              modules are loaded, you can import <code class="epub__literal">sys</code> and print <code class="epub__literal">list(sys.modules.keys())</code>. More on
              other uses for this internal table in Chapter 24.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[49] </sup>See also Chapter 23’s discussion
              of the new <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>relative import syntax</em></span> in Python
              3.0; this modifies the search path for <code class="epub__literal">from</code> statements in files inside
              packages when “.” characters are used (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">from . import string</code>). By default, a
              package’s own directory is not automatically searched by imports
              in Python 3.0, unless relative imports are used by files in the
              package itself.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[50] </sup>Some programs really need to change <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code>, though. Scripts that run on
              web servers, for example, often run as the user “nobody” to
              limit machine access. Because such scripts cannot usually depend
              on “nobody” to have set <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code> in any particular way, they
              often set <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code> manually
              to include required source directories, prior to running any
              <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statements. A <code class="epub__literal">sys.path.append(dirname)</code> will often
              suffice.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
