<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Module Creation</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="module_creation"></a>Module Creation</h1>
<p>To define a <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54711"></a>module, simply use your text editor to type some Python
        code into a text file, and save it with a “<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54717"></a>.py” extension; any such file is automatically
        considered a Python module. All the names assigned at the top level of
        the module become its <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>attributes</em></span> (names
        associated with the module object) and are exported for clients to
        use<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54724"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54729"></a>.</p>
<p>For instance, if you type the following <code class="epub__literal">def</code> into a file called <em class="epub__filename">module1.py</em> and import it, you create a
        module object with one attribute—the name <code class="epub__literal">printer</code>, which happens to be a reference to
        a function object:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e54744"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def printer(x):                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Module attribute</span></em>
    print(x)</pre>
<p>Before we go on, I should say a few more words about module
        filenames. You can call modules just about anything you like, but
        module filenames should end in a <em class="epub__filename">.py</em> suffix if you plan to import them. The
        <em class="epub__filename">.py</em> is technically optional for
        top-level files that will be run but not imported, but adding it in
        all cases makes your files’ types more obvious and allows you to
        import any of your files in the future.</p>
<p>Because <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54759"></a>module names become variable names inside a Python
        program (without the <em class="epub__filename">.py</em>), they
        should also follow the normal variable name rules outlined in Chapter 11. For instance,
        you can create a module file named <em class="epub__filename">if.py</em>, but you cannot import it because
        <code class="epub__literal">if</code> is a reserved word—when you try
        to run <code class="epub__literal">import if</code>, you’ll get a
        syntax error. In fact, both the names of module files and the names of
        directories used in package imports (discussed in the next chapter)
        must conform to the rules for variable names presented in Chapter 11; they may, for
        instance, contain only letters, digits, and underscores. Package
        directories also cannot contain platform-specific syntax such as
        spaces in their names.</p>
<p>When a module is imported, Python maps the internal module name
        to an external filename by adding a directory path from the module
        search path to the front, and a <em class="epub__filename">.py</em> or other extension at the end. For
        instance, a module named <code class="epub__literal">M</code>
        ultimately maps to some external file <em class="epub__filename">&lt;directory&gt;\M.&lt;extension&gt;</em> that
        contains the module’s code.</p>
<p>As <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54795"></a>mentioned in the preceding chapter, it is also possible
        to create a Python module by writing code in an external language such
        as C or C++ (or Java, in the Jython implementation of the language).
        Such modules are called <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>extension modules</em></span>, and
        they are generally used to wrap up external libraries for use in
        Python scripts. When imported by Python code, extension modules look
        and feel the same as modules coded as Python source code files—they
        are accessed with <code class="epub__literal">import</code>
        statements, and they provide functions and objects as module
        attributes. Extension modules are beyond the scope of this book; see
        Python’s standard manuals or advanced texts such as <em class="epub__citetitle">Programming
        Python</em> for more details.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Module Usage"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
