<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Module Usage</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="module_usage"></a>Module Usage</h1>
<p>Clients can use the simple module file we just wrote by running
        an <code class="epub__literal">import</code> or <code class="epub__literal">from</code> statement. Both statements find,
        compile, and run a module file’s code, if it hasn’t yet been loaded.
        The chief difference is that <code class="epub__literal">import</code>
        fetches the module as a whole, so you must qualify to fetch its names;
        in contrast, <code class="epub__literal">from</code> fetches (or
        copies) specific names out of the module.</p>
<p>Let’s see what this means in terms of code. All of the following
        examples wind up calling the <code class="epub__literal">printer</code> function defined in the prior
        section’s <em class="epub__filename">module1.py</em> module file,
        but in different ways.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The import Statement"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_import_statement"></a>The import Statement</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In the <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54841"></a>first <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54847"></a>example, the name <code class="epub__literal">module1</code> serves two different purposes—it
          identifies an external file to be loaded, and it becomes a variable
          in the script, which references the module object after the file is
          loaded:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e54854"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import module1</code></strong>                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Get module as a whole</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>module1.printer('Hello world!')</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Qualify to get names</span></em>
Hello world!</pre>
<p>Because <code class="epub__literal">import</code> gives a name
          that refers to the whole module object, we must go through the
          module name to fetch its attributes (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">module1.printer</code>).</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The from Statement"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_from_statement"></a>The from Statement</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>By contrast, <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54881"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54886"></a>because <code class="epub__literal">from</code> also
          copies names from one file over to another scope, it allows us to
          use the copied names directly in the script without going through
          the module (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">printer</code>):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e54896"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from module1 import printer</code></strong>            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Copy out one variable</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>printer('Hello world!')</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># No need to qualify name</span></em>
Hello world!</pre>
<p>This has the same effect as the prior example, but because the
          imported name is copied into the scope where the <code class="epub__literal">from</code> statement appears, using that name in
          the script requires less typing: we can use it directly instead of
          naming the enclosing module.</p>
<p>As you’ll see in more detail later, the <code class="epub__literal">from</code> statement is really just a minor
          extension to the <code class="epub__literal">import</code>
          statement—it imports the module file as usual, but adds an extra
          step that copies one or more names out of the file.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The from * Statement"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_from_asterisk_statement"></a>The from * Statement</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Finally, the next example <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54928"></a>uses a special form of <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54935"></a>from</code>: when we use a <code class="epub__literal">*</code>, we get copies of
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>all</em></span> the names assigned at the top level of the
          referenced module. Here again, we can then use the copied name
          <code class="epub__literal">printer</code> in our script without
          going through the module name:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e54949"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from module1 import *</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Copy out all variables</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>printer('Hello world!')</code></strong>
Hello world!</pre>
<p>Technically, both <code class="epub__literal">import</code>
          and <code class="epub__literal">from</code> statements invoke the
          same import operation; the <code class="epub__literal">from *</code>
          form simply adds an extra step that copies all the names in the
          module into the importing scope. It essentially collapses one
          module’s namespace into another; again, the net effect is less
          typing for us.</p>
<p>And that’s it—modules really are simple to use. To give you a
          better understanding of what really happens when you define and use
          modules, though, let’s move on to look at some of their properties
          in more detail.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p>In Python 3.0, the <code class="epub__literal">from
            ...*</code> statement form described here can be used
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>only</em></span> at the top level of a module file, not
            within a function. Python 2.6 allows it to be used within a
            function, but issues a warning. It’s extremely rare to see this
            statement used inside a function in practice; when present, it
            makes it impossible for Python to detect variables statically,
            before the function runs.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Imports Happen Only Once"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="imports_happen_only_once"></a>Imports Happen Only Once</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>One <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e54988"></a>of the most common questions people seem to ask when
          they start using modules is, “Why won’t my imports keep working?”
          They often report that the first import works fine, but later
          imports during an interactive session (or program run) seem to have
          no effect. In fact, they’re not supposed to. This section explains
          why.</p>
<p>Modules are loaded and run on the first <code class="epub__literal">import</code> or <code class="epub__literal">from</code>, and only the first. This is on
          purpose—because importing is an expensive operation, by default
          Python does it just once per file, per process. Later import
          operations simply fetch the already loaded module object.</p>
<p>As one consequence, because top-level code in a module file is
          usually executed only once, you can use it to <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e55002"></a>initialize variables. Consider the file <em class="epub__filename">simple.py</em>, for example:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e55011"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">print('hello')
spam = 1                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Initialize variable</span></em></pre>
<p>In this example, the <code class="epub__literal">print</code>
          and <code class="epub__literal">=</code> statements run the first
          time the module is imported, and the variable <code class="epub__literal">spam</code> is initialized at import time:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e55026"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import simple</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># First import: loads and runs file's code</span></em>
hello
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>simple.spam</code></strong>            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Assignment makes an attribute</span></em>
1</pre>
<p>Second and later imports don’t rerun the module’s code; they
          just fetch the already created module object from Python’s internal
          modules table. Thus, the variable <code class="epub__literal">spam</code> is not reinitialized:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e55048"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>simple.spam = 2</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Change attribute in module</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import simple</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Just fetches already loaded module</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>simple.spam</code></strong>            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Code wasn't rerun: attribute unchanged</span></em>
2</pre>
<p>Of course, sometimes you really want a module’s code to be
          rerun on a subsequent import. We’ll see how to do this with Python’s
          <code class="epub__literal">reload</code> function later in this
          chapter.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="import and from Are Assignments"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="import_and_from_are_assignments"></a>import and from Are Assignments</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Just <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e55079"></a>like <code class="epub__literal">def</code>, <code class="epub__literal">import</code> and <code class="epub__literal">from</code> are <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e55094"></a>executable<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e55101"></a> statements, not compile-time declarations. They may
          be nested in <code class="epub__literal">if</code> tests, appear in
          function <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s, and so on, and
          they are not resolved or run until Python reaches them while
          executing your program. In other words, imported modules and names
          are not available until their associated <code class="epub__literal">import</code> or <code class="epub__literal">from</code> statements run. Also, like <code class="epub__literal">def</code>, <code class="epub__literal">import</code> and <code class="epub__literal">from</code> are implicit assignments:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">import</code> assigns an
              entire module object to a single name.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">from</code> assigns one or
              more names to objects of the same names in another
              module.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>All the things we’ve already discussed about assignment apply
          to module access, too. For instance, names copied with a <code class="epub__literal">from</code> become references to shared objects;
          as with function arguments, reassigning a fetched name has no effect
          on the module from which it was copied, but changing a fetched
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>mutable object</em></span> can change it in the module from
          which it was imported. To illustrate, consider the following file,
          <em class="epub__filename">small.py</em>:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e55151"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">x = 1
y = [1, 2]

% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from small import x, y</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Copy two names out</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = 42</code></strong>                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Changes local x only</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y[0] = 42</code></strong>                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Changes shared mutable in-place</span></em></pre>
<p>Here, <code class="epub__literal">x</code> is not a shared
          mutable object, but <code class="epub__literal">y</code> is. The
          name <code class="epub__literal">y</code> in the importer and the
          importee reference the same list object, so changing it from one
          place changes it in the other:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e55185"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import small</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Get module name (from doesn't)</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>small.x</code></strong>                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Small's x is not my x</span></em>
1
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>small.y</code></strong>                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># But we share a changed mutable</span></em>
[42, 2]</pre>
<p>For a graphical picture of what <code class="epub__literal">from</code> assignments do with references, flip
          back to Figure 18-1
          (function argument passing), and mentally replace “caller” and
          “function” with “imported” and “importer.” The effect is the same,
          except that here we’re dealing with names in modules, not functions.
          Assignment works the same everywhere in Python.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Cross-File Name Changes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="cross-file_name_changes"></a>Cross-File Name Changes</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Recall <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e55221"></a>from <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e55225"></a>the preceding example that the assignment to <code class="epub__literal">x</code> in the interactive session changed the
          name <code class="epub__literal">x</code> in that scope only, not
          the <code class="epub__literal">x</code> in the file—there is no
          link from a name copied with <code class="epub__literal">from</code>
          back to the file it came from. To really change a global name in
          another file, you must use <code class="epub__literal">import</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e55247"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from small import x, y</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Copy two names out</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = 42</code></strong>                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Changes my x only</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import small</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Get module name</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>small.x = 42</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Changes x in other module</span></em></pre>
<p>This phenomenon was introduced in Chapter 17.
          Because changing variables in other modules like this is a common
          source of confusion (and often a bad design choice), we’ll revisit
          this technique again later in this part of the book. Note that the
          change to <code class="epub__literal">y[0]</code> in the prior
          session is different; it changes an object, not a name.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="import and from Equivalence"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="import_and_from_equivalence"></a>import and from Equivalence</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Notice in the prior example that we have to execute an
          <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statement after the
          <code class="epub__literal">from</code><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e55293"></a> to access the <code class="epub__literal">small</code> module name at all. <code class="epub__literal">from</code> only copies names from one module to
          another; it does not assign the module name itself. At least
          conceptually, a <code class="epub__literal">from</code> statement
          like this one<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e55309"></a>:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e55315"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from module import name1, name2     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Copy these two names out (only)</span></em></pre>
<p>is equivalent to this statement sequence:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e55321"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import module                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Fetch the module object</span></em>
name1 = module.name1                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Copy names out by assignment</span></em>
name2 = module.name2
del module                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Get rid of the module name</span></em></pre>
<p>Like all assignments, the <code class="epub__literal">from</code> statement creates new variables in
          the importer, which initially refer to objects of the same names in
          the imported file. Only the names are copied out, though, not the
          module itself. When we use the <code class="epub__literal">from
          *</code> form of this statement (<code class="epub__literal">from
          module import *</code>), the equivalence is the same, but all the
          top-level names in the module are copied over to the importing scope
          this way.</p>
<p>Notice that the first step of the <code class="epub__literal">from</code> runs a normal <code class="epub__literal">import</code> operation. Because of this, the
          <code class="epub__literal">from</code> always imports the entire
          module into memory if it has not yet been imported, regardless of
          how many names it copies out of the file. There is no way to load
          just part of a module file (e.g., just one function), but because
          modules are byte code in Python instead of machine code, the
          performance implications are generally negligible.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Potential Pitfalls of the from Statement"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="potential_pitfalls_of_the_from_statemen"></a>Potential Pitfalls of the from Statement</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Because the <code class="epub__literal"><a id="ch22fromstatementpitfalls"></a>from</code> statement makes the location of a
          variable more implicit and obscure (<code class="epub__literal">name</code> is less meaningful to the reader than
          <code class="epub__literal">module.name</code>), some Python users
          recommend using <code class="epub__literal">import</code> instead of
          <code class="epub__literal">from</code> most of the time. I’m not
          sure this advice is warranted, though; <code class="epub__literal">from</code> is commonly and widely used, without
          too many dire consequences. In practice, in realistic programs, it’s
          often convenient not to have to type a module’s name every time you
          wish to use one of its tools. This is especially true for large
          modules that provide many attributes—the standard library’s <code class="epub__literal">tkinter</code> GUI module, for example.</p>
<p>It is true that the <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e55388"></a>from</code> statement has the potential to corrupt
          namespaces, at least in principle—if you use it to import variables
          that happen to have the same names as existing variables in your
          scope, your variables will be silently overwritten. This problem
          doesn’t occur with the simple <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statement because you must always
          go through a module’s name to get to its contents (<code class="epub__literal">module.attr</code> will not clash with a variable named <code class="epub__literal">attr</code> in your scope). As long as you
          understand and expect that this can happen when using <code class="epub__literal">from</code>, though, this isn’t a major concern
          in practice, especially if you list the imported names explicitly
          (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">from module import x, y,
          z</code>).</p>
<p>On the other hand, the <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e55419"></a>from</code> statement has more serious issues when
          used in conjunction with the <code class="epub__literal">reload</code> call, as imported names might
          reference prior versions of objects. Moreover, the <code class="epub__literal">from module import *</code> form really can
          corrupt namespaces and make names difficult to understand,
          especially when applied to more than one file—in this case, there is
          no way to tell which module a name came from, short of searching the
          external source files. In effect, the <code class="epub__literal">from
          *</code> form collapses one namespace into another, and so
          defeats the namespace partitioning feature of modules. We will
          explore these issues in more detail in the section Module Gotchas at the end of this part of the book (see
          Chapter 24).</p>
<p>Probably the best real-world advice here is to generally
          prefer <code class="epub__literal">import</code> to <code class="epub__literal">from</code> for simple modules, to explicitly
          list the variables you want in most <code class="epub__literal">from</code> statements, and to limit the <code class="epub__literal">from *</code> form to just one import per file.
          That way, any undefined names can be assumed to live in the module
          referenced with the <code class="epub__literal">from *</code>. Some
          care is required when using the <code class="epub__literal">from</code> statement, but armed with a little
          knowledge, most programmers find it to be a convenient way to access
          modules.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="When import is required"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="when_import_is_required"></a>When import is required</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The only time you really must use <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e55468"></a><code class="epub__literal">import</code> instead of
            <code class="epub__literal">from</code> is when you must use the
            same name defined in two different modules. For example, if two
            files define the same name differently:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e55481"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># M.py</span></em>

def func():
    <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...do something...</code></em>

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># N.py</span></em>

def func():
    <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...do something else...</code></em></pre>
<p>and you must use both versions of the name in your program,
            the <code class="epub__literal">from</code> statement will
            fail—you can only have one assignment to the name in your
            scope:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e55498"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># O.py</span></em>

from M import func
from N import func        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># This overwites the one we got from M</span></em>
func()                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Calls N.func only</span></em></pre>
<p>An <code class="epub__literal">import</code> will work here,
            though, because including the name of the enclosing module makes
            the two names unique:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e55512"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># O.py</span></em>

import M, N               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Get the whole modules, not their names</span></em>
M.func()                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># We can call both names now</span></em>
N.func()                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># The module names make them unique</span></em></pre>
<p>This case is unusual enough that you’re unlikely to
            encounter it very often in practice. If you do, though, <code class="epub__literal">import</code> allows you to avoid the name
            <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e55529"></a>collision.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Module Namespaces"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
