<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Module Namespaces</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="module_namespaces"></a>Module Namespaces</h1>
<p>Modules <a id="ch22modulesmodnamespaces"></a>are probably best understood as simply packages of
        names—i.e., places to define names you want to make visible to the
        rest of a system. Technically, modules usually correspond to files,
        and Python creates a module object to contain all the names assigned
        in a module file. But in simple terms, modules are just namespaces
        (places where names are created), and the names that live in a module
        are called its <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>attributes</em></span>. We’ll explore how all
        this works in this section.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Files Generate Namespaces"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="files_generate_namespaces"></a>Files Generate Namespaces</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>So, how do <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e55551"></a>files morph into namespaces? The short story is that
          every name that is assigned a value at the top level of a module
          file (i.e., not nested in a function or class body) becomes an
          attribute of that module.</p>
<p>For instance, given an assignment statement such as <code class="epub__literal">X = 1</code> at the top level of a module file
          <em class="epub__filename">M.py</em>, the name <code class="epub__literal">X</code> becomes an attribute of <code class="epub__literal">M</code>, which we can refer to from outside the
          module as <code class="epub__literal">M.X</code>. The name <code class="epub__literal">X</code> also becomes a global variable to other
          code inside <em class="epub__filename">M.py</em>, but we need
          to explain the notion of module loading and scopes a bit more
          formally to understand why:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Module statements run on the first
              import</strong></span>. The first time a module is imported anywhere
              in a system, Python creates an empty module object and executes
              the statements in the module file one after another, from the
              top of the file to the bottom.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Top-level assignments create
              module attributes</strong></span>. During an import, statements at
              the top level of the file not nested in a <code class="epub__literal">def</code> or <code class="epub__literal">class</code> that assign names (e.g.,
              <code class="epub__literal">=</code>, <code class="epub__literal">def</code>) create attributes of the module
              object; assigned names are stored in the module’s
              namespace.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Module namespaces can be accessed
              via the attribute</strong></span><strong class="epub__userinput"><code>__dict__</code></strong> <span class="epub__strong"><strong>or</strong></span> <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dir(M)</code></strong>. Module <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e55619"></a>namespaces created by imports are dictionaries;
              they may be accessed through the built-in <code class="epub__literal">__dict__</code> attribute associated with
              module objects and may be inspected with the <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e55628"></a>dir</code> function. The <code class="epub__literal">dir</code> function is roughly equivalent to
              the sorted keys list of an object’s <code class="epub__literal">__dict__</code> attribute, but it includes
              inherited names for classes, may not be complete, and is prone
              to changing from release to release.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Modules are a single scope (local
              is global)</strong></span>. <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e55644"></a>As we saw in Chapter 17, names at
              the top level of a module follow the same reference/assignment
              rules as names in a function, but the local and global scopes
              are the same (more formally, they follow the LEGB scope rule we
              met in Chapter 17, but without the L and E lookup
              layers). But, in modules, the module <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>scope</em></span>
              becomes an attribute dictionary of a module
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>object</em></span> after the module has been loaded.
              Unlike with functions (where the local namespace exists only
              while the function runs), a module file’s scope becomes a module
              object’s attribute namespace and lives on after the
              import.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Here’s a demonstration of these ideas. Suppose we create the
          following module file in a text editor and call it <em class="epub__filename">module2.py</em>:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e55665"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">print('starting to load...')
import sys
name = 42

def func(): pass

class klass: pass

print('done loading.')</pre>
<p>The first time this module is imported (or run as a program),
          Python executes its statements from top to bottom. Some statements
          create names in the module’s namespace as a side effect, but others
          do actual work while the import is going on. For instance, the two
          <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statements in this file
          execute at import time:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e55672"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import module2</code></strong>
starting to load...
done loading.</pre>
<p>Once the module is loaded, its scope becomes an attribute
          namespace in the module object we get back from <code class="epub__literal">import</code>. We can then access attributes in
          this namespace by qualifying them with the name of the enclosing
          module:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e55682"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>module2.sys</code></strong>
&lt;module 'sys' (built-in)&gt;

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>module2.name</code></strong>
42

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>module2.func</code></strong>
&lt;function func at 0x026D3BB8&gt;

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>module2.klass</code></strong>
&lt;class 'module2.klass'&gt;</pre>
<p>Here, <code class="epub__literal">sys</code>, <code class="epub__literal">name</code>, <code class="epub__literal">func</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">klass</code> were all assigned while the module’s
          statements were being run, so they are attributes after the import.
          We’ll talk about classes in Part VI, but
          notice the <code class="epub__literal">sys</code> attribute—<code class="epub__literal">import</code> statements really
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>assign</em></span> module objects to names, and any type of
          assignment to a name at the top level of a file generates a module
          attribute.</p>
<p>Internally, module namespaces are stored as dictionary
          objects. These are just normal dictionary objects with the usual
          methods. We can access a module’s namespace dictionary through the
          module’s <code class="epub__literal">__dict__</code> attribute
          (remember to wrap this in a <code class="epub__literal">list</code>
          call in Python 3.0—it’s a view object):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e55731"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(module2.__dict__.keys())</code></strong>
['name', '__builtins__', '__file__', '__package__', 'sys', 'klass', 'func',
'__name__', '__doc__']</pre>
<p>The names we assigned in the module file become dictionary
          keys internally, so most of the names here reflect top-level
          assignments in our file. However, Python also adds some names in the
          module’s namespace for us; for instance, <code class="epub__literal">__file__</code> gives the name of the file the
          module was loaded from, and <code class="epub__literal">__name__</code> gives its name as known to
          importers (without the <em class="epub__filename">.py</em>
          extension and directory path).</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Attribute Name Qualification"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="attribute_name_qualification"></a>Attribute Name Qualification</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Now <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e55752"></a>that you’re becoming more familiar with modules, we
          should look at the notion of name <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>qualification</em></span>
          (fetching attributes) in more depth. In Python, you can access the
          attributes of any object that has attributes using the qualification
          syntax <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>object</code></em><code class="epub__literal">.</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>attri</code></em><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>bute</code></em>.</p>
<p>Qualification is really an expression that returns the value
          assigned to an attribute name associated with an object. For
          example, the expression <code class="epub__literal">module2.sys</code> in the previous example
          fetches the value assigned to <code class="epub__literal">sys</code>
          in <code class="epub__literal">module2</code>. Similarly, if we have
          a built-in list object <code class="epub__literal">L</code>,
          <code class="epub__literal">L.append</code> returns the <code class="epub__literal">append</code> method object associated with that
          list.</p>
<p>So, what does attribute qualification do to the scope rules we
          studied in Chapter 17? Nothing, really: it’s an
          independent concept. When you use qualification to access names, you
          give Python an explicit object from which to fetch the specified
          names. The LEGB rule applies only to bare, unqualified names. Here
          are the rules:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Simple variables</span></dt><dd>
<p><code class="epub__literal">X</code> means search for
                the name <code class="epub__literal">X</code> in the current
                scopes (following the LEGB rule).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Qualification</span></dt><dd>
<p><code class="epub__literal">X.Y</code> means find
                <code class="epub__literal">X</code> in the current scopes,
                then search for the attribute <code class="epub__literal">Y</code> in the object <code class="epub__literal">X</code> (not in scopes).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Qualification paths</span></dt><dd>
<p><code class="epub__literal">X.Y.Z</code> means look up
                the name <code class="epub__literal">Y</code> in the object
                <code class="epub__literal">X</code>, then look up <code class="epub__literal">Z</code> in the object <code class="epub__literal">X.Y</code>.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Generality</span></dt><dd>
<p>Qualification works on all objects with attributes:
                modules, classes, C extension types, etc.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>In Part VI, we’ll see that
          qualification means a bit more for classes (it’s also the place
          where something called <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>inheritance</em></span> happens),
          but in general, the rules outlined here apply to all names in
          Python.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Imports Versus Scopes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="imports_versus_scopes"></a>Imports Versus Scopes</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e55865"></a>we’ve learned, it is never possible to access names
          defined in another module file without first importing that file.
          That is, you never automatically get to see names in another file,
          regardless of the structure of imports or function calls in your
          program. A variable’s meaning is always determined by the locations
          of assignments in your source code, and attributes are always
          requested of an object explicitly.</p>
<p>For example, consider the following two simple modules. The
          first, <em class="epub__filename">moda.py</em>, defines a
          variable <code class="epub__literal">X</code> global to code in its
          file only, along with a function that changes the global <code class="epub__literal">X</code> in this file:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e55884"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">X = 88                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># My X: global to this file only</span></em>
def f():
    global X                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Change this file's X</span></em>
    X = 99                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Cannot see names in other modules</span></em></pre>
<p>The second module, <em class="epub__filename">modb.py</em>, defines its own global variable
          <code class="epub__literal">X</code> and imports and calls the
          function in the first module:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e55902"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">X = 11                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># My X: global to this file only</span></em>

import moda                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Gain access to names in moda</span></em>
moda.f()                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Sets moda.X, not this file's X</span></em>
print(X, moda.X)</pre>
<p>When run, <code class="epub__literal">moda.f</code> changes
          the <code class="epub__literal">X</code> in <code class="epub__literal">moda</code>, not the <code class="epub__literal">X</code> in <code class="epub__literal">modb</code>. The global scope for <code class="epub__literal">moda.f</code> is always the file enclosing it,
          regardless of which module it is ultimately called from:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e55934"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python modb.py</code></strong>
11 99</pre>
<p>In other words, import operations never give upward visibility
          to code in imported files—an
          imported file cannot see names in the importing file. More
          formally:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Functions can never see names in other functions, unless
              they are physically enclosing.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Module code can never see names in other modules, unless
              they are explicitly imported.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Such behavior is part of the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>lexical
          scoping</em></span> notion—in Python, the scopes surrounding a piece
          of code are completely determined by the code’s physical position in
          your file. Scopes are never influenced by function calls or module
          imports.<sup>[51]</sup></p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Namespace Nesting"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="namespace_nesting"></a>Namespace Nesting</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e55973"></a>some sense, although imports do not nest namespaces
          upward, they do nest downward. Using attribute qualification paths,
          it’s possible to descend into arbitrarily nested modules and access
          their attributes. For example, consider the next three files.
          <em class="epub__filename">mod3.py</em> defines a single global
          name and attribute by assignment:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e55984"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">X = 3</pre>
<p><em class="epub__filename">mod2.py</em> in turn defines
          its own <code class="epub__literal">X</code>, then imports <code class="epub__literal">mod3</code> and uses qualification to access the
          imported module’s attribute:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e55996"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">X = 2
import mod3

print(X, end=' ')             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># My global X</span></em>
print(mod3.X)                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># mod3's X</span></em></pre>
<p><em class="epub__filename">mod1.py</em> also defines its
          own <code class="epub__literal">X</code>, then imports <code class="epub__literal">mod2</code><a name="second files"></a>, and fetches attributes in both the
          first and second files:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e56013"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">X = 1
import mod2

print(X, end=' ')             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># My global X</span></em>
print(mod2.X, end=' ')        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># mod2's X</span></em>
print(mod2.mod3.X)            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Nested mod3's X</span></em></pre>
<p>Really, when <code class="epub__literal">mod1</code> imports
          <code class="epub__literal">mod2</code> here, it sets up a two-level
          namespace nesting. By using the path of names <code class="epub__literal">mod2.mod3.X</code>, it can descend into <code class="epub__literal">mod3</code>, which is nested in the imported
          <code class="epub__literal">mod2</code>. The net effect is that
          <code class="epub__literal">mod1</code> can see the <code class="epub__literal">X</code>s in all three files, and hence has
          access to all three global scopes:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e56047"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python mod1.py</code></strong>
2 3
1 2 3</pre>
<p>The reverse, however, is not true: <code class="epub__literal">mod3</code> cannot see names in <code class="epub__literal">mod2</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">mod2</code> cannot see names in <code class="epub__literal">mod1</code>. This example may be easier to grasp
          if you don’t think in terms of namespaces and scopes, but instead
          focus on the objects involved. Within <code class="epub__literal">mod1</code>, <code class="epub__literal">mod2</code> is just a name that refers to an
          object with attributes, some of which may refer to other objects
          with attributes (<code class="epub__literal">import</code> is an
          assignment). For paths like <code class="epub__literal">mod2.mod3.X</code>, Python simply evaluates from
          left to right, fetching attributes from objects along the
          way.</p>
<p>Note that <code class="epub__literal">mod1</code> can say
          <code class="epub__literal">import mod2</code>, and then <code class="epub__literal">mod2.mod3.X</code>, but it cannot say <code class="epub__literal">import mod2.mod3</code>—this syntax invokes
          something called package (directory) imports, described in the next chapter. Package
          imports also create module namespace nesting, but their <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statements are taken to reflect
          directory trees, not simple import <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e56100"></a>chains.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Reloading Modules"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
