<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Reloading Modules</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="reloading_modules"></a>Reloading Modules</h1>
<p>As <a id="ch22modulesreloadingmodules"></a>we’ve seen, <a id="ch22reloadfunction"></a>a module’s code is run only once per process by default.
        To force a module’s code to be reloaded and rerun, you need to ask
        Python to do so explicitly by calling the <code class="epub__literal">reload</code> built-in function. In this section,
        we’ll explore how to use reloads to make your systems more dynamic. In
        a nutshell:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Imports (via both <code class="epub__literal">import</code>
            and <code class="epub__literal">from</code> statements) load and
            run a module’s code only the first time the module is imported in
            a process.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Later imports use the already loaded module object without
            reloading or rerunning the file’s code.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">reload</code> function
            forces an already loaded module’s code to be reloaded and rerun.
            Assignments in the file’s new code change the existing module
            object in-place.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Why all the fuss about reloading modules? The <code class="epub__literal">reload</code> function allows parts of a program to
        be changed without stopping the whole program. With <code class="epub__literal">reload</code>, therefore, the effects of changes in
        components can be observed immediately. Reloading doesn’t help in
        every situation, but where it does, it makes for a much shorter
        development cycle. For instance, imagine a database program that must
        connect to a server on startup; because program changes or
        customizations can be tested immediately after reloads, you need to
        connect only once while debugging. Long-running servers can update
        themselves this way, too.</p>
<p>Because Python is interpreted (more or less), it already gets
        rid of the compile/link steps you need to go through to get a C
        program to run: modules are loaded dynamically when imported by a
        running program. Reloading offers a further performance advantage by allowing you to also change
        parts of running programs without stopping. Note that <code class="epub__literal">reload</code> currently only works on modules
        written in Python; compiled extension modules coded in a language such
        as C can be dynamically loaded at runtime, too, but they can’t be
        reloaded.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Version skew note</em></span>: In Python 2.6,
          <code class="epub__literal">reload</code> is available as a built-in
          function. In Python 3.0, it has been moved to the <code class="epub__literal">imp</code> standard library module—it’s known as <code class="epub__literal">imp.reload</code> in 3.0. This simply means that
          an extra <code class="epub__literal">import</code> or <code class="epub__literal">from</code> statement is required to load this
          tool (in 3.0 only). Readers using 2.6 can ignore these imports in
          this book’s examples, or use them anyhow—2.6 also has a <code class="epub__literal">reload</code> in its <code class="epub__literal">imp</code> module to ease migration to 3.0.
          Reloading works the same regardless of its packaging.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="reload Basics"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="reload_basics"></a>reload Basics</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Unlike <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e56195"></a>import</code> and <code class="epub__literal">from</code>:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">reload</code> is a function in
              Python, not a statement.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">reload</code> is passed an
              existing module object, not a name.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">reload</code> lives in a
              module in Python 3.0 and must be imported itself.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Because <code class="epub__literal">reload</code> expects an
          object, a module must have been previously imported successfully
          before you can reload it (if the import was unsuccessful, due to a
          syntax or other error, you may need to repeat it before you can
          reload the module). Furthermore, the syntax of <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statements and <code class="epub__literal">reload</code> calls differs: reloads require
          parentheses, but imports do not. Reloading looks like this:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e56232"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import module                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Initial import</span></em>
...use module.attributes...
...                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Now, go change the module file</span></em>
...
from imp import reload            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Get reload itself (in 3.0)</span></em>
reload(module)                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Get updated exports</span></em>
...use module.attributes...</pre>
<p>The typical usage pattern is that you import a module, then
          change its source code in a text editor, and then reload it. When
          you call <code class="epub__literal">reload</code>, Python rereads
          the module file’s source code and reruns its top-level statements.
          Perhaps the most important thing to know about <code class="epub__literal">reload</code> is that it changes a module object
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>in-place</em></span>; it does not delete and re-create the
          module object. Because of that, every reference to a module object
          anywhere in your program is automatically affected by a reload. Here
          are the details:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><strong class="epub__userinput"><code>reload</code></strong> <span class="epub__strong"><strong>runs a module file’s new code in the module’s
              current namespace</strong></span>. Rerunning a module file’s code
              overwrites its existing namespace, rather than deleting and
              re-creating it.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Top-level assignments in the file
              replace names with new values</strong></span>. For instance,
              rerunning a <code class="epub__literal">def</code> statement
              replaces the prior version of the function in the module’s
              namespace by reassigning the function name.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Reloads impact all clients that
              use</strong></span> <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import</code></strong>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>to fetch modules</strong></span>. Because
              clients that use <code class="epub__literal">import</code>
              qualify to fetch attributes, they’ll find new values in the
              module object after a reload.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Reloads impact future</strong></span>
<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from</code></strong> <span class="epub__strong"><strong>clients only</strong></span>. Clients that used
              <code class="epub__literal">from</code> to fetch attributes in
              the past won’t be affected by a reload; they’ll still have
              references to the old objects fetched before the reload.</p></li></ul>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="reload Example"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="reload_example"></a>reload Example</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To demonstrate, <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e56307"></a>here’s <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e56313"></a>a more concrete example of <code class="epub__literal">reload</code> in action. In the following, we’ll
          change and reload a module file without stopping the interactive
          Python session. Reloads are used in many other scenarios, too (see
          the sidebar Why You Will Care: Module Reloads), but we’ll keep things simple for illustration
          here. First, in the text editor of your choice, write a module file
          named <em class="epub__filename">changer.py</em> with the
          following contents:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e56329"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">message = "First version"
def printer():
    print(message)</pre>
<p>This module creates and exports two names—one bound to a
          string, and another to a function. Now, start the Python
          interpreter, import the module, and call the function it exports.
          The function will print the value of the global <code class="epub__literal">message</code> variable:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e56336"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import changer</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>changer.printer()</code></strong>
First version</pre>
<p>Keeping the interpreter active, now
          edit the module file in another window:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e56350"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...modify changer.py without stopping Python...</code></em>
% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>vi changer.py</code></strong></pre>
<p>Change the global <code class="epub__literal">message</code>
          variable, as well as the <code class="epub__literal">printer</code>
          function body:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e56364"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">message = "After editing"
def printer():
    print('reloaded:', message)</pre>
<p>Then, return to the Python window and reload the module to
          fetch the new code. Notice in the following interaction that
          importing the module again has no effect; we get the original
          message, even though the file’s been changed. We have to call
          <code class="epub__literal">reload</code> in order to get the new
          version:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e56371"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...back to the Python interpreter/program...</code></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import changer</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>changer.printer()</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># No effect: uses loaded module</span></em>
First version
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from imp import reload</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>reload(changer)</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Forces new code to load/run</span></em>
&lt;module 'changer' from 'changer.py'&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>changer.printer()</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs the new version now</span></em>
reloaded: After editing</pre>
<p>Notice that <code class="epub__literal">reload</code> actually
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>returns</em></span> the module object for us—its result is
          usually ignored, but because expression results are printed at the
          interactive prompt, Python shows a default <code class="epub__literal">&lt;module 'name'...&gt;</code>
          representation.</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="why_you_will_care_colon_module_reloads"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Why You Will Care: Module Reloads</p>
<p>Besides allowing you to reload (and hence rerun) modules at
            the interactive prompt, module reloads are also useful in larger
            systems, especially when the cost of restarting the entire
            application is prohibitive. For instance, systems that must
            connect to servers over a network on startup are prime candidates
            for dynamic reloads.</p>
<p>They’re also useful in GUI work (a widget’s callback action
            can be changed while the GUI remains active), and when Python is
            used as an embedded language in a C or C++ program (the enclosing program
            can request a reload of the Python code it runs, without having to
            stop). See <em class="epub__citetitle">Programming
            Python</em> for more on reloading GUI callbacks and
            embedded Python code.</p>
<p>More generally, reloads allow programs to provide highly
            dynamic interfaces. For instance, Python is often used as a
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>customization</em></span> language for larger
            systems—users can customize products by coding bits of Python code
            onsite, without having to recompile the entire product (or even
            having its source code at all). In such worlds, the Python code
            already adds a dynamic flavor by itself.</p>
<p>To be even more dynamic, though,
            such systems can automatically reload the Python customization
            code periodically at runtime. That way, users’ changes are picked
            up while the system is running; there is no need to stop and
            restart each time the Python code is modified. Not all systems
            require such a dynamic approach, but for those that do, module
            reloads provide an easy-to-use dynamic <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e56434"></a>customization <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e56437"></a>tool.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Chapter Summary"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
