<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_answers-id21"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</h1>
<div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>To create a module, you just write a text file containing
            Python statements; every source code file is automatically a
            module, and there is no syntax for declaring one. Import
            operations load module files into module objects in memory. You
            can also make a module by writing code in an external language
            like C or Java, but such extension modules are beyond the scope of
            this book.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">from</code> statement
            imports an entire module, like the <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statement, but as an extra step
            it also copies one or more variables from the imported module into
            the scope where the <code class="epub__literal">from</code>
            appears. This enables you to use the imported names directly
            (<code class="epub__literal">name</code>) instead of having to go
            through the module (<code class="epub__literal">module.name</code>).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>By default, a module is imported only once per process. The
            <code class="epub__literal">reload</code> function forces a module
            to be imported again. It is mostly used to pick up new versions of
            a module’s source code during development, and in dynamic
            customization scenarios.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>You must use <code class="epub__literal">import</code>
            instead of <code class="epub__literal">from</code> only when you
            need to access the same name in two different modules; because
            you’ll have to specify the names of the enclosing modules, the two
            names will be unique.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">from</code> statement can
            obscure the meaning of a variable (which module it is defined in),
            can have problems with the <code class="epub__literal">reload</code> call (names may reference prior
            versions of objects), and can corrupt namespaces (it might
            silently overwrite names you are using in your scope). The
            <code class="epub__literal">from *</code> form is worse in most
            regards—it can seriously corrupt namespaces and obscure the
            meaning of variables, so it is probably best used
            sparingly.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>What do you mean? An African or European swallow?</p></li></ol>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[51] </sup>Some languages act differently and provide for
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>dynamic scoping</em></span>, where scopes really may
              depend on runtime calls. This tends to make code trickier,
              though, because the meaning of a variable can differ over
              time.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
