<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 23. Module Packages</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 23. Module Packages"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h1 class="epub__title"><a id="module_packages"></a>Chapter 23. Module Packages</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>So far, <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e56582"></a>when we’ve imported modules, we’ve been loading files.
      This represents typical module usage, and it’s probably the technique
      you’ll use for most imports you’ll code early on in your Python career.
      However, the module import story is a bit richer than I have thus far
      implied.</p>
<p>In addition to a module name, an import can name a directory path.
      A directory of Python code is said to be a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e56589"></a>package</em></span>, so such imports are known as
      <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e56595"></a>package imports</em></span>. In effect, a package import
      turns a directory on your computer into another Python namespace, with
      attributes corresponding to the subdirectories and module files that the
      directory contains.</p>
<p>This is a somewhat advanced feature, but the hierarchy it provides
      turns out to be handy for organizing the files in a large system and
      tends to simplify module search path settings. As we’ll see, package
      imports are also sometimes required to resolve import ambiguities when
      multiple program files of the same name are installed on a single
      machine.</p>
<p>Because it is relevant to code in packages only, we’ll also
      introduce Python’s recent <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>relative imports</em></span> model
      and syntax here. As we’ll see, this model modifies search paths and
      extends the <code class="epub__literal">from</code> statement for
      imports within packages<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e56610"></a>.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Package Import Basics"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
