<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Package Import Basics</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="package_import_basics"></a>Package Import Basics</h1>
<p>So, how do <a id="ch23modpackpackimp"></a>package imports work? In the place where you have been
        naming a simple file in your <code class="epub__literal">import</code>
        statements, you can instead list a path of names separated by
        periods:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e56628"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import dir1.dir2.mod</pre>
<p>The same goes for <code class="epub__literal">from</code>
        statements:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e56635"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from dir1.dir2.mod import x</pre>
<p>The “<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e56640"></a>dotted” path in these statements is assumed to
        correspond to a path through the directory hierarchy on your machine,
        leading to the file <em class="epub__filename">mod.py</em> (or
        similar; the extension may vary). That is, the preceding statements
        indicate that on your machine there is a directory <em class="epub__filename">dir1</em>, which has a subdirectory <em class="epub__filename">dir2</em>, which contains a module file
        <em class="epub__filename">mod.py</em> (or similar).</p>
<p>Furthermore, these imports imply that <em class="epub__filename">dir1</em> resides within some container
        directory <em class="epub__filename">dir0</em>, which is a
        component of the Python module search path. In other words, the two
        <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statements imply a directory
        structure that looks something like this (shown with DOS backslash
        separators):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e56667"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">dir0\dir1\dir2\mod.py               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Or mod.pyc, mod.so, etc.</span></em></pre>
<p>The container directory <em class="epub__filename">dir0</em> needs to be added to your module
        search path (unless it’s the home directory of the top-level file),
        exactly as if <em class="epub__filename">dir1</em> were a simple
        module file.</p>
<p>More generally, the leftmost component in a package import path
        is still relative to a directory included in the <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code> module search path list we met in
        Chapter 21. From there down,
        though, the <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statements in
        your script give the directory paths leading to the modules
        explicitly.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Packages and Search Path Settings"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="packages_and_search_path_settings"></a>Packages and Search Path Settings</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>If you <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e56694"></a>use this feature, <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e56702"></a>keep in mind that the directory paths in your <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statements can only be variables
          separated by periods. You cannot use any platform-specific path
          syntax in your <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statements,
          such as <code class="epub__literal">C:\dir1</code>, <code class="epub__literal">My Documents.dir2</code> or <code class="epub__literal">../dir1</code>—these do not work syntactically.
          Instead, use platform-specific syntax in your module search path
          settings to name the container directories.</p>
<p>For instance, in the prior example, <em class="epub__filename">dir0</em>—the directory name you add to your
          module search path—can be an arbitrarily long and platform-specific
          directory path leading up to <em class="epub__filename">dir1</em>. Instead of using an invalid
          statement like this:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e56732"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import C:\mycode\dir1\dir2\mod      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Error: illegal syntax</span></em></pre>
<p>add <em class="epub__filename">C:\mycode</em> to your
          <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code> variable or a
          <em class="epub__filename">.pth</em> file (assuming it is not
          the program’s home directory, in which case this step is not
          necessary), and say this in your script:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e56747"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import dir1.dir2.mod</pre>
<p>In effect, entries on the module search path provide
          platform-specific directory path prefixes, which lead to the
          leftmost names in <code class="epub__literal">import</code>
          statements. <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statements
          provide directory path tails in a platform-neutral fashion.<sup>[52]</sup></p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Package __init__.py Files"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="package_underscore_underscore_init_unde"></a>Package __init__.py Files</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>If you <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e56785"></a>choose <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e56793"></a>to use package imports, there is one more constraint
          you must follow: each directory named within the path of a package
          import statement must contain a file named <em class="epub__filename">__init__.py</em>, or your package imports will
          fail. That is, in the example we’ve been using, both <em class="epub__filename">dir1</em> and <em class="epub__filename">dir2</em> must contain a file called <em class="epub__filename">__init__.py</em>; the container directory
          <em class="epub__filename">dir0</em> does not require such a
          file because it’s not listed in the <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statement itself. More formally,
          for a directory structure such as this:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e56816"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">dir0\dir1\dir2\mod.py</pre>
<p>and an <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statement of
          the form:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e56823"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import dir1.dir2.mod</pre>
<p>the following rules apply:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><em class="epub__filename">dir1</em> and <em class="epub__filename">dir2</em> both must contain an <em class="epub__filename">__init__.py</em> file.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><em class="epub__filename">dir0</em>, the container,
              does not require an <em class="epub__filename">__init__.py</em> file; this file will
              simply be ignored if present.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><em class="epub__filename">dir0</em>, not <em class="epub__filename">dir0\dir1</em>, must be listed on the
              module search path (i.e., it must be the home directory, or be
              listed in your <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code>,
              etc.).</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>The net effect is that this example’s directory structure
          should be as follows, with indentation designating directory
          nesting:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e56860"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">dir0\                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Container on module search path</span></em>
    dir1\
        __init__.py
        dir2\
            __init__.py
            mod.py</pre>
<p>The <em class="epub__filename">__init__.py</em> files can
          contain Python code, just like normal module files. They are partly
          present as a declaration to Python, however, and can be completely
          empty. As declarations, these files serve to prevent directories
          with common names from unintentionally hiding true modules that
          appear later on the module search path. Without this safeguard,
          Python might pick a directory that has nothing to do with your code,
          just because it appears in an earlier directory on the search
          path.</p>
<p>More generally, the <em class="epub__filename">__init__.py</em> file serves as a hook for
          package-initialization-time actions, generates a module namespace
          for a directory, and implements the behavior of <code class="epub__literal">from *</code> (i.e., <code class="epub__literal">from .. import *</code>) statements when used
          with directory imports:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Package initialization</span></dt><dd>
<p>The first time Python imports through a directory, it
                automatically runs all the code in the directory’s <em class="epub__filename">__init__.py</em> file. Because of that,
                these files are a natural place to put code to initialize the
                state required by files in a package. For instance, a package
                might use its initialization file to create required data
                files, open connections to databases, and so on. Typically,
                <em class="epub__filename">__init__.py</em> files are not
                meant to be useful if executed directly; they are run
                automatically when a package is first accessed.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Module namespace initialization</span></dt><dd>
<p>In the package import model, the directory paths in your
                script become real nested object paths after an import. For
                instance, in the preceding example, after the import the
                expression <code class="epub__literal">dir1.dir2</code> works
                and returns a module object whose namespace contains all the
                names assigned by <em class="epub__filename">dir2</em>’s
                <em class="epub__filename">__init__.py</em> file. Such
                files provide a namespace for module objects created for
                directories, which have no real associated module
                files.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">from *</code> statement
              behavior</span></dt><dd>
<p><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e58747"></a>As an advanced feature, you can use <code class="epub__literal">__all__</code> lists in <em class="epub__filename">__init__.py</em> files to define what is
                exported when a directory is imported with the <code class="epub__literal">from *</code> statement form. In an
                <em class="epub__filename">__init__.py</em> file, the
                <code class="epub__literal">__all__</code> list is taken to be
                the list of submodule names that should be imported when
                <code class="epub__literal">from *</code> is used on the
                package (directory) name. If <code class="epub__literal">__all__</code> is not set, the <code class="epub__literal">from *</code> statement does not
                automatically load submodules nested in the directory;
                instead, it loads just names defined by assignments in the
                directory’s <em class="epub__filename">__init__.py</em>
                file, including any submodules explicitly imported by code in
                this file. For instance, the statement <code class="epub__literal">from submodule import X</code> in a
                directory’s <em class="epub__filename">__init__.py</em>
                makes the name <code class="epub__literal">X</code> available
                in that directory’s namespace. (We’ll see additional roles for
                <code class="epub__literal">__all__</code> in Chapter 24.)</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>You can also simply leave these files empty, if their roles
          are beyond your needs (and frankly, they are often empty in
          practice). They must exist, though, for your directory imports to
          work at all.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p>Don’t confuse package <em class="epub__filename">__init__.py</em> files with the class
            <code class="epub__literal">__init__</code> constructor methods
            we’ll meet in the next part of the book. The former are files of
            code run when <code class="epub__literal">import</code>s first
            step through a package directory, while the latter are called when
            an instance is created. Both have initialization roles, but they are otherwise
            very different.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Package Import Example"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
