<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Why Use Package Imports?</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="why_use_package_imports_question"></a>Why Use Package Imports?</h1>
<p>If <a id="ch23modpackpackimpjustification"></a>you’re new to Python, <a id="ch23packimpjustification"></a>make sure that you’ve mastered simple modules before
        stepping up to packages, as they are a somewhat advanced feature. They
        do serve useful roles, though, especially in larger programs: they
        make imports more informative, serve as an organizational tool,
        simplify your module search path, and can resolve ambiguities.</p>
<p>First of all, because package imports give some directory
        information in program files, they both make it easier to locate your
        files and serve as an organizational tool. Without package paths, you
        must often resort to consulting the module search path to find files.
        Moreover, if you organize your files into subdirectories for
        functional areas, package imports make it more obvious what role a
        module plays, and so make your code more readable. For example, a
        normal import of a file in a directory somewhere on the module search
        path, like this:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e57230"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import utilities</pre>
<p>offers much less information than an import that includes the
        path:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e57234"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import database.client.utilities</pre>
<p>Package imports can also greatly simplify your <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code> and <em class="epub__filename">.pth</em> file search path settings. In fact, if
        you use explicit package imports for all your cross-directory imports,
        and you make those package imports relative to a common root directory
        where all your Python code is stored, you really only need a single
        entry on your search path: the common root. Finally, package imports
        serve to resolve ambiguities by making explicit exactly which files
        you want to import. The next section explores this role in more
        detail.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="A Tale of Three Systems"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="a_tale_of_three_systems"></a>A Tale of Three Systems</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The only time package imports are actually required is to
          resolve ambiguities that may arise when multiple programs with
          same-named files are installed on a single machine. This is
          something of an install issue, but it can also become a concern in
          general practice. Let’s turn to a hypothetical scenario to
          illustrate.</p>
<p>Suppose that a programmer develops a Python program that
          contains a file called <em class="epub__filename">utilities.py</em> for common utility code and
          a top-level file named <em class="epub__filename">main.py</em>
          that users launch to start the program. All over this program, its
          files say <code class="epub__literal">import utilities</code> to
          load and use the common code. When the program is shipped, it
          arrives as a single <em class="epub__filename">.tar</em> or
          <em class="epub__filename">.zip</em> file containing all the
          program’s files, and when it is installed, it unpacks all its files
          into a single directory named <em class="epub__filename">system1</em> on the target machine:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e57270"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">system1\
    utilities.py        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Common utility functions, classes</span></em>
    main.py             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Launch this to start the program</span></em>
    other.py            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Import utilities to load my tools</span></em></pre>
<p>Now, suppose that a second programmer develops a different
          program with files also called <em class="epub__filename">utilities.py</em> and <em class="epub__filename">main.py</em>, and again uses <code class="epub__literal">import utilities</code> throughout the program to
          load the common code file. When this second system is fetched and
          installed on the same computer as the first system, its files will
          unpack into a new directory called <em class="epub__filename">system2</em> somewhere on the receiving
          machine (ensuring that they do not overwrite same-named files from
          the first system):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e57294"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">system2\
    utilities.py        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Common utilities</span></em>
    main.py             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Launch this to run</span></em>
    other.py            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Imports utilities</span></em></pre>
<p>So far, there’s no problem: both systems can coexist and run
          on the same machine. In fact, you won’t even need to configure the
          module search path to use these programs on your computer—because
          Python always searches the home directory first (that is, the
          directory containing the top-level file), imports in either system’s
          files will automatically see all the files in that system’s
          directory. For instance, if you click on <em class="epub__filename">system1\main.py</em>, all imports will
          search <em class="epub__filename">system1</em> first.
          Similarly, if you launch <em class="epub__filename">system2\main.py</em>, <em class="epub__filename">system2</em> will be searched first instead.
          Remember, module search path settings are only needed to import
          across directory boundaries.</p>
<p>However, suppose that after you’ve installed these two
          programs on your machine, you decide that you’d like to use some of
          the code in each of the <em class="epub__filename">utilities.py</em> files in a system of your
          own. It’s common utility code, after all, and Python code by nature
          wants to be reused. In this case, you want to be able to say the
          following from code that you’re writing in a third directory to load
          one of the two files:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e57324"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import utilities
utilities.func('spam')</pre>
<p>Now the problem starts to materialize. To make this work at
          all, you’ll have to set the module search path to include the
          directories containing the <em class="epub__filename">utilities.py</em> files. But which directory
          do you put first in the path—<em class="epub__filename">system1</em> or <em class="epub__filename">system2</em>?</p>
<p>The problem is the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>linear</em></span> nature of the
          search path. It is always scanned from left to right, so no matter
          how long you ponder this dilemma, you will always get <em class="epub__filename">utilities.py</em> from the directory listed
          first (leftmost) on the search path. As is, you’ll never be able to
          import it from the other directory at all. You could try changing
          <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code> within your script
          before each import operation, but that’s both extra work and highly
          error prone. By default, you’re stuck.</p>
<p>This is the issue that packages actually fix. <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e57351"></a>Rather than installing programs as flat lists of files
          in standalone directories, you can package and install them as
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>subdirectories</em></span> under a common root. For
          instance, you might organize all the code in this example as an
          install hierarchy that looks like this:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e57362"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">root\
    system1\
        __init__.py
        utilities.py
        main.py
        other.py
    system2\
        __init__.py
        utilities.py
        main.py
        other.py
    system3\                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Here or elsewhere</span></em>
        __init__.py             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Your new code here</span></em>
        myfile.py</pre>
<p>Now, add just the common root directory to your search path.
          If your code’s imports are all relative to this common root, you can
          import <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>either</em></span> system’s utility file with a
          package import—the enclosing directory name makes the path (and
          hence, the module reference) unique. In fact, you can import
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>both</em></span> utility files in the same module, as long
          as you use an <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statement
          and repeat the full path each time you reference the utility
          modules:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e57382"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import system1.utilities
import system2.utilities
system1.utilities.function('spam')
system2.utilities.function('eggs')</pre>
<p>The names of the enclosing directories here make the module
          references unique.</p>
<p>Note <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e57388"></a>that you have to use <code class="epub__literal">import</code> instead of <code class="epub__literal">from</code> with packages only if you need to
          access the same attribute in two or more paths. If the name of the
          called function here was different in each path, <code class="epub__literal">from</code> statements could be used to avoid
          repeating the full package path whenever you call one of the
          functions, as described earlier.</p>
<p>Also, notice in the install hierarchy shown earlier that
          <em class="epub__filename">__init__.py</em> files were added to
          the <em class="epub__filename">system1</em> and <em class="epub__filename">system2</em> directories to make this work,
          but not to the <em class="epub__filename">root</em> directory.
          Only directories listed within <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statements in your code require
          these files; as you’ll recall, they are run automatically the first
          time the Python process imports through a package directory.</p>
<p>Technically, in this case the <em class="epub__filename">system3</em> directory doesn’t have to be
          under <em class="epub__filename">root</em>—just the packages of
          code from which you will import. However, because you never know
          when your own modules might be useful in other programs, you might
          as well place them under the common <em class="epub__filename">root</em> directory as well to avoid similar
          name-collision problems in the future.</p>
<p>Finally, notice that both of the two original systems’ imports
          will keep working unchanged. Because their <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>home</em></span>
          directories are searched first, the addition of the common root on
          the search path is irrelevant to code in <em class="epub__filename">system1</em> and <em class="epub__filename">system2</em>; they can keep saying just
          <code class="epub__literal">import utilities</code> and expect to
          find their own files. Moreover, if you’re careful to unpack all your
          Python systems under a common root like this, path configuration
          becomes simple: you’ll only need to add the common root directory,
          <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e57447"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e57449"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e57452"></a>once.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Package Relative Imports"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
