<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Package Relative Imports</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="package_relative_imports"></a>Package Relative Imports</h1>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e57460"></a>coverage of package <a id="ch23packrelimports"></a>imports so far has focused mostly on importing package
        files from <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>outside</em></span> the package. Within the
        package itself, imports of package files can use the same path syntax
        as outside imports, but they can also make use of special
        intra-package search rules to simplify <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statements. That is, rather than
        listing package import paths, imports within the package can be
        relative to the package.</p>
<p>The way this works is version-dependent today: Python 2.6
        implicitly searches package directories first on imports, while 3.0
        requires explicit relative import syntax. This 3.0 change can enhance
        code readability, by making same-package imports more obvious. If
        you’re starting out in Python with version 3.0, your focus in this
        section will likely be on its new import syntax. If you’ve used other
        Python packages in the past, though, you’ll probably also be
        interested in how the 3.0 model differs.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Changes in Python 3.0"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="changes_in_python_3.0"></a>Changes in Python 3.0</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The way <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e57485"></a>import operations in packages work has changed
          slightly in Python 3.0. This change applies only to imports within
          files located in the package directories we’ve been studying in this
          chapter; imports in other files work as before. For imports in
          packages, though, Python 3.0 introduces two changes:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>It modifies the module import search path semantics to
              skip the package’s own directory by default. Imports check only
              other components of the search path. These are known as
              “absolute” imports.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>It extends the syntax of <code class="epub__literal">from</code> statements to allow them to
              explicitly request that imports search the package’s directory
              only. This is known as “relative” import syntax.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>These changes are fully present in Python 3.0. The new
          <code class="epub__literal">from</code> statement relative syntax is
          also available in Python 2.6, but the default search path change
          must be enabled as an option. It’s currently scheduled to be added
          in the 2.7 release<sup>[53]</sup>—this change is being phased in this way because the
          search path portion is not backward compatible with earlier
          Pythons.</p>
<p>The impact of this change is that in 3.0 (and optionally in
          2.6), you must generally use special <code class="epub__literal">from</code> syntax to import modules located in
          the same package as the importer, unless you spell out a complete
          path from a package root. Without this syntax, your package is not
          automatically searched.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Relative Import Basics"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="relative_import_basics"></a>Relative Import Basics</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In Python 3.0 and 2.6, <code class="epub__literal">from</code>
<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e57525"></a>statements can now use leading dots (“.”) to specify
          that they require modules located within the same package (known as
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>package relative imports</em></span>), instead of modules
          located elsewhere on the module import search path (called
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e57535"></a>absolute imports</em></span>). That is:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e57543"></a>In both Python 3.0 and 2.6, you can use leading
              dots in <code class="epub__literal">from</code> statements to
              indicate that imports should be <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>relative</em></span> to
              the containing package—such imports will search for modules
              inside the package only and will not look for same-named modules
              located elsewhere on the import search path (<code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code>). The net effect is that
              package modules override outside modules.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In Python 2.6, normal imports in a package’s code (without
              leading dots) currently default to a relative-then-absolute
              search path order—that is, they search the package’s own
              directory first. However, in Python 3.0, imports within a
              package are absolute by default—in the absence of any special
              dot syntax, imports skip the containing package itself and look
              elsewhere on the <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code>
              search path.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>For example, in both Python 3.0 and 2.6, a statement of the
          form:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e57568"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from . import spam                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Relative to this package</span></em></pre>
<p>instructs Python to import a module named <code class="epub__literal">spam</code> located in the same package directory
          as the file in which this statement appears. Similarly, this
          statement:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e57577"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from .spam import name</pre>
<p>means “from a module named <code class="epub__literal">spam</code> located in the same package as the
          file that contains this statement, import the variable <code class="epub__literal">name</code>.”</p>
<p>The behavior of a statement <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>without</em></span> the
          leading dot depends on which version of Python you use. In 2.6, such an import
          will still default to the current relative-then-absolute search path
          order (i.e., searching the package’s directory first), unless a
          statement of the following form is included in the importing
          file:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e57598"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from __future__ import  absolute_import   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Required until 2.7?</span></em></pre>
<p>If present, this statement enables the Python 3.0
          absolute-by-default default search path change, described in the
          next paragraph.</p>
<p>In 3.0, an import without a leading dot always causes Python
          to skip the relative components of the module import search path and
          look instead in the absolute directories that <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code> contains. For instance, in 3.0’s
          model, a statement of the following form will always find a <code class="epub__literal">string</code> module somewhere on <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code>, instead of a module of the same
          name in the package:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e57616"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import string                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Skip this package's version</span></em></pre>
<p>Without the <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e57623"></a>from __future__</code> statement in 2.6, if there’s
          a <code class="epub__literal">string</code> module in the package,
          it will be imported instead. To get the same behavior in 3.0 and in
          2.6 when the absolute import change is enabled, run a statement of
          the following form to force a relative import:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e57631"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from . import string                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Searches this package only</span></em></pre>
<p>This works in both Python 2.6 and 3.0 today. The only
          difference in the 3.0 model is that it is
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>required</em></span> in order to load a module that is
          located in the same package directory as the file in which this
          appears, when the module is given with a simple name.</p>
<p>Note that leading dots can be used to force relative imports
          only with the <code class="epub__literal">from</code> statement, not
          with the <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statement. In
          Python 3.0, the <code class="epub__literal">import modname</code>
          statement is always absolute, skipping the containing package’s
          directory. In 2.6, this statement form still performs relative
          imports today (i.e., the package’s directory is searched first), but
          these will become absolute in Python 2.7, too. <code class="epub__literal">from</code> statements without leading dots
          behave the same as <code class="epub__literal">import</code>
          statements—absolute in 3.0 (skipping the package directory), and
          relative-then-absolute in 2.6 (searching the package directory
          first).</p>
<p>Other dot-based relative reference patterns are possible, too.
          Within a module file located in a package directory named <em class="epub__filename">mypkg</em>, the following alternative import
          forms work as described:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e57662"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from .string import name1, name2            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Imports names from mypkg.string</span></em>
from . import string                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Imports mypkg.string</span></em>
from .. import string                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Imports string sibling of mypkg</span></em></pre>
<p>To understand these latter forms better, we need to understand
          the rationale behind this change.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Why Relative Imports?"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="why_relative_imports_question"></a>Why Relative Imports?</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>This <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e57679"></a>feature is designed to allow scripts to resolve
          ambiguities that can arise when a same-named file appears in
          multiple places on the module search path. Consider the following
          package directory:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e57685"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">mypkg\
    __init__.py
    main.py
    string.py</pre>
<p>This defines a package named <code class="epub__literal">mypkg</code> containing modules named <code class="epub__literal">mypkg.main</code> and <code class="epub__literal">mypkg.string</code>. Now, suppose that the
          <code class="epub__literal">main</code> module tries to import a
          module named <code class="epub__literal">string</code>. In Python
          2.6 and earlier, Python will first look in the <em class="epub__filename">mypkg</em> directory to perform a
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>relative</em></span> import. It will find and import the
          <em class="epub__filename">string.py</em> file located there,
          assigning it to the name <code class="epub__literal">string</code>
          in the <code class="epub__literal">mypkg.main</code> module’s
          namespace.</p>
<p>It could be, though, that the intent of this import was to
          load the Python standard library’s <code class="epub__literal">string</code> module instead. Unfortunately, in
          these versions of Python, there’s no straightforward way to ignore
          <code class="epub__literal">mypkg.string</code> and look for the
          standard library’s <code class="epub__literal">string</code> module
          located on the module search path. Moreover, we cannot resolve this
          with package import paths, because we cannot depend on any extra
          package directory structure above the standard library being present
          on every machine.</p>
<p>In other words, imports in packages can be ambiguous—within a
          package, it’s not clear whether an <code class="epub__literal">import
          spam</code> statement refers to a module within or outside the
          package. More accurately, a local module or package can hide another
          hanging directly off of <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code>,
          whether intentionally or not.</p>
<p>In practice, Python users can avoid reusing the names of
          standard library modules they need for modules of their own (if you
          need the standard <code class="epub__literal">string</code>, don’t
          name a new module <code class="epub__literal">string</code>!). But
          this doesn’t help if a package accidentally hides a standard module;
          moreover, Python might add a new standard library module in the
          future that has the same name as a module of your own. Code that
          relies on relative imports is also less easy to understand, because
          the reader may be confused about which module is intended to be
          used. It’s better if the resolution can be made explicit in
          code.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="The relative imports solution in 3.0"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="the_relative_imports_solution_in_3.0"></a>The relative imports solution in 3.0</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e57752"></a>address this dilemma, imports run within packages
            have changed in Python 3.0 (and as an option in 2.6) to be
            absolute. Under this model, an <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statement of the following form
            in our example file <em class="epub__filename">mypkg/main.py</em> will always find a
            <code class="epub__literal">string</code> outside the package, via
            an absolute import search of <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e57770"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import string                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Imports string outside package</span></em></pre>
<p>A <code class="epub__literal">from</code> import without
            leading-dot syntax is considered absolute as well:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e57779"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from string import name                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Imports name from string outside package</span></em></pre>
<p>If you really want to import a module from your package
            without giving its full path from the package root, though,
            relative imports are still possible by using the dot syntax in the
            <code class="epub__literal">from</code> statement:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e57788"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from . import string                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Imports mypkg.string (relative)</span></em></pre>
<p>This form imports the <code class="epub__literal">string</code> module relative to the current
            package only and is the relative equivalent to the prior <code class="epub__literal">import</code> example’s absolute form; when
            this special relative syntax is used, the package’s directory is
            the only directory searched.</p>
<p>We can also copy specific names from a module with relative
            syntax:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e57802"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from .string import name1, name2       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Imports names from mypkg.string</span></em></pre>
<p>This statement again refers to the <code class="epub__literal">string</code> module relative to the current
            package. If this code appears in our <code class="epub__literal">mypkg.main</code> module, for example, it will
            import <code class="epub__literal">name1</code> and <code class="epub__literal">name2</code> from <code class="epub__literal">mypkg.string</code>.</p>
<p>In effect, the “.” in a relative import is taken to stand
            for the package directory <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>containing</em></span> the file
            in which the import appears. An additional leading dot performs
            the relative import starting from the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>parent</em></span>
            of the current package. For example, this statement:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e57835"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from .. import spam                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Imports a sibling of mypkg</span></em></pre>
<p>will load a sibling of <code class="epub__literal">mypkg</code>—i.e., the <code class="epub__literal">spam</code> module located in the package’s own
            container directory, next to <code class="epub__literal">mypkg</code>. More generally, code located in
            some module <code class="epub__literal">A.B.C</code> can do any of
            these:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e57853"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from . import D                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Imports A.B.D     (. means A.B)</span></em>
from .. import E                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Imports A.E       (.. means A)</span></em>

from .D import X                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Imports A.B.D.X   (. means A.B)</span></em>
from ..E import X                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Imports A.E.X     (.. means A)</span></em></pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Relative imports versus absolute package paths"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="relative_imports_versus_absolute_packag"></a>Relative imports versus absolute package paths</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Alternatively, <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e57871"></a>a file can sometimes name its own package explicitly
            in an absolute import statement. For example, in the following,
            <code class="epub__literal">mypkg</code> will be found in an
            absolute directory on <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e57883"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from mypkg import string                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Imports mypkg.string (absolute)</span></em></pre>
<p>However, this relies on both the configuration and the order
            of the module search path settings, while relative import dot
            syntax does not. In fact, this form requires that the directory
            immediately containing <code class="epub__literal">mypkg</code> be
            included in the module search path. In general, absolute import statements
            must list all the directories below the package’s root entry in
            <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code> when naming packages
            explicitly like this:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e57898"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from system.section.mypkg import string     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># system container on sys.path only</span></em></pre>
<p>In large or deep packages, that could be much more work than
            a dot:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e57904"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from . import string                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Relative import syntax</span></em></pre>
<p>With this latter form, the containing package is searched
            automatically, regardless of the search path settings.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The Scope of Relative Imports"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_scope_of_relative_imports"></a>The Scope of Relative Imports</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Relative imports <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e57915"></a>can seem a bit perplexing on first encounter, but it
          helps if you remember a few key points about them:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Relative imports apply to imports
              within packages only</strong></span>. Keep in mind that this
              feature’s module search path change applies only to <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statements within module files
              located in a package. Normal imports coded outside package files
              still work exactly as described earlier, automatically searching
              the directory containing the top-level script first.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Relative imports apply to the from
              statement only</strong></span>. Also remember that this feature’s new
              syntax applies only to <code class="epub__literal">from</code>
              statements, not <code class="epub__literal">import</code>
              statements. It’s detected by the fact that the module name in a
              <code class="epub__literal">from</code> begins with one or more
              dots (periods). Module names that contain dots but don’t have a
              leading dot are package imports, not relative imports.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>The terminology is
              ambiguous</strong></span>. Frankly, the terminology used to describe
              this feature is probably more confusing than it needs to be.
              Really, all imports are relative to something. Outside a
              package, imports are still relative to directories listed on the
              <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code> module search path.
              As we learned in Chapter 21, this path includes
              the program’s container directory, <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code> settings, path file
              settings, and standard libraries. When working interactively,
              the program container directory is simply the current working
              directory.</p>
<p>For imports made inside packages, 2.6 augments this
              behavior by searching the package itself first. In the 3.0
              model, all that really changes is that normal “absolute” import
              syntax skips the package directory, but special “relative”
              import syntax causes it to be searched first and only. When we
              talk about 3.0 imports as being “absolute,” what we really mean
              is that they are relative to the directories on <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code>, but not the package itself.
              Conversely, when we speak of “relative” imports, we mean they
              are relative to the package directory only. Some <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code> entries could, of course, be
              absolute or relative paths too. (And I could probably make up
              something more confusing, but it would be a stretch!)</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>In other words, “package relative
          imports” in 3.0 really just boil down to a removal of 2.6’s special
          search path behavior for packages, along with the addition of
          special <code class="epub__literal">from</code> syntax to explicitly
          request relative behavior. If you wrote your package imports in the
          past to not depend on 2.6’s special implicit relative lookup (e.g.,
          by always spelling out full paths from a package root), this change
          is largely a moot point. If you didn’t, you’ll need to update your
          package files to use the new <code class="epub__literal">from</code>
          syntax for local package files.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Module Lookup Rules Summary"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="module_lookup_rules_summary"></a>Module Lookup Rules Summary</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>With packages <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e57979"></a>and relative imports, the module search story in
          Python 3.0 in its entirety can be summarized as follows:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Simple module names (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">A</code>) are looked up by searching each
              directory on the <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code>
              list, from left to right. This list is constructed from both
              system defaults and user-configurable settings.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Packages are simply directories of Python modules with a
              special <em class="epub__filename">__init__.py</em> file,
              which enables <code class="epub__literal">A.B.C</code> directory
              path syntax in imports. In an import of <code class="epub__literal">A.B.C</code>, for example, the directory
              named <code class="epub__literal">A</code> is located relative
              to the normal module import search of <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code>, <code class="epub__literal">B</code> is another package subdirectory
              within <code class="epub__literal">A</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">C</code> is a module or other importable item
              within <code class="epub__literal">B</code>.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Within a package’s files, normal <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statements use the same
              <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code> search rule as
              imports elsewhere. Imports in packages using <code class="epub__literal">from</code> statements and leading dots,
              however, are relative to the package; that is, only the package
              directory is checked, and the normal <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code> lookup is not used. In
              <code class="epub__literal">from . import A</code>, for example,
              the module search is restricted to the directory containing the
              file in which this statement appears.</p></li></ul>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Relative Imports in Action"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="relative_imports_in_action"></a>Relative Imports in Action</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>But <a id="ch23packrelimportsexamples"></a>enough theory: let’s run some quick tests to
          demonstrate the concepts behind relative imports.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Imports outside packages"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="imports_outside_packages"></a>Imports outside packages</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>First of all, <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e58060"></a>as mentioned previously, this feature does not
            impact imports outside a package. Thus, the following finds the
            standard library <code class="epub__literal">string</code> module
            as expected:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e58071"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\test&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\Python30\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import string</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>string</code></strong>
&lt;module 'string' from 'c:\Python30\lib\string.py'&gt;</pre>
<p>But if we add a module of the same
            name in the directory we’re working in, it is selected instead,
            because the first entry on the module search path is the
            <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e58085"></a>current working directory (CWD):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e58092"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># test\string.py</span></em>
print('string' * 8)

C:\test&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\Python30\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import string</code></strong>
stringstringstringstringstringstringstringstring
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>string</code></strong>
&lt;module 'string' from 'string.py'&gt;</pre>
<p>In other words, normal imports are still relative to the
            “home” directory (the top-level script’s container, or the
            directory you’re working in). In fact, relative import syntax is
            not even allowed in code that is not in a file being used as part
            of a package:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e58107"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from . import string</code></strong>
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "&lt;stdin&gt;", line 1, in &lt;module&gt;
ValueError: Attempted relative import in non-package</pre>
<p>In this and all examples in this section, code entered at
            the interactive prompt behaves the same as it would if run in a
            top-level script, because the first entry on <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code> is either the interactive
            working directory or the directory containing the top-level file.
            The only difference is that the start of <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code> is an absolute directory, not
            an empty string:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e58120"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># test\main.py</span></em>
import string
print(string)

C:\test&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>C:\python30\python main.py</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same results in 2.6</span></em>
stringstringstringstringstringstringstringstring
&lt;module 'string' from 'C:\test\string.py'&gt;</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Imports within packages"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="imports_within_packages"></a>Imports within packages</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Now, <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e58135"></a>let’s get rid of the local <code class="epub__literal">string</code> module we coded in the CWD and
            build a package directory there with two modules, including the
            required but empty <em class="epub__filename">test\pkg\__init__.py</em> file (which I’ll
            omit here):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e58149"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\test&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>del string*</code></strong>
C:\test&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mkdir pkg</code></strong>

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># test\pkg\spam.py</span></em>
import eggs                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># &lt;== Works in 2.6 but not 3.0!</span></em>
print(eggs.X)

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># test\pkg\eggs.py</span></em>
X = 99999
import string
print(string)</pre>
<p>The first file in this package tries to import the second
            with a normal <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statement.
            Because this is taken to be relative in 2.6 but absolute in 3.0,
            it fails in the latter. That is, 2.6 searches the containing
            package first, but 3.0 does not. This is the noncompatible
            behavior you have to be aware of in 3.0:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e58171"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\test&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\Python26\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import pkg.spam</code></strong>
&lt;module 'string' from 'c:\Python26\lib\string.pyc'&gt;
99999

C:\test&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\Python30\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import pkg.spam</code></strong>
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "&lt;stdin&gt;", line 1, in &lt;module&gt;
  File "pkg\spam.py", line 1, in &lt;module&gt;
    import eggs
ImportError: No module named eggs</pre>
<p>To make this work in both 2.6 and 3.0, change the first file
            to use the special relative import syntax, so that its import
            searches the package directory in 3.0, too:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e58187"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># test\pkg\spam.py</span></em>
from . import eggs             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># &lt;== Use package relative import in 2.6 or 3.0</span></em>
print(eggs.X)

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># test\pkg\eggs.py</span></em>
X = 99999
import string
print(string)

C:\test&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\Python26\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import pkg.spam</code></strong>
&lt;module 'string' from 'c:\Python26\lib\string.pyc'&gt;
99999

C:\test&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\Python30\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import pkg.spam</code></strong>
&lt;module 'string' from 'c:\Python30\lib\string.py'&gt;
99999</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Imports are still relative to the CWD"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="imports_are_still_relative_to_the_cwd"></a>Imports are still relative to the CWD</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Notice <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e58215"></a>in the preceding example that the package modules
            still have access to standard library modules like <code class="epub__literal">string</code>. Really, their imports are still
            relative to the entries on the module search path, even if those
            entries are relative themselves. If you add a <code class="epub__literal">string</code> module to the CWD again, imports
            in a package will find it there instead of in the standard
            library. Although you can skip the package directory with an
            absolute import in 3.0, you still can’t skip the home directory of
            the program that imports the package:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e58229"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># test\string.py</span></em>
print('string' * 8)

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># test\pkg\spam.py</span></em>
from . import eggs
print(eggs.X)

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># test\pkg\eggs.py</span></em>
X = 99999
import string                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># &lt;== Gets string in CWD, not Python lib!</span></em>
print(string)

C:\test&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\Python30\python</code></strong>    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same result in 2.6</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import pkg.spam</code></strong>
stringstringstringstringstringstringstringstring
&lt;module 'string' from 'string.py'&gt;
99999</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Selecting modules with relative and absolute imports"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="selecting_modules_with_relative_and_abs"></a>Selecting modules with relative and absolute
            imports</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e58257"></a>show how this applies to imports of standard library
            modules, reset the package one more time. Get rid of the local
            <code class="epub__literal">string</code> module, and define a new
            one inside the package itself:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e58268"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\test&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>del string*</code></strong>

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># test\pkg\spam.py</span></em>
import string                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># &lt;== Relative in 2.6, absolute in 3.0</span></em>
print(string)

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># test\pkg\string.py</span></em>
print('Ni' * 8)</pre>
<p>Now, which version of the <code class="epub__literal">string</code> module you get depends on which
            Python you use. As before, 3.0 interprets the import in the first
            file as absolute and skips the package, but 2.6 does not:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e58287"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\test&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\Python30\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import pkg.spam</code></strong>
&lt;module 'string' from 'c:\Python30\lib\string.py'&gt;

C:\test&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\Python26\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import pkg.spam</code></strong>
NiNiNiNiNiNiNiNi
&lt;module 'pkg.string' from 'pkg\string.py'&gt;</pre>
<p>Using relative import syntax in 3.0 forces the package to be
            searched again, as it is in 2.6—by using absolute or relative
            import syntax in 3.0, you can either skip or select the package
            directory explicitly. In fact, this is the use case that the 3.0
            model addresses:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e58303"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># test\pkg\spam.py</span></em>
from . import string           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># &lt;== Relative in both 2.6 and 3.0</span></em>
print(string)

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># test\pkg\string.py</span></em>
print('Ni' * 8)

C:\test&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\Python30\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import pkg.spam</code></strong>
NiNiNiNiNiNiNiNi
&lt;module 'pkg.string' from 'pkg\string.py'&gt;

C:\test&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\Python26\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import pkg.spam</code></strong>
NiNiNiNiNiNiNiNi
&lt;module 'pkg.string' from 'pkg\string.py'&gt;</pre>
<p>It’s important to note that relative import syntax is really
            a binding declaration, not just a preference. If we delete the
            <em class="epub__filename">string.py</em> file in this
            example, the relative import in <em class="epub__filename">spam.py</em> <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>fails</em></span> in
            both 3.0 and 2.6, instead of falling back on the standard
            library’s version of this module (or any other):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e58337"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># test\pkg\spam.py</span></em>
from . import string           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># &lt;== Fails if no string.py here!</span></em>

C:\test&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>C:\python30\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import pkg.spam</code></strong>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...text omitted...</code></em>
ImportError: cannot import name string</pre>
<p>Modules referenced by relative imports must exist in the
            package directory.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Imports are still relative to the CWD (again)"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="imports_are_still_relative_to_the_cw"></a>Imports are still relative to the CWD (again)</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Although <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e58360"></a>absolute imports let you skip package modules, they
            still rely on other components of <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code>. For one last test, let’s
            define two <code class="epub__literal">string</code> modules of
            our own. In the following, there is one module by that name in the
            CWD, one in the package, and another in the standard
            library:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e58374"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># test\string.py</span></em>
print('string' * 8)

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># test\pkg\spam.py</span></em>
from . import string           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># &lt;== Relative in both 2.6 and 3.0</span></em>
print(string)

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># test\pkg\string.py</span></em>
print('Ni' * 8)</pre>
<p>When we import the <code class="epub__literal">string</code>
            module with relative import syntax, we get the version in the
            package, as desired:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e58392"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\test&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\Python30\python</code></strong>    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same result in 2.6</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import pkg.spam</code></strong>
NiNiNiNiNiNiNiNi
&lt;module 'pkg.string' from 'pkg\string.py'&gt;</pre>
<p>When absolute syntax is used, though, the module we get
            varies per version again. 2.6 interprets this as relative to the
            package, but 3.0 makes it “absolute,” which in this case really
            just means it skips the package and loads the version relative to
            the CWD (<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>not</em></span> the version the standard
            library):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e58408"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># test\string.py</span></em>
print('string' * 8)

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># test\pkg\spam.py</span></em>
import string                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># &lt;== Relative in 2.6, "absolute" in 3.0: CWD!</span></em>
print(string)

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># test\pkg\string.py</span></em>
print('Ni' * 8)

C:\test&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\Python30\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import pkg.spam</code></strong>
stringstringstringstringstringstringstringstring
&lt;module 'string' from 'string.py'&gt;

C:\test&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\Python26\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import pkg.spam</code></strong>
NiNiNiNiNiNiNiNi
&lt;module 'pkg.string' from 'pkg\string.pyc'&gt;</pre>
<p>As you can see, although packages can explicitly request
            modules within their own directories, their imports are otherwise
            still relative to the rest of the normal module search path. In
            this case, a file in the program using the package hides the
            standard library module the package may want. All that the change
            in 3.0 really accomplishes is allowing package code to select
            files either inside or outside the package (i.e., relatively or
            absolutely). Because import resolution can depend on an enclosing
            context that may not be foreseen, absolute imports in 3.0 are not
            a guarantee of finding a module in the standard library.</p>
<p>Experiment with these examples on your own for more insight.
            In practice, this is not usually as ad-hoc as it might seem: you
            can generally structure your imports, search paths, and module
            names to work the way you wish during development. You should keep
            in mind, though, that imports in larger systems may depend upon
            context of use, and the module import protocol is part of a
            successful library’s design.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p>Now that you’ve learned about package-relative imports,
              also keep in mind that they may not always be your best option.
              Absolute package imports, relative to a directory on <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code>, are still sometimes
              preferred over both implicit package-relative imports in Python
              2, and explicit package-relative import syntax in both Python 2
              and 3.</p>
<p>Package-relative import syntax and Python 3.0’s new
              absolute import search rules at least require relative imports
              from a package to be made explicit, and thus easier to
              understand and maintain. Files that use imports with dots,
              though, are implicitly bound to a package directory and cannot
              be used elsewhere without code changes.</p>
<p>Naturally, the extent to which this may impact your
              modules can vary per package; absolute imports may also require
              changes when directories are reorganized.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="why_you_will_care_colon_module_packages"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Why You Will Care: Module Packages</p>
<p>Now that packages are a standard part of Python, it’s
              common to see larger third-party extensions shipped as sets of
              package directories, rather than flat lists of modules. The
              <em class="epub__filename">win32all</em> Windows extensions
              package for Python, for instance, was one of the first to jump
              on the package bandwagon. Many of its utility modules reside in
              packages imported with paths. For instance, to load client-side
              COM tools, you use a statement like this:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e58456"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from win32com.client import constants, Dispatch</pre>
<p>This line fetches names from the <code class="epub__literal">client</code> module of the <code class="epub__literal">win32com</code> package (an install
              subdirectory).</p>
<p>Package imports are also pervasive in code run under the
              Jython Java-based implementation of Python, because Java
              libraries are organized into hierarchies as well. In recent
              Python releases, the email and XML tools are likewise organized
              into package subdirectories in the standard library, and Python
              3.0 groups even more related modules into packages (including
              tkinter GUI tools, HTTP networking tools, and more). The
              following imports access various standard library tools in
              3.0:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e58468"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from email.message import Message
from tkinter.filedialog import askopenfilename
from http.server import CGIHTTPRequestHandler</pre>
<p>Whether you create package directories or not, you will
              probably import from them <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e58472"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e58474"></a>eventually.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Chapter Summary"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
