<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_answers-id22"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</h1>
<div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <em class="epub__filename">__init__.py</em> file
            serves to declare and initialize a module package; Python
            automatically runs its code the first time you import through a
            directory in a process. Its assigned variables become the
            attributes of the module object created in memory to correspond to
            that directory. It is also not optional—you can’t import through a
            directory with package syntax unless it contains this file.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Use the <code class="epub__literal">from</code> statement
            with a package to copy names out of the package directly, or use
            the <code class="epub__literal">as</code> extension with the
            <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statement to rename the
            path to a shorter synonym. In both cases, the path is listed in
            only one place, in the <code class="epub__literal">from</code> or
            <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statement.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Each directory listed in an <code class="epub__literal">import</code> or <code class="epub__literal">from</code> statement must contain an <em class="epub__filename">__init__.py</em> file. Other directories,
            including the directory containing the leftmost component of a
            package path, do not need to include this file.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>You must use <code class="epub__literal">import</code>
            instead of <code class="epub__literal">from</code> with packages
            only if you need to access the same name defined in more than one
            path. With <code class="epub__literal">import</code>, the path
            makes the references unique, but <code class="epub__literal">from</code> allows only one version of any
            given name.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">from mypkg import spam</code> is
            an <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>absolute</em></span> import—the search for <code class="epub__literal">mypkg</code> skips the package directory and
            the module is located in an absolute directory in <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code>. A statement <code class="epub__literal">from . import spam</code>, on the other hand,
            is a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>relative</em></span> import—<code class="epub__literal">spam</code> is looked up relative to the
            package in which this statement is contained before <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code> is searched.</p></li></ol>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[52] </sup>The dot path syntax was chosen partly for platform
              neutrality, but also because paths in <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statements become real nested
              object paths. This syntax also means that you get odd error
              messages if you forget to omit the <em class="epub__filename">.py</em> in your <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statements. For example,
              <code class="epub__literal">import mod.py</code> is assumed to
              be a directory path import—it loads <em class="epub__filename">mod.py</em>, then tries to load a
              <em class="epub__filename">mod\py.py</em>, and ultimately
              issues a potentially confusing “No module named py” error
              message.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[53] </sup>Yes, there will be a 2.7 release, and possibly 2.8 and
              later releases, in parallel with new releases in the 3.X line.
              As described in the Preface, both the Python 2 and Python 3
              lines are expected to be fully supported for years to come, to
              accommodate the large existing Python 2 user and code
              bases.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
