<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Data Hiding in Modules</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="data_hiding_in_modules"></a>Data Hiding in Modules</h1>
<p>As <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e58649"></a>we’ve <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e58655"></a>seen, a Python module exports all the names assigned at
        the top level of its file. There is no notion of declaring which names
        should and shouldn’t be visible outside the module. In fact, there’s
        no way to prevent a client from changing names inside a module if it
        wants to.</p>
<p>In Python, data hiding in modules is a convention, not a
        syntactical constraint. If you want to break a module by trashing its
        names, you can, but fortunately, I’ve yet to meet a programmer who
        would. Some purists object to this liberal attitude toward data
        hiding, claiming that it means Python can’t implement encapsulation.
        However, encapsulation in Python is more about packaging than about
        restricting.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Minimizing from * Damage: _X and __all__"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="minimizing_from_asterisk_damage_colon"></a>Minimizing from * Damage: _X and __all__</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As a special case, you can prefix names with a single
          <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e58666"></a>underscore<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e58670"></a> (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">_X</code>) to
          prevent them from being copied out when a client imports a module’s
          names with a <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e58678"></a>from *</code> statement. This really is intended
          only to minimize namespace pollution; because <code class="epub__literal">from *</code> copies out all names, the importer
          may get more than it’s bargained for (including names that overwrite
          names in the importer). <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e60530"></a>Underscores aren’t “private” declarations: you can
          still see and change such names with other import forms, such as the
          <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statement.</p>
<p>Alternatively, you can achieve a hiding effect similar to the
          <code class="epub__literal">_X</code> naming convention by assigning
          a list of variable name strings to the variable <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e58698"></a>__all__</code> at the top level of the module. For
          example:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e58703"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">__all__ = ["Error", "encode", "decode"]     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Export these only</span></em></pre>
<p>When this feature is used, the <code class="epub__literal">from
          *</code> statement will copy out only those names listed in the
          <code class="epub__literal">__all__</code> list. In effect, this is
          the converse of the <code class="epub__literal">_X</code>
          convention: <code class="epub__literal">__all__</code> identifies
          names to be copied, while <code class="epub__literal">_X</code>
          identifies names not to be copied. Python looks for an <code class="epub__literal">__all__</code> list in the module first; if one
          is not defined, <code class="epub__literal">from *</code> copies all
          names without a single leading underscore.</p>
<p>Like the <code class="epub__literal">_X</code> convention, the
          <code class="epub__literal">__all__</code> list has meaning only to
          the <code class="epub__literal">from *</code> statement form and
          does not amount to a privacy declaration. Module writers can use
          either trick to implement modules that are well behaved when used
          with <code class="epub__literal">from *</code>. (See also the
          discussion of <code class="epub__literal">__all__</code> lists in
          package <em class="epub__filename">__init__.py</em> files in
          Chapter 23; there, these lists declare
          submodules to be loaded for a <code class="epub__literal">from
          *</code>.)</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Enabling Future Language Features"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
