<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Mixed Usage Modes: __name__ and __main__</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="mixed_usage_modes_colon_underscore_unde"></a>Mixed Usage Modes: __name__ and __main__</h1>
<p>Here’s <a id="ch24modnameattrib"></a>another <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e58813"></a>module-related trick that lets you both import a file as
        a module <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e58817"></a>and run it as a standalone program. <a id="ch24modmixedusagemode"></a>Each module has a built-in attribute called <code class="epub__literal">__name__</code>, which Python sets automatically as
        follows:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>If the file is being run as a top-level program file,
            <code class="epub__literal">__name__</code> is set to the string
            <code class="epub__literal">"__main__"</code> when it
            starts.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>If the file is being imported instead, <code class="epub__literal">__name__</code> is set to the module’s name as
            known by its clients.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>The upshot is that a module can test its own <code class="epub__literal">__name__</code> to determine whether it’s being run
        or imported. For example, suppose we create the following module file,
        named <em class="epub__filename">runme.py</em>, to export a
        single function called <code class="epub__literal">tester</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e58859"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def tester():
    print("It's Christmas in Heaven...")

if __name__ == '__main__':           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Only when run</span></em>
    tester()                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Not when imported</span></em></pre>
<p>This module defines a function for clients to import and use as
        usual:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e58868"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import runme</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>runme.tester()</code></strong>
It's Christmas in Heaven...</pre>
<p>But, the module also includes code at the bottom that is set up
        to call the function when this file is run as a program:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e58881"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python runme.py</code></strong>
It's Christmas in Heaven...</pre>
<p>In effect, a module’s <code class="epub__literal">__name__</code> variable serves as a
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>usage mode flag</em></span>, allowing its code to be
        leveraged as both an importable library and a top-level script. Though
        simple, you’ll see this hook used in nearly every realistic Python
        program file you are likely to encounter.</p>
<p>Perhaps the most common way you’ll see the <code class="epub__literal">__name__</code> test applied is for
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>self-test</em></span> code. In short, you can package code
        that tests a module’s exports in the module itself by wrapping it in a
        <code class="epub__literal">__name__</code> test at the bottom of the
        file. This way, you can use the file in clients by importing it, but
        also test its logic by running it from the system shell or via another
        launching scheme. In practice, self-test code at the bottom of a file
        under the <code class="epub__literal">__name__</code> test is probably
        the most common and simplest unit-testing protocol in Python. (Chapter 35 will discuss other commonly
        used options for testing Python code—as you’ll see, the <code class="epub__literal">unittest</code> and <code class="epub__literal">doctest</code> standard library modules provide
        more advanced testing tools.)</p>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">__name__</code> trick is also
        commonly used when writing files that can be used both as command-line
        utilities and as tool libraries. For instance, suppose you write a
        file-finder script in Python. You can get more mileage out of your
        code if you package it in functions and add a <code class="epub__literal">__name__</code> test in the file to automatically
        call those functions when the file is run standalone. That way, the
        script’s code becomes reusable in other programs.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Unit Tests with __name__"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="unit_tests_with_underscore_underscore_n"></a>Unit Tests with __name__</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In fact, <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e58937"></a>we’ve <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e58943"></a>already <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e58951"></a>seen a prime example in this book of an instance where
          the <code class="epub__literal">__name__</code> check could be
          useful. In the section on arguments in Chapter 18,
          we coded a script that computed the minimum value from the set of
          arguments sent in:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e58960"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def minmax(test, *args):
    res = args[0]
    for arg in args[1:]:
        if test(arg, res):
            res = arg
    return res

def lessthan(x, y): return x &lt; y
def grtrthan(x, y): return x &gt; y

print(minmax(lessthan, 4, 2, 1, 5, 6, 3))        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Self-test code</span></em>
print(minmax(grtrthan, 4, 2, 1, 5, 6, 3))</pre>
<p>This script includes self-test code at the bottom, so we can
          test it without having to retype everything at the interactive
          command line each time we run it. The problem with the way it is
          currently coded, however, is that the output of the self-test call
          will appear every time this file is imported from another file to be
          used as a tool—not exactly a user-friendly feature! To improve it,
          we can wrap up the self-test call in a <code class="epub__literal">__name__</code> check, so that it will be
          launched only when the file is run as a top-level script, not when
          it is imported (this new version of the module file is renamed
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>min.py</em></span> here):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e58970"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">print('I am:', __name__)

def minmax(test, *args):
    res = args[0]
    for arg in args[1:]:
        if test(arg, res):
            res = arg
    return res

def lessthan(x, y): return x &lt; y
def grtrthan(x, y): return x &gt; y

if __name__ == '__main__':
    print(minmax(lessthan, 4, 2, 1, 5, 6, 3))    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Self-test code</span></em>
    print(minmax(grtrthan, 4, 2, 1, 5, 6, 3))</pre>
<p>We’re also printing the value of <code class="epub__literal">__name__</code> at the top here to trace its
          value. Python creates and assigns this usage-mode variable as soon
          as it starts loading a file. When we run this file as a top-level
          script, its name is set to <code class="epub__literal">__main__</code>, so its self-test code kicks in
          automatically:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e58983"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python min.py</code></strong>
I am: __main__
1
6</pre>
<p>But, if we import the file, its name is not <code class="epub__literal">__main__</code>, so we must explicitly call the
          function to make it run:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e58993"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import min</code></strong>
I am: min
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>min.minmax(min.lessthan, 's', 'p', 'a', 'm')</code></strong>
'a'</pre>
<p>Again, regardless of whether this is used for testing, the net
          effect is that we get to use our code in two different roles—as a
          library module of tools, or as an executable program.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Using Command-Line Arguments with __name__"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="using_command-line_arguments_with_under"></a>Using Command-Line Arguments with __name__</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Here’s a <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e59011"></a>more <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e59017"></a>substantial module example that demonstrates another
          way that the <code class="epub__literal">__name__</code> trick is
          commonly employed. The following module, <em class="epub__filename"><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e59029"></a>formats.py</em>, defines string formatting
          utilities for importers, but also checks its name to see if it is
          being run as a top-level script; if so, it tests and uses arguments
          listed on the system command line to run a canned or passed-in test.
          In Python, the <code class="epub__literal">sys.argv</code> list
          contains <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e59039"></a>command-line arguments</em></span>—it is a list of
          strings reflecting words typed on the command line, where the first
          item is always the name of the script being run:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e59044"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
Various specialized string display formatting utilities.
Test me with canned self-test or command-line arguments.
"""

def commas(N):
    """
    format positive integer-like N for display with
    commas between digit groupings: xxx,yyy,zzz
    """
    digits = str(N)
    assert(digits.isdigit())
    result = ''
    while digits:
        digits, last3 = digits[:-3], digits[-3:]
        result = (last3 + ',' + result) if result else last3
    return result

def money(N, width=0):
    """
    format number N for display with commas, 2 decimal digits,
    leading $ and sign, and optional padding: $  -xxx,yyy.zz
    """
    sign   = '-' if N &lt; 0 else ''
    N      = abs(N)
    whole  = commas(int(N))
    fract  = ('%.2f' % N)[-2:]
    format = '%s%s.%s' % (sign, whole, fract)
    return '$%*s' % (width, format)

if __name__ == '__main__':
    def selftest():
        tests  = 0, 1        # fails: −1, 1.23
        tests += 12, 123, 1234, 12345, 123456, 1234567
        tests += 2 ** 32, 2 ** 100
        for test in tests:
            print(commas(test))

        print('')
        tests  = 0, 1, −1, 1.23, 1., 1.2, 3.14159
        tests += 12.34, 12.344, 12.345, 12.346
        tests += 2 ** 32, (2 ** 32 + .2345)
        tests += 1.2345, 1.2, 0.2345
        tests += −1.2345, −1.2, −0.2345
        tests += −(2 ** 32), −(2**32 + .2345)
        tests += (2 ** 100), −(2 ** 100)
        for test in tests:
            print('%s [%s]' % (money(test, 17), test))

    import sys
    if len(sys.argv) == 1:
        selftest()
    else:
        print(money(float(sys.argv[1]), int(sys.argv[2])))</pre>
<p>This file works the same in Python 2.6 and 3.0. When run
          directly, it tests itself as before, but it uses options on the
          command line to control the test behavior. Run this file directly
          with no command-line arguments on your own to see what its self-test
          code prints. To test specific strings, pass them in on the command
          line along with a minimum field width:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e59048"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python formats.py 999999999 0</code></strong>
$999,999,999.00

C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python formats.py −999999999 0</code></strong>
$-999,999,999.00

C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python formats.py 123456789012345 0</code></strong>
$123,456,789,012,345.00

C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python formats.py −123456789012345 25</code></strong>
$  −123,456,789,012,345.00

C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python formats.py 123.456 0</code></strong>
$123.46

C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python formats.py −123.454 0</code></strong>
$-123.45

C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python formats.py</code></strong>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...canned tests: try this yourself...</code></em></pre>
<p>As before, because this code is instrumented for dual-mode
          usage, we can also import its tools normally in other contexts as
          library components:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e59076"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from formats import money, commas</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>money(123.456)</code></strong>
'$123.46'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>money(-9999999.99, 15)</code></strong>
'$  −9,999,999.99'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = 99999999999999999999</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'%s (%s)' % (commas(X), X)</code></strong>
'99,999,999,999,999,999,999 (99999999999999999999)'</pre>
<p>Because this file uses the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>docstring</em></span>
          feature introduced in Chapter 15, we can use the <code class="epub__literal">help</code> function to explore its tools as
          well—it serves as a general-purpose tool:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e59103"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import formats</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>help(formats)</code></strong>
Help on module formats:

NAME
    formats

FILE
    c:\misc\formats.py

DESCRIPTION
    Various specialized string display formatting utilities.
    Test me with canned self-test or command-line arguments.

FUNCTIONS
    commas(N)
        format positive integer-like N for display with
        commas between digit groupings: xxx,yyy,zzz

    money(N, width=0)
        format number N for display with commas, 2 decimal digits,
        leading $ and sign, and optional padding: $  -xxx,yyy.zz</pre>
<p>You can use command-line arguments in similar ways to provide
          general inputs to scripts that may also package their code as
          functions and classes for reuse by importers. For more advanced
          command-line processing, be sure to see the <code class="epub__literal">getopt</code> and <code class="epub__literal">optparse</code> modules in Python’s standard
          library and manuals. In some scenarios, you might also use the
          built-in <code class="epub__literal">input</code> function
          introduced in Chapter 3 and used in
          Chapter 10 to prompt the shell
          user for test inputs instead of pulling them from the command
          <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e59127"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e59129"></a>line.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p>Also see Chapter 7’s discussion of the
            new <code class="epub__literal">{,d}</code> string format method
            syntax that will be available in Python 3.1 and later; this
            formatting extension separates thousands groups with commas much
            like the code here. The module listed here, though, adds money
            formatting and serves as a manual alternative for comma insertion
            for Python versions before 3.1.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Changing the Module Search Path"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
