<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Changing the Module Search Path</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="changing_the_module_search_path"></a>Changing the Module Search Path</h1>
<p>In Chapter 21, <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e59147"></a>we learned that the module search path is a list of
        directories that can be customized via the environment variable
        <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code>, and possibly via
        <em class="epub__filename">.pth</em> files. What I haven’t shown
        you until now is how a Python program itself can actually change the
        search path by changing a built-in list called <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e59160"></a>sys.path</code> (the <code class="epub__literal">path</code> attribute in the built-in <code class="epub__literal">sys</code> module). <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code> is initialized on startup, but
        thereafter you can delete, append, and reset its components however
        you like:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e59175"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import sys</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sys.path</code></strong>
['', 'C:\\users', 'C:\\Windows\\system32\\python30.zip', <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...more deleted...</code></em>]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sys.path.append('C:\\sourcedir')</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Extend module search path</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import string</code></strong>                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># All imports search the new dir last</span></em></pre>
<p>Once you’ve made such a change, it will impact future imports
        anywhere in the Python program, as all imports and all files share the
        single <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code> list. In fact, this
        list may be changed arbitrarily:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e59203"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sys.path = [r'd:\temp']</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Change module search path</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sys.path.append('c:\\lp4e\\examples')</code></strong>    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># For this process only</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sys.path</code></strong>
['d:\\temp', 'c:\\lp4e\\examples']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import string</code></strong>
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "&lt;stdin&gt;", line 1, in &lt;module&gt;
ImportError: No module named string</pre>
<p>Thus, you can use this technique to dynamically configure a
        search path inside a Python program. Be careful, though: if you delete
        a critical directory from the path, you may lose access to critical
        utilities. In the prior example, for instance, we no longer have
        access to the <code class="epub__literal">string</code> module because
        we deleted the Python source library’s directory from the path.</p>
<p>Also, remember that such <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code> settings endure for only as long as
        the Python session or program (technically, process) that made them
        runs; they are not retained after Python exits. <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code> and <em class="epub__filename">.pth</em> file path configurations live in the
        operating system instead of a running Python program, and so are more
        global: they are picked up by every program on your machine and live
        on after a program completes.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="The as Extension for import and from"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
