<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Modules Are Objects: Metaprograms</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="modules_are_objects_colon_metaprograms"></a>Modules Are Objects: Metaprograms</h1>
<p>Because <a id="ch24modmetaprograms"></a>modules <a id="ch24metaprograms"></a>expose most of their interesting properties as built-in
        attributes, it’s easy to write programs that manage other programs. We
        usually call such manager programs <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>metaprograms</em></span>
        because they work on top of other systems. This is also referred to as
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e59325"></a>introspection</em></span>, because programs can see and
        process object internals. Introspection is an advanced feature, but it
        can be useful for building programming tools.</p>
<p>For instance, to get to an attribute called <code class="epub__literal">name</code> in a module called <code class="epub__literal">M</code>, we can use qualification or index the
        module’s attribute dictionary, exposed in the built-in <code class="epub__literal">__dict__</code> attribute we met briefly in Chapter 22. Python also exports the list of all
        loaded modules as the <code class="epub__literal">sys.modules</code>
        dictionary (that is, the <code class="epub__literal">modules</code>
        attribute of the <code class="epub__literal">sys</code> module) and
        provides a built-in called <code class="epub__literal">getattr</code>
        that lets us fetch attributes from their string names (it’s like
        saying <code class="epub__literal">object.attr</code>, but <code class="epub__literal">attr</code> is an expression that yields a string
        at runtime). Because of that, all the following expressions reach the
        same attribute and object<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e61214"></a>:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e59362"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">M.name                                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Qualify object</span></em>
M.__dict__['name']                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Index namespace dictionary manually</span></em>
sys.modules['M'].name                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Index loaded-modules table manually</span></em>
getattr(M, 'name')                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Call built-in fetch function</span></em></pre>
<p>By exposing module internals like this, Python helps you build
        programs about programs.<sup>[54]</sup> For example, here is a module named <em class="epub__filename"><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e59401"></a>mydir.py</em> that puts these ideas to work to
        implement a customized version of the built-in <code class="epub__literal">dir</code> function. It defines and exports a
        function called <code class="epub__literal">listing</code>, which
        takes a module object as an argument and prints a formatted listing of
        the module’s namespace:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e59412"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
mydir.py: a module that lists the namespaces of other modules
"""

seplen = 60
sepchr = '-'

def listing(module, verbose=True):
    sepline = sepchr * seplen
    if verbose:
        print(sepline)
        print('name:', module.__name__, 'file:', module.__file__)
        print(sepline)

    count = 0
    for attr in module.__dict__:              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Scan namespace keys</span></em>
        print('%02d) %s' % (count, attr), end = ' ')
        if attr.startswith('__'):
            print('&lt;built-in name&gt;')          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Skip __file__, etc.</span></em>
        else:
            print(getattr(module, attr))      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same as .__dict__[attr]</span></em>
        count += 1

    if verbose:
        print(sepline)
        print(module.__name__, 'has %d names' % count)
        print(sepline)

if __name__ == '__main__':
    import mydir
    listing(mydir)                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Self-test code: list myself</span></em></pre>
<p>Notice the docstring at the top; as in the prior <em class="epub__filename">formats.py</em> example, because we may want to
        use this as a general tool, a docstring is coded to provide functional
        information accessible via <code class="epub__literal">__doc__</code>
        attributes or the <code class="epub__literal">help</code> function
        (see Chapter 15 for
        details):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e59438"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import mydir</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>help(mydir)</code></strong>
Help on module mydir:

NAME
    mydir - mydir.py: a module that lists the namespaces of other modules

FILE
    c:\users\veramark\mark\mydir.py

FUNCTIONS
    listing(module, verbose=True)

DATA
    sepchr = '-'
    seplen = 60</pre>
<p>I’ve also provided <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>self-test</em></span> logic at the
        bottom of this module, which narcissistically imports and lists
        itself. Here’s the sort of output produced in Python 3.0 (to use this
        in 2.6, enable 3.0 <code class="epub__literal">print</code> calls with
        the <code class="epub__literal">__future__</code> import described in
        Chapter 11—the
        <code class="epub__literal">end</code> keyword is 3.0-only):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e59462"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\Users\veramark\Mark&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\Python30\python mydir.py</code></strong>
------------------------------------------------------------
name: mydir file: C:\Users\veramark\Mark\mydir.py
------------------------------------------------------------
00) seplen 60
01) __builtins__ &lt;built-in name&gt;
02) __file__ &lt;built-in name&gt;
03) __package__ &lt;built-in name&gt;
04) listing &lt;function listing at 0x026D3B70&gt;
05) __name__ &lt;built-in name&gt;
06) sepchr -
07) __doc__ &lt;built-in name&gt;
------------------------------------------------------------
mydir has 8 names
------------------------------------------------------------</pre>
<p>To use this as a tool for listing other modules, simply pass the
        modules in as objects to this file’s function. Here it is listing
        attributes in the <code class="epub__literal">tkinter</code> GUI
        module in the standard library (a.k.a. <code class="epub__literal">Tkinter</code> in Python 2.6):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e59476"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import mydir</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import tkinter</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mydir.listing(tkinter)</code></strong>
------------------------------------------------------------
name: tkinter file: c:\PYTHON30\lib\tkinter\__init__.py
------------------------------------------------------------
00) getdouble &lt;class 'float'&gt;
01) MULTIPLE multiple
02) mainloop &lt;function mainloop at 0x02913B70&gt;
03) Canvas &lt;class 'tkinter.Canvas'&gt;
04) AtSelLast &lt;function AtSelLast at 0x028FA7C8&gt;
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...many more name omitted...</code></em>
151) StringVar &lt;class 'tkinter.StringVar'&gt;
152) ARC arc
153) At &lt;function At at 0x028FA738&gt;
154) NSEW nsew
155) SCROLL scroll
------------------------------------------------------------
tkinter has 156 names
------------------------------------------------------------</pre>
<p>We’ll meet <code class="epub__literal">getattr</code> and its
        relatives again later. The point to notice here is that <code class="epub__literal">mydir</code> is a program that lets you browse
        other programs. Because Python exposes its internals, you can process
        objects <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e59498"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e59500"></a>generically.<sup>[55]</sup></p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Importing Modules by Name String"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
