<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Importing Modules by Name String</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="importing_modules_by_name_string"></a>Importing Modules by Name String</h1>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e59522"></a>module name in an <code class="epub__literal">import</code> or <code class="epub__literal">from</code> statement is a hardcoded variable name.
        Sometimes, though, your program will get the name of a module to be
        imported as a string at runtime (e.g., if a user selects a module name
        from within a GUI). Unfortunately, you can’t use <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statements directly to load a module
        given its name as a string—Python expects a variable name, not a
        string. For instance:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e59537"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import "string"</code></strong>
  File "&lt;stdin&gt;", line 1
    import "string"
                  ^
SyntaxError: invalid syntax</pre>
<p>It also won’t work to simply assign the string to a variable
        name:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e59544"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">x = "string"
import x</pre>
<p>Here, Python will try to import a file <em class="epub__filename">x.py</em>, not the <code class="epub__literal">string</code> module—the name in an <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statement both becomes a variable
        assigned to the loaded module and identifies the external file
        literally.</p>
<p>To get around this, you need to use special tools to load a
        module dynamically from a string that is generated at runtime. The
        most general approach is to construct an <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statement as a string of Python code
        and pass it to the <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e59563"></a>exec</code> built-in function to run (<code class="epub__literal">exec</code> is a statement in Python 2.6, but it
        can be used exactly as shown here—the parentheses are simply
        ignored):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e59573"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>modname = "string"</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>exec("import " + modname)</code></strong>      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Run a string of code</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>string</code></strong>                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Imported in this namespace</span></em>
&lt;module 'string' from 'c:\Python30\lib\string.py'&gt;</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">exec</code> function (and its
        cousin for expressions, <code class="epub__literal">eval</code>)
        compiles a string of code and passes it to the Python interpreter to
        be executed. In Python, the byte code compiler is available at
        runtime, so you can write programs that construct and run other
        programs like this. By default, <code class="epub__literal">exec</code> runs the code in the current scope, but
        you can get more specific by passing in optional namespace
        dictionaries.</p>
<p>The only real drawback to <code class="epub__literal">exec</code> is that it must compile the <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statement each time it runs; if it
        runs many times, your code may run quicker if it uses the built-in
        <code class="epub__literal">__import__</code> function to load from a
        name string instead. The effect is similar, but <code class="epub__literal">__import__</code> returns the module object, so
        assign it to a name here to keep it:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e59615"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>modname = "string"</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>string = __import__(modname)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>string</code></strong>
&lt;module 'string' from 'c:\Python30\lib\string.py'&gt;</pre>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Transitive Module Reloads"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
