<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Module Gotchas</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="module_gotchas"></a>Module Gotchas</h1>
<p>In this <a id="ch24modgotchas"></a>section, we’ll take a look at the usual collection of
        boundary cases that make life interesting for Python beginners. Some
        are so obscure that it was hard to come up with examples, but most
        illustrate something important about the language.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Statement Order Matters in Top-Level Code"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="statement_order_matters_in_top-level_co"></a>Statement Order Matters in Top-Level Code</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>When a <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e59979"></a>module is first imported (or reloaded), Python
          executes its statements one by one, from the top of the file to the
          bottom. This has a few subtle implications regarding forward
          references that are worth underscoring here:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Code at the top level of a module file (not nested in a
              function) runs as soon as Python reaches it during an import;
              because of that, it can’t reference names assigned lower in the
              file.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Code inside a function body doesn’t run until the function
              is called; because names in a function aren’t resolved until the
              function actually runs, they can usually reference names
              anywhere in the file.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Generally, forward references are only a concern in top-level
          module code that executes immediately; functions can reference names
          arbitrarily. Here’s an example that illustrates forward
          reference:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e59997"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">func1()                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Error: "func1" not yet assigned</span></em>

def func1():
    print(func2())                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Okay: "func2" looked up later</span></em>

func1()                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Error: "func2" not yet assigned</span></em>

def func2():
    return "Hello"

func1()                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Okay: "func1" and "func2" assigned</span></em></pre>
<p>When this file is imported (or run as a standalone program),
          Python executes its statements from top to bottom. The first call to
          <code class="epub__literal">func1</code> fails because the <code class="epub__literal">func1 def</code> hasn’t run yet. The call to
          <code class="epub__literal">func2</code> inside <code class="epub__literal">func1</code> works as long as <code class="epub__literal">func2</code>’s <code class="epub__literal">def</code> has been reached by the time <code class="epub__literal">func1</code> is called (it hasn’t when the second
          top-level <code class="epub__literal">func1</code> call is run). The
          last call to <code class="epub__literal">func1</code> at the bottom
          of the file works because <code class="epub__literal">func1</code>
          and <code class="epub__literal">func2</code> have both been assigned.</p>
<p>Mixing <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s with top-level
          code is not only hard to read, it’s dependent on statement ordering.
          As a rule of thumb, if you need to mix immediate code with <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s, put your <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s at the top of the file and your
          top-level code at the bottom. That way, your functions are
          guaranteed to be defined and assigned by the time code that uses
          them runs.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="from Copies Names but Doesn’t Link"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="from_copies_names_but_doesn_apostrophy"></a>from Copies Names but Doesn’t Link</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Although <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e60066"></a>it’s <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e60074"></a>commonly used, the <code class="epub__literal">from</code> statement is the source of a variety
          of potential gotchas in Python. The <code class="epub__literal">from</code> statement is really an assignment to
          names in the importer’s scope—a name-copy operation, not a name
          aliasing. The implications of this are the same as for all
          assignments in Python, but they’re subtle, especially given that the
          code that shares the objects lives in different files. For instance,
          suppose we define the following module, <em class="epub__filename">nested1.py</em>:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e60089"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># nested1.py</span></em>
X = 99
def printer(): print(X)</pre>
<p>If we import its two names using <code class="epub__literal">from</code> in another module, <em class="epub__filename">nested2.py</em>, we get copies of those names,
          not links to them. Changing a name in the importer resets only the
          binding of the local version of that name, not the name in <em class="epub__filename">nested1.py</em>:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e60104"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># nested2.py</span></em>
from nested1 import X, printer    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Copy names out</span></em>
X = 88                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Changes my "X" only!</span></em>
printer()                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># nested1's X is still 99</span></em>

% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python nested2.py</code></strong>
99</pre>
<p>If we use <code class="epub__literal">import</code> to get the
          whole module and then assign to a qualified name, however, we change
          the name in <em class="epub__filename">nested1.py</em>.
          Qualification directs Python to a name in the module object, rather
          than a name in the importer, <em class="epub__filename">nested3.py</em>:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e60131"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># nested3.py</span></em>
import nested1                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Get module as a whole</span></em>
nested1.X = 88                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># OK: change nested1's X</span></em>
nested1.printer()

% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python nested3.py</code></strong>
88</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="from * Can Obscure the Meaning of Variables"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="from_asterisk_can_obscure_the_meaning_of"></a>from * Can Obscure the Meaning of Variables</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>I mentioned <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e60149"></a>this earlier <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e60157"></a>but saved the details for here. Because you don’t list
          the variables you want when using the <code class="epub__literal">from
          module import *</code> statement form, it can accidentally
          overwrite names you’re already using in your scope. Worse, it can
          make it difficult to determine where a variable comes from. This is
          especially true if the <code class="epub__literal">from *</code>
          form is used on more than one imported file.</p>
<p>For example, if you use <code class="epub__literal">from
          *</code> on three modules, you’ll have no way of knowing what a
          raw function call really means, short of searching all three
          external module files (all of which may be in other
          directories):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e60174"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from module1 import *</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Bad: may overwrite my names silently</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from module2 import *</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Worse: no way to tell what we get!</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from module3 import *</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; . . .

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>func()</code></strong>                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Huh???</span></em></pre>
<p>The solution again is not to do this: try to explicitly list
          the attributes you want in your <code class="epub__literal">from</code> statements, and restrict the <code class="epub__literal">from *</code> form to at most one imported module
          per file. That way, any undefined names must by deduction be in the
          module named in the single <code class="epub__literal">from
          *</code>. You can avoid the issue altogether if you always use
          <code class="epub__literal">import</code> instead of <code class="epub__literal">from</code>, but that advice is too harsh; like
          much else in programming, <code class="epub__literal">from</code> is
          a convenient tool if used wisely. Even this example isn’t an
          absolute evil—it’s OK for a program to use this technique to collect
          names in a single space for convenience, as long as it’s well
          known.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="reload May Not Impact from Imports"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="reload_may_not_impact_from_imports"></a>reload May Not Impact from Imports</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Here’s <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e60223"></a>another <code class="epub__literal">from</code>-related gotcha: <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e60234"></a>as discussed previously, <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e60240"></a>because <code class="epub__literal">from</code> copies
          (assigns) names when run, there’s no link back to the modules where
          the names came from. Names imported with <code class="epub__literal">from</code> simply become references to objects,
          which happen to have been referenced by the same names in the
          importee when the <code class="epub__literal">from</code>
          ran.</p>
<p>Because of this behavior, reloading the importee has no effect
          on clients that import its names using <code class="epub__literal">from</code>. That is, the client’s names will
          still reference the original objects fetched with <code class="epub__literal">from</code>, even if the names in the original
          module are later reset:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e60264"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from module import X          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># X may not reflect any module reloads!</span></em>
 . . .
from imp import reload
reload(module)                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Changes module, but not my names</span></em>
X                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Still references old object</span></em></pre>
<p>To make reloads more effective, use <code class="epub__literal">import</code> and name qualification instead of
          <code class="epub__literal">from</code>. Because qualifications
          always go back to the module, they will find the new bindings of
          module names after reloading:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e60282"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import module                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Get module, not names</span></em>
 . . .
from imp import reload
reload(module)                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Changes module in-place</span></em>
module.X                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Get current X: reflects module reloads</span></em></pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="reload, from, and Interactive Testing"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="reload_comma_from_comma_and_interactive"></a>reload, from, and Interactive Testing</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In fact, the <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e60297"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e60304"></a>prior gotcha is even more subtle than it appears.
          Chapter 3 warned that it’s usually
          better not to launch programs with imports and reloads because of
          the complexities involved. Things get even worse when <code class="epub__literal">from</code> is brought into the mix. Python
          beginners often stumble onto its issues in scenarios like the one
          outlined next. Say that after opening a module file in a text edit
          window, you launch an interactive session to load and test your
          module with <code class="epub__literal">from</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e60320"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from module import function
function(1, 2, 3)</pre>
<p>Finding a bug, you jump back to the edit window, make a
          change, and try to reload the module this way:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e60324"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from imp import reload
reload(module)</pre>
<p>This doesn’t work, because the <code class="epub__literal">from</code> statement assigned the name <code class="epub__literal">function</code>, not <code class="epub__literal">module</code>. To refer to the module in
          a <code class="epub__literal">reload</code>, you have to first load
          it with an <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statement at
          least once:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e60344"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from imp import reload
import module
reload(module)
function(1, 2, 3)</pre>
<p>However, this doesn’t quite work either—<code class="epub__literal">reload</code> updates the module object, but as
          discussed in the preceding section, names like <code class="epub__literal">function</code> that were copied out of the
          module in the past still refer to the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>old
          objects</em></span> (in this instance, the original version of the
          function). To really get the new function, you must refer to it as
          <code class="epub__literal">module.function</code> after the
          <code class="epub__literal">reload</code>, or rerun the <code class="epub__literal">from</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e60367"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from imp import reload
import module
reload(module)
from module import function        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Or give up and use module.function()</span></em>
function(1, 2, 3)</pre>
<p>Now, the new version of the function will finally run.</p>
<p>As you can see, there are problems inherent in using <code class="epub__literal">reload</code> with <code class="epub__literal">from</code>: not only do you have to remember to
          reload after imports, but you also have to remember to rerun your
          <code class="epub__literal">from</code> statements after reloads.
          This is complex enough to trip up even an expert once in a while.
          (In fact, the situation has gotten even worse in Python 3.0, because
          you must also remember to import <code class="epub__literal">reload</code> itself!)</p>
<p>The short story is that you should not expect <code class="epub__literal">reload</code> and <code class="epub__literal">from</code> to play together nicely. The best
          policy is not to combine them at all—use <code class="epub__literal">reload</code> with <code class="epub__literal">import</code>, or launch your programs other
          ways, as suggested in Chapter 3: using
          the Run→Run Module menu option in IDLE, file icon clicks, system
          command lines, or the <code class="epub__literal">exec</code>
          built-in function.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Recursive from Imports May Not Work"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="recursive_from_imports_may_not_work"></a>Recursive from Imports May Not Work</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>I saved <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e60414"></a>the most bizarre (and, thankfully, obscure) gotcha for
          last. Because imports execute a file’s statements from top to
          bottom, you need to be careful when using modules that import each
          other (known as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e60423"></a>recursive imports</em></span>). Because the statements
          in a module may not all have been run when it imports another
          module, some of its names may not yet exist.</p>
<p>If you use <code class="epub__literal">import</code> to fetch
          the module as a whole, this may or may not matter; the module’s
          names won’t be accessed until you later use qualification to fetch
          their values. But if you use <code class="epub__literal">from</code>
          to fetch specific names, you must bear in mind that you will only
          have access to names in that module that have already been
          assigned.</p>
<p>For instance, take the following modules, <code class="epub__literal">recur1</code> and <code class="epub__literal">recur2</code>. <code class="epub__literal">recur1</code> assigns a name <code class="epub__literal">X</code>, and then imports <code class="epub__literal">recur2</code> before assigning the name <code class="epub__literal">Y</code>. At this point, <code class="epub__literal">recur2</code> can fetch <code class="epub__literal">recur1</code> as a whole with an <code class="epub__literal">import</code> (it already exists in Python’s
          internal modules table), but if it uses <code class="epub__literal">from</code>, it will be able to see only the name
          <code class="epub__literal">X</code>; the name <code class="epub__literal">Y</code>, which is assigned below the <code class="epub__literal">import</code> in <code class="epub__literal">recur1</code>, doesn’t yet exist, so you get an
          error:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e60482"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># recur1.py</span></em>
X = 1
import recur2                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Run recur2 now if it doesn't exist</span></em>
Y = 2

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># recur2.py</span></em>
from recur1 import X                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># OK: "X" already assigned</span></em>
from recur1 import Y                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Error: "Y" not yet assigned</span></em>

C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>C:\Python30\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import recur1</code></strong>
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "&lt;stdin&gt;", line 1, in &lt;module&gt;
  File "recur1.py", line 2, in &lt;module&gt;
    import recur2
  File "recur2.py", line 2, in &lt;module&gt;
    from recur1 import Y
ImportError: cannot import name Y</pre>
<p>Python avoids rerunning <code class="epub__literal">recur1</code>’s statements when they are imported
          recursively from <code class="epub__literal">recur2</code>
          (otherwise the imports would send the script into an infinite loop),
          but <code class="epub__literal">recur1</code>’s namespace is
          incomplete when it’s imported by <code class="epub__literal">recur2</code>.</p>
<p>The solution? Don’t use <code class="epub__literal">from</code> in recursive imports (no, really!).
          Python won’t get stuck in a cycle if you do, but your programs will
          once again be dependent on the order of the statements in the
          modules.</p>
<p>There are two ways out of this gotcha:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>You can usually eliminate import cycles like this by
              careful design—maximizing cohesion and minimizing coupling are
              good first steps.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>If you can’t break the cycles completely, postpone module
              name accesses by using <code class="epub__literal">import</code>
              and qualification (instead of <code class="epub__literal">from</code>), or by running your <code class="epub__literal">from</code>s either inside functions (instead
              of at the top level of the module), or near the bottom of your
              file to defer <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e60542"></a>their execution.</p></li></ul>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Chapter Summary"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
