<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_answers-id23"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</h1>
<div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Variables at the top level of a module whose names begin
            with a single underscore are not copied out to the importing scope
            when the <code class="epub__literal">from *</code> statement form
            is used. They can still be accessed by an <code class="epub__literal">import</code> or the normal <code class="epub__literal">from</code> statement form, though.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>If a module’s <code class="epub__literal">__name__</code>
            variable is the string <code class="epub__literal">"__main__"</code>, it means that the file is
            being executed as a top-level script instead of being imported
            from another file in the program. That is, the file is being used
            as a program, not a library.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>User input usually comes into a script as a string; to
            import the referenced module given its string name, you can build
            and run an <code class="epub__literal">import</code> statement
            with <code class="epub__literal">exec</code>, or pass the string
            name in a call to the <code class="epub__literal">__import__</code> function.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Changing <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code> only
            affects one running program, and is temporary—the change goes away
            when the program ends. <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code> settings live in the
            operating system—they are picked up globally by all programs on a
            machine, and changes to these settings endure after programs
            exit.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>No, we can’t import from the past in Python. We can install
            (or stubbornly use) an older version of the language, but the
            latest Python is generally the best Python.</p></li></ol>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Test Your Knowledge: Part V Exercises"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
