<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Test Your Knowledge: Part V Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_part_v_exerci"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Part V Exercises</h1>
<p>See<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e60655"></a> Part V, Modules in Appendix B for the
        solutions.</p><div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Import basics</em></span>. Write a program that
            counts the lines and characters in a file (similar in spirit to
            <em class="epub__filename">wc</em> on Unix). With your text
            editor, code a Python module called <em class="epub__filename">mymod.py</em> that exports three top-level
            names:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>A <code class="epub__literal">countLines(name)</code>
                function that reads an input file and counts the number of
                lines in it (hint: <code class="epub__literal">file.readlines</code> does most of the work
                for you, and <code class="epub__literal">len</code> does the
                rest).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>A <code class="epub__literal">countChars(name)</code>
                function that reads an input file and counts the number of
                characters in it (hint: <code class="epub__literal">file.read</code> returns a single
                string).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>A <code class="epub__literal">test(name)</code> function
                that calls both counting functions with a given input
                filename. Such a filename generally might be passed in,
                hardcoded, input with the <code class="epub__literal">input</code> built-in function, or pulled
                from a command line via the <code class="epub__literal">sys.argv</code> list shown in this
                chapter’s <em class="epub__filename">formats.py</em>
                example; for now, you can assume it’s a passed-in function
                argument.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>All three <code class="epub__literal">mymod</code> functions
            should expect a filename string to be passed in. If you type more
            than two or three lines per function, you’re working much too
            hard—use the hints I just gave!</p>
<p>Next, test your module interactively, using <code class="epub__literal">import</code> and attribute references to fetch
            your exports. Does your <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code> need to include the directory
            where you created <em class="epub__filename">mymod.py</em>?
            Try running your module on itself: e.g., <code class="epub__literal">test("mymod.py")</code>. Note that <code class="epub__literal">test</code> opens the file twice; if you’re
            feeling ambitious, you may be able to improve this by passing an
            open file object into the two count functions (hint: <code class="epub__literal">file.seek(0)</code> is a file rewind).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">from/from *</code>. Test your
            <code class="epub__literal">mymod</code> module from exercise 1
            interactively by using <code class="epub__literal">from</code> to
            load the exports directly, first by name, then using the <code class="epub__literal">from *</code> variant to fetch
            everything.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>__main__</em></span>. Add a line in your <code class="epub__literal">mymod</code> module that calls the <code class="epub__literal">test</code> function automatically only when
            the module is run as a script, not when it is imported. The line
            you add will probably test the value of <code class="epub__literal">__name__</code> for the string <code class="epub__literal">"__main__"</code>, as shown in this chapter.
            Try running your module from the system command line; then, import
            the module and test its functions interactively. Does it still
            work in both modes?</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Nested imports</em></span>. Write a second module,
            <em class="epub__filename">myclient.py</em>, that imports
            <code class="epub__literal">mymod</code> and tests its functions;
            then run <code class="epub__literal">myclient</code> from the
            system command line. If <code class="epub__literal">myclient</code> uses <code class="epub__literal">from</code> to fetch from <code class="epub__literal">mymod</code>, will <code class="epub__literal">mymod</code>’s functions be accessible from the
            top level of <code class="epub__literal">myclient</code>? What if
            it imports with <code class="epub__literal">import</code> instead?
            Try coding both variations in <code class="epub__literal">myclient</code> and test interactively by
            importing <code class="epub__literal">myclient</code> and
            inspecting its <code class="epub__literal">__dict__</code>
            attribute.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Package imports</em></span>. Import your file from
            a package. Create a subdirectory called <em class="epub__filename">mypkg</em> nested in a directory on your
            module import search path, move the <em class="epub__filename">mymod.py</em> module file you
            created in exercise 1 or 3 into the new directory, and try to
            import it with a package import of the form <code class="epub__literal">import mypkg.mymod</code>.</p>
<p>You’ll need to add an <em class="epub__filename">__init__.py</em> file in the directory your
            module was moved to make this go, but it should work on all major
            Python platforms (that’s part of the reason Python uses “.” as a
            path separator). The package directory you create can be simply a
            subdirectory of the one you’re working in; if it is, it will be
            found via the home directory component of the search path, and you
            won’t have to configure your path. Add some code to your <em class="epub__filename">__init__.py</em>, and see if it runs on each
            import.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Reloads</em></span>. Experiment with module
            reloads: perform the tests in Chapter 22’s <em class="epub__filename">changer.py</em> example, changing the called
            function’s message and/or behavior repeatedly, without stopping
            the Python interpreter. Depending on your system, you might be
            able to edit <code class="epub__literal">changer</code> in another
            window, or suspend the Python interpreter and edit in the same
            window (on Unix, a Ctrl-Z key combination usually suspends the
            current process, and an <code class="epub__literal">fg</code>
            command later resumes it).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Circular imports</em></span>.<sup>[56]</sup> In the section on recursive import gotchas,
            importing <code class="epub__literal">recur1</code> raised an
            error. But if you restart Python and import <code class="epub__literal">recur2</code> interactively, the error doesn’t
            occur—test this and see for yourself. Why do you think it works to
            import <code class="epub__literal">recur2</code>, but not <code class="epub__literal">recur1</code>? (Hint: Python stores new modules
            in the built-in <code class="epub__literal">sys.modules</code> table—a
            dictionary—before running their code; later imports fetch the
            module from this table
            first, whether the module is “complete” yet or not.) Now, try
            running <code class="epub__literal">recur1</code> as a top-level
            script file: <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python
            recur1.py</code></strong>. Do you get the same error that occurs when
            <code class="epub__literal">recur1</code> is imported
            interactively? Why? (Hint: when modules are run as programs, they
            aren’t imported, so this case has the same effect as importing
            <code class="epub__literal">recur2</code> interactively; <code class="epub__literal">recur2</code> is the first module imported.)
            What happens when you run <code class="epub__literal">recur2</code> as a script?</p></li></ol>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[54] </sup>As we saw in Chapter 17, because a function
            can access its enclosing module by going through the <code class="epub__literal">sys.modules</code> table like this, it’s
            possible to emulate the effect of the <code class="epub__literal">global</code> statement. For instance, the
            effect of <code class="epub__literal">global X; X=0</code> can be
            simulated (albeit with much more typing!) by saying this inside a
            function: <code class="epub__literal">import sys; glob=sys.modules[__name__];
            glob.X=0</code>. Remember, each module gets a <code class="epub__literal">__name__</code> attribute for free; it’s
            visible as a global name inside the functions within the module.
            This trick provides another way to change both local and global
            variables of the same name inside a function.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[55] </sup>Tools such as <code class="epub__literal">mydir.listing</code> can be preloaded into the
            interactive namespace by importing them in the file referenced by
            the <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONSTARTUP</code> environment
            variable. Because code in the startup file runs in the interactive
            namespace (module <code class="epub__literal">__main__</code>),
            importing common tools in the startup file can save you some
            typing. See Appendix A for
            more details.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[56] </sup>Note that circular imports are extremely rare in
                practice. On the other hand, if you can understand why they
                are a potential problem, you know a lot about Python’s import
                semantics.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
