<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 25. OOP: The Big Picture</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 25. OOP: The Big Picture"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h1 class="epub__title"><a id="oop_colon_the_big_picture"></a>Chapter 25. OOP: The Big Picture</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>So far in this book, we’ve been using the term “object”
      generically. Really, the code written up to this point has been
      <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>object-based</em></span>—we’ve passed objects around our
      scripts, used them in expressions, called their methods, and so on. For
      our code to qualify as being truly <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>object-oriented</em></span>
      (OO), though, our objects will generally need to also participate in
      something called an <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>inheritance hierarchy</em></span>.</p>
<p>This chapter begins our exploration of the Python
      <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e60923"></a>class</em></span>—a device used to implement new kinds of
      objects in Python that support inheritance. Classes are Python’s main
      object-oriented programming (OOP) tool, so we’ll also look at OOP basics
      along the way in this part of the book. OOP offers a different and often
      more effective way of looking at programming, in which we factor code to
      minimize redundancy, and write new programs by
      <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>customizing</em></span> existing code instead of changing it
      in-place.</p>
<p>In Python, classes are created with a new statement: the <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e60934"></a>class</code> statement. As you’ll see, the objects
      defined with classes can look a lot like the built-in types we studied
      earlier in the book. In fact, classes really just apply and extend the
      ideas we’ve already covered; roughly, they are packages of functions
      that use and process built-in object types. Classes, though, are
      designed to create and manage new objects, and they also support
      <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>inheritance</em></span>—a mechanism of code customization and
      reuse above and beyond anything we’ve seen so far.</p>
<p>One note up front: in Python, OOP is entirely optional, and you
      don’t need to use classes just to get started. In fact, you can get
      plenty of work done with simpler constructs such as functions, or even
      simple top-level script code. Because using classes well requires some
      up-front planning, they tend to be of more interest to people who work
      in <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>strategic</em></span> mode (doing long-term product
      development) than to people who work in <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>tactical</em></span>
      mode (where time is in very short supply).</p>
<p>Still, as you’ll see in this part of the book, classes turn out to
      be one of the most useful tools Python provides. When used well, classes
      can actually cut development time radically. They’re also employed in
      popular Python tools like the tkinter GUI API, so most Python
      programmers will usually find at least a working knowledge of class
      basics helpful.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Why Use Classes?"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
