<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Why Use Classes?</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="why_use_classes_question"></a>Why Use Classes?</h1>
<p>Remember <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e60957"></a>when I told you that programs “do things with stuff”? In
        simple terms, classes are just a way to define new sorts of stuff,
        reflecting real objects in a program’s domain. For instance, suppose
        we decide to implement that hypothetical pizza-making robot we used as
        an example in Chapter 16. If we implement it
        using classes, we can model more of its real-world structure and
        relationships. Two aspects of OOP prove useful here:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Inheritance</span></dt><dd>
<p>Pizza-<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e60972"></a>making robots are kinds of robots, so they possess
              the usual robot-y properties. In OOP terms, we say they
              “inherit” properties from the general category of all robots.
              These common properties need to be implemented only once for the
              general case and can be reused by all types of robots we may
              build in the future.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Composition</span></dt><dd>
<p>Pizza-making <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e60982"></a>robots are really collections of components that
              work together as a team. For instance, for our robot to be
              successful, it might need arms to roll dough, motors to maneuver
              to the oven, and so on. In OOP parlance, our robot is an example
              of composition; it contains other objects that it activates to
              do its bidding. Each component might be coded as a class, which
              defines its own behavior and relationships.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>General OOP ideas like inheritance and composition apply to any
        application that can be decomposed into a set of objects. For example,
        in typical GUI systems, interfaces are written as collections of
        widgets—buttons, labels, and so on—which are all drawn when their
        container is drawn (<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>composition</em></span>). Moreover, we
        may be able to write our own custom widgets—buttons with unique fonts,
        labels with new color schemes, and the like—which are specialized
        versions of more general interface devices
        (<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>inheritance</em></span>).</p>
<p>From a more concrete programming perspective, classes are Python
        program units, just like functions and modules: they are another
        compartment for packaging logic and data. In fact, classes also define
        new namespaces, much like modules. But, compared to other program
        units we’ve already seen, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e60996"></a>classes have three critical distinctions that make them
        more useful when it comes to building new objects:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Multiple instances</span></dt><dd>
<p>Classes are essentially factories for generating one or
              more objects. Every time we call a class, we generate a new
              object with a distinct namespace. Each object generated from a
              class has access to the class’s attributes
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>and</em></span> gets a namespace of its own for data
              that varies per object.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Customization via inheritance</span></dt><dd>
<p>Classes also support the OOP notion of inheritance; we can
              extend a class by redefining its attributes outside the class
              itself. More generally, classes can build up namespace
              hierarchies, which define names to be used by objects created
              from classes in the hierarchy.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Operator overloading</span></dt><dd>
<p>By <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e61024"></a>providing special protocol methods, classes can
              define objects that respond to the sorts of operations we saw at
              work on built-in types. For instance, objects made with classes
              can be sliced, concatenated, indexed, and so on. Python provides
              hooks that classes can use to intercept and implement any
              built-in type operation.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="OOP from 30,000 Feet"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
