<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_answers-id24"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</h1>
<div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>OOP is about code reuse—you factor code to minimize
            redundancy and program by customizing what already exists instead
            of changing code in-place or starting from scratch.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>An inheritance search looks for an attribute first in the
            instance object, then in the class the instance was created from,
            then in all higher superclasses, progressing from the bottom to
            the top of the object tree, and from left to right (by default).
            The search stops at the first place the attribute is found.
            Because the lowest version of a name found along the way wins,
            class hierarchies naturally support customization by
            extension.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Both class and instance objects are namespaces (packages of
            variables that appear as attributes). The main difference between
            them is that classes are a kind of factory for creating multiple
            instances. Classes also support operator overloading methods,
            which instances inherit, and treat any functions nested within
            them as special methods for processing instances.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The first argument in a class method function is special
            because it always receives the instance object that is the implied
            subject of the method call. It’s usually called <code class="epub__literal">self</code> by convention. Because method
            functions always have this implied subject object context by
            default, we say they are “object-oriented”—i.e., designed to
            process or change objects.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>If the <code class="epub__literal">__init__</code> method is
            coded or inherited in a class, Python calls it automatically each
            time an instance of that class is created. It’s known as the
            constructor method; it is passed the new instance implicitly, as
            well as any arguments passed explicitly to the class name. It’s
            also the most commonly used operator overloading method. If no
            <code class="epub__literal">__init__</code> method is present,
            instances simply begin life as empty namespaces.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>You create a class instance by calling the class name as
            though it were a function; any arguments passed into the class
            name show up as arguments two and beyond in the <code class="epub__literal">__init__</code> constructor method. The new
            instance remembers the class it was created from for inheritance
            purposes.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>You create a class by running a <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement; like function
            definitions, these statements normally run when the enclosing
            module file is imported (more on this in the next chapter).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>You specify a class’s superclasses by listing them in
            parentheses in the <code class="epub__literal">class</code>
            statement, after the new class’s name. The left-to-right order in
            which the classes are listed in the parentheses gives the
            left-to-right inheritance search order in the class tree.</p></li></ol>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[57] </sup>In other literature, you may also occasionally see the
              terms <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>base classes</em></span> and <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>derived
              classes</em></span> used to describe superclasses and subclasses,
              respectively.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[58] </sup>If you’ve ever used C++ or Java, you’ll recognize that
              Python’s <code class="epub__literal">self</code> is the same as
              the <code class="epub__literal">this</code> pointer, but
              <code class="epub__literal">self</code> is always explicit in
              Python to make attribute accesses more obvious.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[59] </sup>Note that the <code class="epub__literal">company</code>
              list in this example could be stored in a file with Python
              object pickling, introduced in Chapter 9 when we met
              files, to yield a persistent employee database. Python also
              comes with a module named <code class="epub__literal">shelve</code>, which would allow you to store
              the pickled representation of the class instances in an
              access-by-key filesystem; the third-party open source ZODB
              system does the same but has better support for
              production-quality object-oriented databases.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
