<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 26. Class Coding Basics</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 26. Class Coding Basics"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h1 class="epub__title"><a id="class_coding_basics"></a>Chapter 26. Class Coding Basics</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Now that we’ve talked about OOP in the abstract, it’s time to see
      how this translates to actual code. This chapter begins to fill in the
      syntax details behind the class model in Python.</p>
<p>If you’ve never been exposed to OOP in the past, classes can seem
      somewhat complicated if taken in a single dose. To make class coding
      easier to absorb, we’ll begin our detailed exploration of OOP by taking
      a first look at some basic classes in action in this chapter. We’ll
      expand on the details introduced here in later chapters of this part of
      the book, but in their basic form, Python classes are easy to
      understand.</p>
<p>In fact, classes have just three primary distinctions. At a base
      level, they are mostly just namespaces, much like the modules we studied
      in Part V. Unlike modules, though, classes also have
      support for generating multiple objects, for namespace inheritance, and
      for operator overloading. Let’s begin our <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement tour by exploring each of
      these three distinctions in turn.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Classes Generate Multiple Instance Objects"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
