<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>The World’s Simplest Python Class</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="the_world_apostrophy_s_simplest_python"></a>The World’s Simplest Python Class</h1>
<p>We’ve <a id="ch26classessimplestclass"></a>begun studying <code class="epub__literal">class</code>
        statement syntax in detail in this chapter, but I’d again like to
        remind you that the basic <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e63439"></a>inheritance model that classes produce is very simple—all it really involves is
        searching for attributes in trees of linked objects. In fact, we can
        create a class with nothing in it at all. The following statement
        makes a class with no attributes attached (an empty namespace
        object):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e63448"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class rec: pass</code></strong>              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Empty namespace object</span></em></pre>
<p>We need the no-operation <code class="epub__literal">pass</code>
        statement (discussed in Chapter 13) here
        because we don’t have any methods to code. After we make the class by
        running this statement interactively, we can start attaching
        attributes to the class by assigning names to it completely outside of
        the original <code class="epub__literal">class</code>
        statement:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e63465"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rec.name = 'Bob'</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Just objects with attributes</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rec.age  = 40</code></strong></pre>
<p>And, after we’ve created these attributes by assignment, we can
        fetch them with the usual syntax. When used this way, a class is
        roughly similar to a “struct” in C, or a “record” in Pascal. It’s
        basically an object with field names attached to it (we can do similar
        work with dictionary keys, but it requires extra characters):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e63477"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(rec.name)</code></strong>              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Like a C struct or a record</span></em>
Bob</pre>
<p>Notice that this works even though there are no instances of the
        class yet; classes are objects in their own right, even without
        instances. In fact, they are just self-contained namespaces, so as
        long as we have a reference to a class, we can set or change its
        attributes anytime we wish. Watch what happens when we do create two
        instances, though:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e63487"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = rec()</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Instances inherit class names</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y = rec()</code></strong></pre>
<p>These instances begin their lives as completely empty namespace
        objects. Because they remember the class from which they were made,
        though, they will obtain the attributes we attached to the class by
        inheritance:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e63499"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.name, y.name</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># name is stored on the class only</span></em>
('Bob', 'Bob')</pre>
<p>Really, these instances have no attributes of their own; they
        simply fetch the <code class="epub__literal">name</code> attribute
        from the class object where it is stored. If we do assign an attribute
        to an instance, though, it creates (or changes) the attribute in that
        object, and no other—attribute references kick off inheritance
        searches, but attribute assignments affect only the objects in which
        the assignments are made. Here, <code class="epub__literal">x</code>
        gets its own <code class="epub__literal">name</code>, but <code class="epub__literal">y</code> still inherits the <code class="epub__literal">name</code> attached to the class above it:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e63525"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.name = 'Sue'</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># But assignment changes x only</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rec.name, x.name, y.name</code></strong>
('Bob', 'Sue', 'Bob')</pre>
<p>In fact, as we’ll explore in more detail in Chapter 28, the attributes of a namespace
        object are usually implemented as dictionaries, and class inheritance
        trees are (generally speaking) just dictionaries with links to other
        dictionaries. If you know where to look, you can see this
        explicitly.</p>
<p>For example, the <code class="epub__literal">__dict__</code>
        attribute is the namespace dictionary for most class-based objects
        (some classes may also define attributes in <code class="epub__literal">__slots__</code>, an advanced and seldom-used
        feature that we’ll study in Chapters 30
        and 31). The following was run in Python
        3.0; the order of names and set of <code class="epub__literal">__</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>X</code></em><code class="epub__literal">__</code> internal names present can vary from
        release to release, but the names we assigned are present in
        all:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e63560"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rec.__dict__.keys()</code></strong>
['__module__', 'name', 'age', '__dict__', '__weakref__', '__doc__']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(x.__dict__.keys())</code></strong>
['name']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(y.__dict__.keys())</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># list() not required in Python 2.6</span></em>
[]</pre>
<p>Here, the class’s namespace dictionary shows the <code class="epub__literal">name</code> and <code class="epub__literal">age</code> attributes we assigned to it, <code class="epub__literal">x</code> has its own <code class="epub__literal">name</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">y</code> is still empty. Each instance has a link
        to its class for inheritance, though—it’s called <code class="epub__literal">__class__</code>, if you want to inspect it:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e63595"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.__class__</code></strong>
&lt;class '__main__.rec'&gt;</pre>
<p>Classes also have a <code class="epub__literal">__bases__</code>
        attribute, which is a tuple of their superclasses:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e63605"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rec.__bases__</code></strong>                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># () empty tuple in Python 2.6</span></em>
(&lt;class 'object'&gt;,)</pre>
<p>These two attributes are how class trees are literally
        represented in memory by Python.</p>
<p>The main point to take away from this look under the hood is
        that Python’s class model is extremely dynamic. <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e63617"></a>Classes and <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e63623"></a>instances are just namespace objects, with attributes
        created on the fly by assignment. Those assignments usually happen
        within the <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statements you
        code, but they can occur anywhere you have a reference to one of the
        objects in the tree.</p>
<p>Even <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e63635"></a>methods, normally created by a <code class="epub__literal">def</code> nested in a <code class="epub__literal">class</code>, can be created completely
        independently of any class object. The following, for example, defines
        a simple function outside of any class that takes one argument:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e63645"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def upperName(self):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return self.name.upper()</code></strong>    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Still needs a self</span></em></pre>
<p>There is nothing about a class here yet—it’s a simple function,
        and it can be called as such at this point, provided we pass in an
        object with a <code class="epub__literal">name</code> attribute (the
        name <code class="epub__literal">self</code> does not make this
        special in any way):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e63663"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>upperName(x)</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Call as a simple function</span></em>
'SUE'</pre>
<p>If we assign this simple function to an attribute of our class,
        though, it becomes a method, callable through any instance (as well as
        through the class name itself, as long as we pass in an instance
        manually):<sup>[61]</sup></p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e63688"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rec.method = upperName</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.method()</code></strong>                              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Run  method to process x</span></em>
'SUE'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y.method()</code></strong>                              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same, but pass y to self</span></em>
'BOB'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rec.method(x)</code></strong>                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Can call through instance or class</span></em>
'SUE'</pre>
<p>Normally, classes are filled out by <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statements, and instance attributes
        are created by assignments to <code class="epub__literal">self</code>
        attributes in method functions. The point again, though, is that they
        don’t have to be; OOP in Python really is mostly about looking up
        attributes in linked namespace objects.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Classes Versus Dictionaries"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="classes_versus_dictionaries"></a>Classes Versus Dictionaries</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Although <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e63725"></a>the <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e63731"></a>simple classes of the prior section are meant to
          illustrate class model basics, the techniques they employ can also
          be used for real work. For example, Chapter 8 showed how to use dictionaries
          to record properties of entities in our programs. It turns out that
          classes can serve this role, too—they package information like
          dictionaries, but can also bundle processing logic in the form of
          methods. For reference, here is the example for dictionary-based
          records we used earlier in the book:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e63739"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rec = {}</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rec['name'] = 'mel'</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Dictionary-based record</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rec['age']  = 45</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rec['job']  = 'trainer/writer'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(rec['name'])</code></strong>
mel</pre>
<p>This code emulates tools like records in other languages. As
          we just saw, though, there are also multiple ways to do the same
          with classes. Perhaps the simplest is this—trading keys for
          attributes:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e63762"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class rec: pass</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rec.name = 'mel'</code></strong>                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Class-based record</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rec.age  = 45</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rec.job  = 'trainer/writer'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(rec.age)</code></strong>
45</pre>
<p>This code has substantially less syntax than the dictionary
          equivalent. It uses an empty <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement to generate an empty
          namespace object. Once we make the empty class, we fill it out by
          assigning class attributes over time, as before.</p>
<p>This works, but a new <code class="epub__literal">class</code>
          statement will be required for each distinct record we will need.
          Perhaps more typically, we can instead generate
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>instances</em></span> of an empty class to represent each
          distinct entity:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e63796"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class rec: pass</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pers1 = rec()</code></strong>                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Instance-based records</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pers1.name = 'mel'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pers1.job  = 'trainer'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pers1.age   = 40</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pers2 = rec()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pers2.name = 'vls'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pers2.job  = 'developer'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pers1.name, pers2.name</code></strong>
('mel', 'vls')</pre>
<p>Here, we make two records from the same class. Instances start
          out life empty, just like classes. We then fill in the records by
          assigning to attributes. This time, though, there are two separate
          objects, and hence two separate <code class="epub__literal">name</code> attributes. In fact, instances of the
          same class don’t even have to have the same set of attribute names;
          in this example, one has a unique <code class="epub__literal">age</code> name. Instances really are distinct
          namespaces, so each has a distinct attribute dictionary. Although
          they are normally filled out consistently by class methods, they are
          more flexible than you might expect.</p>
<p>Finally, we might instead code a more full-blown class to
          implement the record and its processing:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e63839"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class Person:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __init__(self, name, job):</code></strong>      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Class = Data + Logic</span></em>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>self.name = name</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>self.job  = job</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def info(self):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return (self.name, self.job)</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rec1 = Person('mel', 'trainer')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rec2 = Person('vls', 'developer')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rec1.job, rec2.info()</code></strong>
('trainer', ('vls', 'developer'))</pre>
<p>This scheme also makes multiple instances, but the class is
          not empty this time: we’ve added <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>logic</em></span>
          (methods) to initialize instances at construction time and collect
          attributes into a tuple. The constructor imposes some consistency on
          instances here by always setting the <code class="epub__literal">name</code> and <code class="epub__literal">job</code> attributes. Together, the class’s
          methods and instance attributes create a
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>package</em></span>, which combines both data and
          logic.</p>
<p>We could further extend this code by adding logic to compute
          salaries, parse names, and so on. Ultimately, we might link the
          class into a larger hierarchy to inherit an existing set of methods
          via the automatic attribute search of classes, or perhaps even store
          instances of the class in a file with Python object pickling to make
          them persistent. In fact, we will—in the next chapter, we’ll expand
          on this analogy between classes and records with a more realistic
          running example that demonstrates class basics in action.</p>
<p>In the end, although types like dictionaries are flexible,
          classes allow us to add behavior to objects in ways that built-in
          types and simple functions do not directly support. Although we can
          store functions in dictionaries, too, using them to process implied
          instances is nowhere near as natural as it is in <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e63891"></a>classes.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Chapter Summary"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
