<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 27. A More Realistic Example</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 27. A More Realistic Example"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h1 class="epub__title"><a id="a_more_realistic_example"></a>Chapter 27. A More Realistic Example</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>We’ll dig into more class syntax details in the next chapter.
      Before we do, though, I’d like to show you a more realistic example of
      classes in action that’s more practical than what we’ve seen so far. In
      this chapter, we’re going to build a set of classes that do something
      more concrete—recording and processing information about people. As
      you’ll see, what we call <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e64029"></a>instances</em></span> and <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="ch27classescoding"></a>classes</em></span> in Python programming can often serve
      the same roles as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>records</em></span> and
      <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>programs</em></span> in more traditional terms.</p>
<p>Specifically, in this chapter we’re going to code two <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e64050"></a>classes:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">Person</code>—a class that creates
          and processes information about people</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">Manager</code>—a customization of
          Person that modifies inherited behavior</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Along the way, we’ll make instances of both classes and test out
      their functionality. When we’re done, I’ll show you a nice example use
      case for classes—we’ll store our instances in a
      <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>shelve</em></span> object-oriented database, to make them
      permanent. That way, you can use this code as a template for fleshing
      out a full-blown personal database written entirely in Python.</p>
<p>Besides actual utility, though, our aim here is also
      <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>educational</em></span>: this chapter provides a tutorial on
      object-oriented programming in Python. Often, people grasp the last
      chapter’s class syntax on paper, but have trouble seeing how to get
      started when confronted with having to code a new class from scratch.
      Toward this end, we’ll take it one step at a time here, to help you
      learn the basics; we’ll build up the classes gradually, so you can see
      how their features come together in complete programs.</p>
<p>In the end, our classes will still be relatively small in terms of
      code, but they will demonstrate <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>all</em></span> of the main
      ideas in Python’s OOP model. Despite its syntax details, Python’s class
      system really is largely just a matter of searching for an attribute in
      a tree of objects, along with a special first argument for
      functions.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Step 1: Making Instances"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
