<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Step 1: Making Instances</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="step_1_colon_making_instances"></a>Step 1: Making Instances</h1>
<p>OK, <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e64085"></a>so <a id="ch27instancesmakinginstances"></a>much <a id="ch27classescodingmakinginstances"></a>for the design phase—let’s move on to implementation.
        Our first task is to start coding the main class, <code class="epub__literal">Person</code>. In your favorite text editor, open a
        new file for the code we’ll be writing. It’s a fairly strong
        convention in Python to begin <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e64106"></a>module names with a lowercase letter and <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e64113"></a>class names with an uppercase letter; like the name of
        <code class="epub__literal">self</code> arguments in methods, this is
        not required by the language, but it’s so common that deviating might
        be confusing to people who later read your code. To conform, we’ll
        call our new module file <em class="epub__filename"><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e64123"></a>person.py</em> and our class within it <code class="epub__literal">Person</code>, like this:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e64131"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># File person.py (start)</span></em>

<span class="epub__strong"><strong>class Person:</strong></span>
</pre>
<p>All our work will be done in this file until later in this
        chapter. We can code any number of functions and classes in a single
        module file in Python, and this one’s <em class="epub__filename">person.py</em> name might not make much sense if
        we add unrelated components to it later. For now, we’ll assume
        everything in it will be <code class="epub__literal">Person</code>-related. It probably should be
        anyhow—as we’ve learned, modules tend to work best when they have a
        single, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>cohesive</em></span> purpose.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Coding Constructors"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="coding_constructors"></a>Coding Constructors</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Now, <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e64153"></a>the <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e64161"></a>first thing we want to do with our <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> class is record basic information
          about people—to fill out record fields, if you will. Of course,
          these are known as instance object <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e64171"></a>attributes</em></span> in Python-speak, and they
          generally are created by assignment to <code class="epub__literal">self</code> attributes in class method functions.
          <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e64180"></a>The normal way to give instance attributes their first
          values is to assign them to <code class="epub__literal">self</code>
          in the <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e64189"></a><code class="epub__literal">__init__</code>
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>constructor method</em></span>, which contains code run
          automatically by Python each time an instance is created. Let’s add
          one to our class:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e64198"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Add record field initialization</span></em>

class Person:
    <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __init__(self, name, job, pay):</code></strong>      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Constructor takes 3 arguments</span></em>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>self.name = name</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Fill out fields when created</span></em>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>self.job  = job</code></strong>                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># self is the new instance object</span></em>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>self.pay  = pay</code></strong></pre>
<p>This is a very common coding pattern: we pass in the data to
          be attached to an instance as arguments to the constructor method
          and assign them to <code class="epub__literal">self</code> to retain
          them permanently. In OO terms, <code class="epub__literal">self</code> is the newly created instance object,
          and <code class="epub__literal">name</code>, <code class="epub__literal">job</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">pay</code> become <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e64242"></a>state information</em></span>—descriptive data saved on
          an object for later use. Although other techniques (such as
          enclosing scope references) can save details, too, instance attributes make this very
          explicit and easy to understand.</p>
<p>Notice that the argument names appear
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>twice</em></span> here. This code might seem a bit
          redundant at first, but it’s not. The <code class="epub__literal">job</code> argument, for example, is a local
          variable in the scope of the <code class="epub__literal">__init__</code> function, but <code class="epub__literal">self.job</code> is an attribute of the instance
          that’s the implied subject of the method call. They are two
          different variables, which happen to have the same name. By
          assigning the <code class="epub__literal">job</code> local to the
          <code class="epub__literal">self.job</code> attribute with <code class="epub__literal">self.job=job</code>, we save the passed-in
          <code class="epub__literal">job</code> on the instance for later
          use. As usual in Python, where a name is assigned (or what object it
          is assigned to) determines what it means.</p>
<p>Speaking of arguments, there’s really nothing magical about
          <code class="epub__literal">__init__</code>, apart from the fact
          that it’s called automatically when an instance is made and has a
          special first argument. Despite its weird name, it’s a normal
          function and supports all the features of functions we’ve already
          covered. We can, for example, provide <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>defaults</em></span>
          for some of its arguments, so they need not be provided in cases
          where their values aren’t available or useful.</p>
<p>To demonstrate, let’s make the <code class="epub__literal">job</code> argument optional—it will default to
          <code class="epub__literal">None</code>, meaning the person being
          created is not (currently) employed. If <code class="epub__literal">job</code> defaults to <code class="epub__literal">None</code>, we’ll probably want to default
          <code class="epub__literal">pay</code> to <code class="epub__literal">0</code>, too, for consistency (unless some of
          the people you know manage to get paid without having jobs!). In
          fact, we have to specify a default for <code class="epub__literal">pay</code> because according to Python’s syntax
          rules, any arguments in a function’s header after the first default
          must all have defaults, too:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e64309"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Add defaults for constructor arguments</span></em>

class Person:
    <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __init__(self, name, job=None, pay=0):</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Normal function args</span></em>
        self.name = name
        self.job  = job
        self.pay  = pay</pre>
<p>What this code means is that we’ll need to pass in a name when
          making <code class="epub__literal">Person</code>s, but <code class="epub__literal">job</code> and <code class="epub__literal">pay</code> are now optional; they’ll default to
          <code class="epub__literal">None</code> and <code class="epub__literal">0</code> if omitted. The <code class="epub__literal">self</code> argument, as usual, is filled in by
          Python automatically to refer to the instance object—assigning
          values to attributes of <code class="epub__literal">self</code>
          attaches them to the new instance.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Testing As You Go"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="testing_as_you_go"></a>Testing As You Go</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>This <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e64348"></a>class doesn’t do much yet—it essentially <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e64354"></a>just fills out the fields of a new record—but it’s a
          real working class. <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e64362"></a>At this point we could add more code to it for more
          features, but we won’t do that yet. As you’ve probably begun to
          appreciate already, programming in Python is really a matter of
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e64367"></a>incremental prototyping</em></span>—you write some
          code, test it, write more code, test again, and so on. Because
          Python provides both an interactive session and nearly immediate
          turnaround after code changes, it’s more natural to test as you go
          than to write a huge amount of code to test all at once.</p>
<p>Before adding more features, then, let’s test what we’ve got
          so far by making a few instances of our class and displaying their
          attributes as created by the constructor. We could do this
          interactively, but as you’ve also probably surmised by now,
          interactive testing has its limits—it gets tedious to have to
          reimport modules and retype test cases each time you start a new
          testing session. More commonly, Python programmers use the
          interactive prompt for simple one-off tests but do more substantial
          testing by writing code at the bottom of the file that contains the
          objects to be tested, like this:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e64374"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Add incremental self-test code</span></em>

class Person:
    def __init__(self, name, job=None, pay=0):
        self.name = name
        self.job  = job
        self.pay  = pay

<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bob = Person('Bob Smith')</code></strong>                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Test the class</span></em>
<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sue = Person('Sue Jones', job='dev', pay=100000)</code></strong>  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs __init__ automatically</span></em>
<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(bob.name, bob.pay)</code></strong>                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Fetch attached attributes</span></em>
<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(sue.name, sue.pay)</code></strong>                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># sue's and bob's attrs differ</span></em></pre>
<p>Notice here that the <code class="epub__literal">bob</code>
          object accepts the defaults for <code class="epub__literal">job</code> and <code class="epub__literal">pay</code>, but <code class="epub__literal">sue</code> provides values explicitly. Also note
          how we use <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e64417"></a>keyword arguments</em></span> when making <code class="epub__literal">sue</code>; we could pass by position instead,
          but the keywords may help remind us later what the data is (and they
          allow us to pass the arguments in any left-to-right order we like).
          Again, despite its unusual name, <code class="epub__literal">__init__</code> is a normal function, supporting
          everything you already know about functions—including both defaults
          and pass-by-name keyword arguments.</p>
<p>When this file runs as a script, the test code at the bottom
          makes two instances of our class and prints two attributes of each
          (<code class="epub__literal">name</code> and <code class="epub__literal">pay</code>):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e64437"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>person.py</code></strong>
Bob Smith 0
Sue Jones 100000</pre>
<p>You can also type this file’s test code at Python’s
          interactive prompt (assuming you import the <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> class there first), but coding
          canned tests inside the module file like this makes it much easier
          to rerun them in the future.</p>
<p>Although this is fairly simple code, it’s already
          demonstrating something important. Notice that <code class="epub__literal">bob</code>’s <code class="epub__literal">name</code> is not <code class="epub__literal">sue</code>’s, and <code class="epub__literal">sue</code>’s <code class="epub__literal">pay</code> is not <code class="epub__literal">bob</code>’s. Each is an independent record of
          information. Technically, <code class="epub__literal">bob</code> and
          <code class="epub__literal">sue</code> are both <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e64475"></a>namespace objects</em></span>—like all class instances,
          they each have their own independent copy of the state information
          created by the class. Because each instance of a class has its own
          set of <code class="epub__literal">self</code> attributes, classes
          are a natural for recording information for multiple objects this
          way; just like built-in types, classes serve as a sort of
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>object factory</em></span>. Other Python program
          structures, such as functions and modules, have no such
          concept.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Using Code Two Ways"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="using_code_two_ways"></a>Using Code Two Ways</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As is, <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e64491"></a>the test code at the bottom of the file works, but
          there’s a big catch—its top-level <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statements run both when the file is
          run as a script and when it is imported as a module. This means if
          we ever decide to import the class in this file in order to use it
          somewhere else (and we will later in this chapter), we’ll see the
          output of its test code every time the file is imported. That’s not
          very good software citizenship, though: client programs probably
          don’t care about our internal tests and won’t want to see our output
          mixed in with their own.</p>
<p>Although we could split the test code off into a separate
          file, it’s often more convenient to code tests in the same file as
          the items to be tested. It would be better to arrange to run the
          test statements at the bottom <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>only</em></span> when the
          file is run for testing, not when the file is imported. That’s
          exactly what the module <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e64507"></a><code class="epub__literal">__name__</code> check is
          designed for, as you learned in the preceding part of this book.
          Here’s what this addition looks like:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e64513"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Allow this file to be imported as well as run/tested</span></em>

class Person:
    def __init__(self, name, job=None, pay=0):
        self.name = name
        self.job  = job
        self.pay  = pay

<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if __name__ == '__main__':</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># When run for testing only</span></em>
    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># self-test code</span></em>
    bob = Person('Bob Smith')
    sue = Person('Sue Jones', job='dev', pay=100000)
    print(bob.name, bob.pay)
    print(sue.name, sue.pay)</pre>
<p>Now, we get exactly the behavior we’re after—running the file
          as a top-level script tests it because its <code class="epub__literal">__name__</code> is <code class="epub__literal">__main__</code>, but importing it as a library of
          classes later does not:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e64534"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>person.py</code></strong>
Bob Smith 0
Sue Jones 100000

c:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
Python 3.0.1 (r301:69561, Feb 13 2009, 20:04:18) ...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import person</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt;</pre>
<p>When imported, the file now defines the class, but does not
          use it. When run directly, this file creates two instances of our
          class as before, and prints two attributes of each; again, because
          each instance is an independent namespace object, the values of
          their attributes differ.</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="I_sidebar3_d1e64547"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Version Portability Note</p>
<p>I’m running all the <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e64552"></a>code in this chapter under Python 3.0, and using the
            3.0 <code class="epub__literal">print</code> function call syntax.
            If you run under 2.6 the code will work as-is, but you’ll notice
            parentheses around some output lines because the extra parentheses
            in <code class="epub__literal">print</code>s turn multiple items
            into a tuple:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e64564"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">c:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python26\python person.py</code></strong>
('Bob Smith', 0)
('Sue Jones', 100000)</pre>
<p>If this difference is the sort of detail that might keep you
            awake at nights, simply remove the parentheses to use 2.6 <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statements. You can also avoid the
            extra parentheses portably by using formatting to yield a single
            object to print. Either of the following works in both 2.6 and
            3.0, though the method form is <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e64574"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e64576"></a>newer:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e64579"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">print('{0} {1}'.format(bob.name, bob.pay))    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># New format method</span></em>
print('%s %s' % (bob.name, bob.pay))          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Format expression</span></em></pre>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Step 2: Adding Behavior Methods"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
