<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Step 2: Adding Behavior Methods</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="step_2_colon_adding_behavior_methods"></a>Step 2: Adding Behavior Methods</h1>
<p>Everything <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e64591"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e64598"></a>looks good so far—at this point, our class is
        essentially a record <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>factory</em></span>; it creates and
        fills out fields of records (attributes of instances, in more Pythonic
        terms). Even as limited as it is, though, we can still run some
        operations on its objects. Although classes add an extra layer of
        structure, they ultimately do most of their work by embedding and
        processing basic <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e64606"></a>core data types</em></span> like lists and strings. In
        other words, if you already know how to use Python’s simple core
        types, you already know much of the Python class story; classes are
        really just a minor structural extension.</p>
<p>For example, the <code class="epub__literal">name</code> field
        of our objects is a simple string, so we can extract last names from
        our objects by splitting on spaces and indexing. These are all core
        data type operations, which work whether their subjects are embedded
        in class instances or not:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e64616"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>name = 'Bob Smith'</code></strong>      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Simple string, outside class</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>name.split()</code></strong>            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Extract last name</span></em>
['Bob', 'Smith']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>name.split()[-1]</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Or [1], if always just two parts</span></em>
'Smith'</pre>
<p>Similarly, we can give an object a pay raise by updating its
        <code class="epub__literal">pay</code> field—that is, by changing its
        state information in-place with an assignment. This task also involves
        basic operations that work on Python’s core objects, regardless of
        whether they are standalone or embedded in a class structure:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e64642"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pay = 100000</code></strong>            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Simple variable, outside class</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pay *= 1.10</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Give a 10% raise</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(pay)</code></strong>              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Or: pay = pay * 1.10, if you like to type</span></em>
110000.0                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Or: pay = pay + (pay * .10), if you _really_ do!</span></em></pre>
<p>To apply these operations to the <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> objects created by our script, simply
        do to <code class="epub__literal">bob.name</code> and <code class="epub__literal">sue.pay</code> what we just did to <code class="epub__literal">name</code> and <code class="epub__literal">pay</code>. The operations are the same, but the
        subject objects are attached to attributes in our class
        structure:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e64682"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Process embedded built-in types: strings, mutability</span></em>

class Person:
    def __init__(self, name, job=None, pay=0):
        self.name = name
        self.job  = job
        self.pay  = pay

if __name__ == '__main__':
    bob = Person('Bob Smith')
    sue = Person('Sue Jones', job='dev', pay=100000)
    print(bob.name, bob.pay)
    print(sue.name, sue.pay)
    <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(bob.name.split()[-1])</code></strong>            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Extract object's last name</span></em>
    <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sue.pay *= 1.10</code></strong>                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Give this object a raise</span></em>
    <span class="epub__strong"><strong>print(sue.pay)</strong></span>
</pre>
<p>We’ve added the last three lines here; when they’re run, we
        extract <code class="epub__literal">bob</code>’s last name by using
        basic string and list operations and give <code class="epub__literal">sue</code> a pay raise by modifying her <code class="epub__literal">pay</code> attribute in-place with basic number
        operations. In a sense, <code class="epub__literal">sue</code> is also
        a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e64715"></a>mutable</em></span> object—her state changes in-place just
        like a list after an <code class="epub__literal">append</code>
        call:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e64727"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">Bob Smith 0
Sue Jones 100000
Smith
110000.0</pre>
<p>The preceding code works as planned, but if you show it to a
        veteran software developer he’ll probably tell you that its general
        approach is not a great idea in practice. Hardcoding operations like
        these <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>outside</em></span> of the class can lead to
        maintenance problems in the future.</p>
<p>For example, what if you’ve hardcoded the last-name-extraction
        formula at many different places in your program? If you ever need to
        change the way it works (to support a new name structure, for
        instance), you’ll need to hunt down and update
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>every</em></span> occurrence. Similarly, if the pay-raise
        code ever changes (e.g., to require approval or database updates), you may have multiple
        copies to modify. Just finding all the appearances of such code may be
        problematic in larger programs—they may be scattered across many
        files, split into individual steps, and so on.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Coding Methods"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="coding_methods"></a>Coding Methods</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>What <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e64748"></a>we <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e64754"></a>really want to do here is employ a software design
          concept known as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e64763"></a>encapsulation</em></span>. The idea with encapsulation
          is to wrap up operation logic behind interfaces, such that each
          operation is coded only once in our program. That way, if our needs
          change in the future, there is just one copy to update. Moreover,
          we’re free to change the single copy’s internals almost arbitrarily,
          without breaking the code that uses it.</p>
<p>In Python terms, we want to code operations on objects in
          class <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>methods</em></span>, instead of littering them
          throughout our program. In fact, this is one of the things that
          classes are very good at—<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e64773"></a><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>factoring</em></span> code to remove
          redundancy and thus optimize maintainability. As an added bonus,
          turning operations into methods enables them to be applied to any
          instance of the class, not just those that they’ve been hardcoded to
          process.</p>
<p>This is all simpler in code than it may sound in theory. The
          following achieves encapsulation by moving the two operations from
          code outside the class into class methods. While we’re at it, let’s
          change our self-test code at the bottom to use the new methods we’re
          creating, instead of hardcoding operations:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e64781"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Add methods to encapsulate operations for maintainability</span></em>

class Person:
    def __init__(self, name, job=None, pay=0):
        self.name = name
        self.job  = job
        self.pay  = pay
    <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def lastName(self):</code></strong>                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Behavior methods</span></em>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return self.name.split()[-1]</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># self is implied subject</span></em>
    <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def giveRaise(self, percent):</code></strong>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>self.pay = int(self.pay * (1 + percent))</code></strong>      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Must change here only</span></em>

if __name__ == '__main__':
    bob = Person('Bob Smith')
    sue = Person('Sue Jones', job='dev', pay=100000)
    print(bob.name, bob.pay)
    print(sue.name, sue.pay)
    <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(bob.lastName(), sue.lastName())</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Use the new methods</span></em>
    <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sue.giveRaise(.10)</code></strong>                                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># instead of hardcoding</span></em>
    <span class="epub__strong"><strong>print(sue.pay)</strong></span>
</pre>
<p>As we’ve learned, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e64825"></a>methods</em></span> are simply normal functions that
          are attached to classes and designed to process instances of those
          classes. The instance is the subject of the method call and is
          passed to the method’s <code class="epub__literal">self</code>
          argument automatically.</p>
<p>The transformation to the methods in this version is
          straightforward. The new <code class="epub__literal">lastName</code> method, for example, simply
          does to <code class="epub__literal">self</code> what the previous
          version hardcoded for <code class="epub__literal">bob</code>,
          because <code class="epub__literal">self</code> is the implied
          subject when the method is called. <code class="epub__literal">lastName</code> also returns the result, because
          this operation is a called function now; it computes a value for its
          caller to use, even if it is just to be printed. Similarly, the new
          <code class="epub__literal">giveRaise</code> method just does to
          <code class="epub__literal">self</code> what we did to <code class="epub__literal">sue</code> before.</p>
<p>When run now, our file’s output is similar to before—we’ve
          mostly just <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>refactored</em></span> the code to allow for
          easier changes in the future, not altered its behavior:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e64865"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">Bob Smith 0
Sue Jones 100000
Smith Jones
110000</pre>
<p>A few coding details are worth pointing out here. First,
          notice that <code class="epub__literal">sue</code>’s pay is now
          still an <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>integer</em></span> after a pay raise—we convert
          the math result back to an integer by calling the <code class="epub__literal">int</code> built-in within the method. Changing
          the value to either <code class="epub__literal">int</code> or
          <code class="epub__literal">float</code> is probably not a
          significant concern for most purposes (integer and floating-point
          objects have the same interfaces and can be mixed within
          expressions), but we may need to address rounding issues in a real
          system (money probably matters to <code class="epub__literal">Person</code>s!).</p>
<p>As we learned in Chapter 5, we might
          handle this by using the <code class="epub__literal">round(N,
          2)</code> built-in to round and retain cents, using the <code class="epub__literal">decimal</code> type to fix precision, or storing
          monetary values as full floating-point numbers and displaying them
          with a <code class="epub__literal">%.2f</code> or <code class="epub__literal">{0:.2f}</code> formatting string to show cents.
          For this example, we’ll simply truncate any cents with <code class="epub__literal">int</code>. (For another idea, also see the
          <code class="epub__literal">money</code> function in the <em class="epub__filename">formats.py</em> module of Chapter 24; you can import this tool to
          show pay with commas, cents, and dollar signs.)</p>
<p>Second, notice that we’re also printing <code class="epub__literal">sue</code>’s last name this time—because the
          last-name logic has been encapsulated in a method, we get to use it
          on <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>any instance</em></span> of the class. As we’ve seen,
          Python tells a method which instance to process by automatically
          passing it in to the first argument, usually called <code class="epub__literal">self</code>. Specifically:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In the first call, <code class="epub__literal">bob.lastName()</code>, <code class="epub__literal">bob</code> is the implied subject passed to
              <code class="epub__literal">self</code>.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In the second call, <code class="epub__literal">sue.lastName()</code>, <code class="epub__literal">sue</code> goes to <code class="epub__literal">self</code> instead.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Trace through these calls to see how the instance winds up in
          <code class="epub__literal">self</code>. The net effect is that the
          method fetches the name of the implied subject each time. The same
          happens for <code class="epub__literal">giveRaise</code>. We could,
          for example, give <code class="epub__literal">bob</code> a raise by
          calling <code class="epub__literal">giveRaise</code> for both
          instances this way, too; but unfortunately, <code class="epub__literal">bob</code>’s zero pay will prevent him from
          getting a raise as the program is currently coded (something we may
          want to address in a future 2.0 release of our software).</p>
<p>Finally, notice that the <code class="epub__literal">giveRaise</code> method assumes that <code class="epub__literal">percent</code> is passed in as a floating-point
          number between zero and one. That may be too radical an assumption
          in the real world (a 1000% raise would probably be a bug for most of
          us!); we’ll let it pass for this prototype, but we might want to
          test or at least document this in a future iteration of this code.
          Stay tuned for a rehash of this idea in a later chapter in this
          book, where we’ll code something called <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>function
          decorators</em></span> and explore Python’s <code class="epub__literal">assert</code> statement—alternatives that can do
          the validity test for us automatically during development.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Step 3: Operator Overloading"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
