<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Step 3: Operator Overloading</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="step_3_colon_operator_overloading"></a>Step 3: Operator Overloading</h1>
<p>At this <a id="ch27classescodingoperatoroverloading"></a>point, <a id="ch27operatoroverloading"></a>we have a fairly full-featured class that generates and
        initializes instances, along with two new bits of behavior for
        processing instances (in the form of methods). So far, so good.</p>
<p>As it stands, though, testing is still a bit less convenient
        than it needs to be—to trace our objects, we have to manually fetch
        and print <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>individual attributes</em></span> (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">bob.name</code>, <code class="epub__literal">sue.pay</code>). It would be nice if displaying an
        instance all at once actually gave us some useful information.
        Unfortunately, the default display format for an instance object isn’t
        very good—it displays the object’s class name, and its address in
        memory (which is essentially useless in Python, except as a unique
        identifier).</p>
<p>To see this, change the last line in the script to <code class="epub__literal">print(sue)</code> so it displays the object as a
        whole. Here’s what you’ll get (the output says that <code class="epub__literal">sue</code> is an “object” in 3.0 and an “instance”
        in 2.6):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e65020"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">Bob Smith 0
Sue Jones 100000
Smith Jones
&lt;__main__.Person object at 0x02614430&gt;</pre>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Providing Print Displays"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="providing_print_displays"></a>Providing Print Displays</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Fortunately, it’s easy to do better by employing
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e65028"></a>operator overloading</em></span>—coding methods in a
          class that intercept and process built-in operations when run on the
          class’s instances.
          Specifically, we can make use of what is probably the second most
          commonly used operator overloading method in Python, after <code class="epub__literal">__init__</code>: the <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e65039"></a><code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> method
          introduced in the preceding chapter. <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> is run automatically every time an
          instance is converted to its print string. Because that’s what
          printing an object does, the net transitive effect is that printing
          an object displays whatever is returned by the object’s <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> method, if it either defines one
          itself or inherits one from a superclass (double-underscored names
          are inherited just like any other).</p>
<p>Technically speaking, the <code class="epub__literal">__init__</code> constructor method we’ve already
          coded is operator overloading too—it is run automatically at
          construction time to initialize a newly created instance.
          Constructors are so common, though, that they almost seem like a
          special case. More focused methods like <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> allow us to tap into specific
          operations and provide <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>specialized behavior</em></span>
          when our objects are used in those contexts.</p>
<p>Let’s put this into code. The following extends our class to
          give a custom display that lists attributes when our class’s
          instances are displayed as a whole, instead of relying on the less
          useful default display:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e65067"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Add __str__ overload method for printing objects</span></em>

class Person:
    def __init__(self, name, job=None, pay=0):
        self.name = name
        self.job  = job
        self.pay  = pay
    def lastName(self):
        return self.name.split()[-1]
    def giveRaise(self, percent):
        self.pay = int(self.pay * (1 + percent))
    <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __str__(self):</code></strong>                                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Added method</span></em>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return '[Person: %s, %s]' % (self.name, self.pay)</code></strong>      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># String to print</span></em>

if __name__ == '__main__':
    bob = Person('Bob Smith')
    sue = Person('Sue Jones', job='dev', pay=100000)
    <span class="epub__strong"><strong>print(bob)</strong></span>
    <span class="epub__strong"><strong>print(sue)</strong></span>
    print(bob.lastName(), sue.lastName())
    sue.giveRaise(.10)
    <span class="epub__strong"><strong>print(sue)</strong></span>
</pre>
<p>Notice that we’re doing string <code class="epub__literal">%</code> formatting to build the display string
          in <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> here; at the bottom,
          classes use built-in type objects and operations like these to get
          their work done. Again, everything you’ve already learned about both
          built-in types and functions applies to class-based code. Classes
          largely just add an additional layer of
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>structure</em></span> that packages functions and data
          together and supports extensions.</p>
<p>We’ve also changed our self-test code to print objects
          directly, instead of printing individual attributes. When run, the
          output is more coherent and meaningful now; the “[...]” lines are
          returned by our new <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code>, run
          automatically by print operations:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e65108"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">[Person: Bob Smith, 0]
[Person: Sue Jones, 100000]
Smith Jones
[Person: Sue Jones, 110000]</pre>
<p>Here’s a subtle point: as we’ll learn in the next chapter, a
          related overloading method, <code class="epub__literal">__repr__</code>, provides an as-code low-level
          display of an object when present. Sometimes classes provide both a
          <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> for user-friendly
          displays and a <code class="epub__literal">__repr__</code> with
          extra details for developers to view. Because printing runs <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> and the interactive prompt echoes
          results with <code class="epub__literal">__repr__</code>, this can
          provide both target audiences with an appropriate display. Since
          we’re not interested in displaying an as-code format, <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> is sufficient for our <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e65131"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e65133"></a>class.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Step 4: Customizing Behavior by Subclassing"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
