<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Step 4: Customizing Behavior by Subclassing</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="step_4_colon_customizing_behavior_by_su"></a>Step 4: Customizing Behavior by Subclassing</h1>
<p>At this <a id="ch27classescodingsubclassing"></a>point, <a id="ch27subclasses"></a>our class captures much of the OOP machinery in Python:
        it makes instances, provides behavior in methods, and even does a bit
        of operator overloading now to intercept print operations in <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code>. It effectively packages our data
        and logic together into a single, self-contained <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e65157"></a>software component</em></span>, making it easy to locate
        code and straightforward to change it in the future. By allowing us to
        encapsulate behavior, it also allows us to factor that code to avoid
        redundancy and its associated maintenance headaches.</p>
<p>The only major OOP concept it does not yet capture is
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>customization by inheritance</em></span>. In some sense,
        we’re already doing inheritance, because instances inherit methods
        from their classes. To demonstrate the real power of OOP, though, we
        need to define a superclass/subclass relationship that allows us to
        extend our software and replace bits of inherited behavior. That’s the
        main idea behind OOP, after all; by fostering a coding model based
        upon customization of work already done, it can dramatically cut
        development time.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Coding Subclasses"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="coding_subclasses"></a>Coding Subclasses</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As a <a id="ch27subclassescoding"></a>next step, then, let’s put OOP’s methodology to use
          and customize our <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e65179"></a>Person</code> class by extending our software
          hierarchy. For the purpose of this tutorial, we’ll define a subclass
          of <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> called <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> that replaces the inherited
          <code class="epub__literal">giveRaise</code> method with a more
          specialized version. Our new class begins as follows:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e65195"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Manager(Person):                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Define a subclass of Person</span></em></pre>
<p>This code means that we’re defining a new class named <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e65202"></a>Manager</code>, which inherits from and may add
          customizations to the superclass <code class="epub__literal">Person</code>. In plain terms, a <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> is almost like a <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> (admittedly, a very long journey
          for a very small joke...), but <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> has a custom way to give
          raises.</p>
<p>For the sake of argument, let’s assume that when a <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> gets a raise, it receives the
          passed-in percentage as usual, but also gets an extra bonus that
          defaults to 10%. For instance, if a <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code>’s raise is specified as 10%, it
          will really get 20%. (Any relation to <code class="epub__literal">Person</code>s living or dead is, of course,
          strictly coincidental.) Our new method begins as follows; because
          this redefinition of <code class="epub__literal">giveRaise</code>
          will be closer in the class tree to <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> instances than the
          original version in <code class="epub__literal">Person</code>, it
          effectively replaces, and thereby customizes, the operation. Recall
          that according to the inheritance search rules, the
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>lowest</em></span> version of the name wins:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e65244"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Manager(Person):                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Inherit Person attrs</span></em>
    def giveRaise(self, percent, bonus=.10):    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Redefine to customize</span></em></pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Augmenting Methods: The Bad Way"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="augmenting_methods_colon_the_bad_way"></a>Augmenting Methods: The Bad Way</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Now, <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e65256"></a>there <a id="ch27subclassescodingaugmentingmethods"></a>are two ways we might code this <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> customization: a good way and a
          bad way. Let’s start with the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>bad way</em></span>, since it
          might be a bit easier to understand. The bad way is to cut and paste
          the code of <code class="epub__literal">giveRaise</code> in <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> and modify it for <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code>, like this:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e65286"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Manager(Person):
    def giveRaise(self, percent, bonus=.10):
        self.pay = int(self.pay * (1 + percent + bonus))   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Bad: cut-and-paste</span></em></pre>
<p>This works as advertised—when we later call the <code class="epub__literal">giveRaise</code> method of a <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> instance, it will run this custom
          version, which tacks on the extra bonus. So what’s wrong with
          something that runs correctly?</p>
<p>The problem here is a very general one: any time you copy code
          with cut and paste, you essentially <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>double</em></span> your
          maintenance effort in the future. Think about it: because we copied
          the original version, if we ever have to change the way raises are
          given (and we probably will), we’ll have to change the code in
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>two</em></span> places, not one. Although this is a small
          and artificial example, it’s also representative of a universal
          issue—any time you’re tempted to program by copying code this way,
          you probably want to look for a better approach.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Augmenting Methods: The Good Way"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="augmenting_methods_colon_the_good_way"></a>Augmenting Methods: The Good Way</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>What we really want to do here is somehow
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>augment</em></span> the original <code class="epub__literal">giveRaise</code>, instead of replacing it
          altogether. The <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>good way</em></span> to do that in Python
          is by calling to the original version directly, with augmented
          arguments, like this:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e65320"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Manager(Person):
    def giveRaise(self, percent, bonus=.10):
        Person.giveRaise(self, percent + bonus)            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Good: augment original</span></em></pre>
<p>This code leverages the fact that a class method can always be
          called either through an <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>instance</em></span> (the usual
          way, where Python sends the instance to the <code class="epub__literal">self</code> argument automatically) or through
          the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>class</em></span> (the less common scheme, where you
          must pass the instance manually). In more symbolic terms, recall
          that a normal method call of this form:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e65335"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>instance</code></em>.<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>method</code></em>(<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>args...</code></em>)</pre>
<p>is automatically translated by Python into this equivalent
          form:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e65347"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>class</code></em>.<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>method</code></em>(<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>instance</code></em>, <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>args...</code></em>)</pre>
<p>where the class containing the method to be run is determined
          by the inheritance search rule applied to the method’s name. You can
          code <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>either</em></span> form in your script, but there is a
          slight asymmetry between the two—you must remember to pass along the
          instance manually if you call through the class directly. The method
          always needs a subject instance one way or another, and Python
          provides it automatically only for calls made through an instance.
          For calls through the class name, you need to send an instance to
          <code class="epub__literal">self</code> yourself; for code inside a
          method like <code class="epub__literal">giveRaise</code>, <code class="epub__literal">self</code> already <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>is</em></span> the
          subject of the call, and hence the instance to pass along.</p>
<p>Calling through the class directly effectively subverts
          inheritance and kicks the call higher up the class tree to run a
          specific version. In our case, we can use this technique to invoke
          the default <code class="epub__literal">giveRaise</code> in <code class="epub__literal">Person</code>, even though it’s been redefined at
          the <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> level. In some sense, we
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>must</em></span> call through <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> this way, because a <code class="epub__literal">self.give</code><code class="epub__literal">Raise()</code> inside <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code>’s <code class="epub__literal">giveRaise</code> code would loop—since <code class="epub__literal">self</code> already is a <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code>, <code class="epub__literal">self.giveRaise()</code> would resolve again to
          <code class="epub__literal">Manager.giveRaise</code>, and so on and
          so forth until available memory is exhausted.</p>
<p>This “good” version may seem like a small difference in code,
          but it can make a huge difference for future <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>code
          maintenance</em></span>—because the <code class="epub__literal">giveRaise</code> logic lives in just one place
          now (<code class="epub__literal">Person</code>’s method), we have
          only one version to change in the future as needs evolve. And
          really, this form captures our intent more directly anyhow—we want
          to perform the standard <code class="epub__literal">giveRaise</code>
          operation, but simply tack on an extra bonus. Here’s our entire
          module file with this step applied:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e65435"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Add customization of one behavior in a subclass</span></em>

class Person:
    def __init__(self, name, job=None, pay=0):
        self.name = name
        self.job  = job
        self.pay  = pay
    def lastName(self):
        return self.name.split()[-1]
    def giveRaise(self, percent):
        self.pay = int(self.pay * (1 + percent))
    def __str__(self):
        return '[Person: %s, %s]' % (self.name, self.pay)

<span class="epub__strong"><strong>class Manager(Person):</strong></span>
    <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def giveRaise(self, percent, bonus=.10):</code></strong>           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Redefine at this level</span></em>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Person.giveRaise(self, percent + bonus)</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Call Person's version</span></em>

if __name__ == '__main__':
    bob = Person('Bob Smith')
    sue = Person('Sue Jones', job='dev', pay=100000)
    print(bob)
    print(sue)
    print(bob.lastName(), sue.lastName())
    sue.giveRaise(.10)
    print(sue)
    <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>tom = Manager('Tom Jones', 'mgr', 50000)</code></strong>           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Make a Manager: __init__</span></em>
    <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>tom.giveRaise(.10)</code></strong>                                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs custom version</span></em>
    <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(tom.lastName())</code></strong>                              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs inherited method</span></em>
    <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(tom)</code></strong>                                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs inherited __str__</span></em></pre>
<p>To test our <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code>
          subclass customization, we’ve also added self-test code that makes a
          <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code>, calls its methods, and
          prints it. Here’s the new version’s output:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e65488"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">[Person: Bob Smith, 0]
[Person: Sue Jones, 100000]
Smith Jones
[Person: Sue Jones, 110000]
Jones
[Person: Tom Jones, 60000]</pre>
<p>Everything looks good here: <code class="epub__literal">bob</code> and <code class="epub__literal">sue</code> are as before, and when <code class="epub__literal">tom</code> the <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> is given a 10% raise, he really
          gets 20% (his pay goes from $50K to $60K), because the customized
          <code class="epub__literal">giveRaise</code> in <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> is run for him only. Also notice
          how printing <code class="epub__literal">tom</code> as a whole at
          the end of the test code displays the nice format defined in
          <code class="epub__literal">Person</code>’s <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code>: <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> objects get this, <code class="epub__literal">lastName</code>, and the <code class="epub__literal">__init__</code> constructor method’s code “for
          free” from <code class="epub__literal">Person</code>, <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e65533"></a>by inheritance.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Polymorphism in Action"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="polymorphism_in_action"></a>Polymorphism in Action</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e65541"></a>make <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e65549"></a>this acquisition of inherited behavior even more
          striking, we can add the following code at the end of our
          file:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e65555"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">if __name__ == '__main__':
    ...
    <span class="epub__strong"><strong>print('--All three--')</strong></span>
    <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for object in (bob, sue, tom):</code></strong>            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Process objects generically</span></em>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>object.giveRaise(.10)</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Run this object's giveRaise</span></em>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(object)</code></strong>                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Run the common __str__</span></em></pre>
<p>Here’s the resulting output:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e65580"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">[Person: Bob Smith, 0]
[Person: Sue Jones, 100000]
Smith Jones
[Person: Sue Jones, 110000]
Jones
[Person: Tom Jones, 60000]
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>--All three--</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[Person: Bob Smith, 0]</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[Person: Sue Jones, 121000]</strong></span>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>[Person: Tom Jones, 72000]</strong></span>
</pre>
<p>In the added code, <code class="epub__literal">object</code>
          is <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>either</em></span> a <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> or a <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code>, and Python runs the appropriate
          <code class="epub__literal">giveRaise</code> automatically—our
          original version in <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> for
          <code class="epub__literal">bob</code> and <code class="epub__literal">sue</code>, and our customized version in
          <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> for <code class="epub__literal">tom</code>. Trace the method calls yourself to
          see how Python selects the right <code class="epub__literal">giveRaise</code> method for each object.</p>
<p>This is just Python’s notion of
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>polymorphism</em></span>, which we met earlier in the book,
          at work again—what <code class="epub__literal">giveRaise</code> does
          depends on what you do it to. Here, it’s made all the more obvious
          when it selects from code we’ve written ourselves in classes. The
          practical effect in this code is that <code class="epub__literal">sue</code> gets another 10% but <code class="epub__literal">tom</code> gets another 20%, because <code class="epub__literal">give</code><code class="epub__literal">Raise</code> is dispatched based upon
          the object’s type. As we’ve learned, polymorphism is at the heart of
          Python’s flexibility. Passing any of our three objects to a function
          that calls a <code class="epub__literal">giveRaise</code> method,
          for example, would have the same effect: the appropriate version
          would be run automatically, depending on which type of object was
          passed.</p>
<p>On the other hand, printing runs the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>same</em></span>
<code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> for all three objects,
          because it’s coded just once in <code class="epub__literal">Person</code>. <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> both specializes and applies the
          code we originally wrote in <code class="epub__literal">Person</code>. Although this example is small,
          it’s already leveraging OOP’s talent for code customization and
          reuse; with classes, this almost seems automatic at times.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Inherit, Customize, and Extend"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="inherit_comma_customize_comma_and_exten"></a>Inherit, Customize, and Extend</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In fact, <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e65675"></a>classes can be even more flexible than our example
          implies. In general, classes can <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>inherit</em></span>,
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>customize</em></span>, or <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>extend</em></span>
          existing code in superclasses. For example, although we’re focused
          on customization here, we can also add unique methods to <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> that are not present in <code class="epub__literal">Person</code>, if <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code>s require something completely
          different (Python namesake reference intended). The following
          snippet illustrates. Here, <code class="epub__literal">giveRaise</code> redefines a superclass method to
          customize it, but <code class="epub__literal">someThingElse</code>
          defines something new to extend:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e65708"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Person:
    def lastName(self): ...
    def giveRaise(self): ...
    def __str__(self): ...

class Manager(Person):                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Inherit</span></em>
    def giveRaise(self, ...): ...             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Customize</span></em>
    def someThingElse(self, ...): ...         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Extend</span></em>

tom = Manager()
tom.lastName()                                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Inherited verbatim</span></em>
tom.giveRaise()                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Customized version</span></em>
tom.someThingElse()                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Extension here</span></em>
print(tom)                                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Inherited overload method</span></em></pre>
<p>Extra methods like this code’s <code class="epub__literal">someThingElse</code> <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>extend</em></span>
          the existing software and are available on <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> objects only, not on <code class="epub__literal">Person</code>s. For the purposes of this
          tutorial, however, we’ll limit our scope to customizing some of
          <code class="epub__literal">Person</code>’s behavior by redefining
          it, not adding to it.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="OOP: The Big Idea"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="oop_colon_the_big_idea"></a>OOP: The Big Idea</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As is, <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e65753"></a>our code may be small, but it’s fairly functional. And
          really, it already illustrates the main point behind <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e65761"></a>OOP in general: in OOP, we program by
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>customizing</em></span> what has already been done, rather
          than copying or changing existing code. This isn’t always an obvious
          win to newcomers at first glance, especially given the extra coding
          requirements of classes. But overall, the programming style implied
          by classes can cut development time radically compared to other
          approaches.</p>
<p>For instance, in our example we could theoretically have
          implemented a custom <code class="epub__literal">give</code><code class="epub__literal">Raise</code> operation without
          subclassing, but none of the other options yield code as optimal as
          ours:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Although we could have simply coded <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>from
              scratch</em></span> as new, independent code, we would have had
              to reimplement all the behaviors in <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> that are the same for <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code>s.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Although we could have simply <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>changed</em></span>
              the existing <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> class
              in-place for the requirements of <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code>’s <code class="epub__literal">giveRaise</code>, doing so would probably
              break the places where we still need the original <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> behavior.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Although we could have simply <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>copied</em></span>
              the <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> class in its
              entirety, renamed the copy to <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code>, and changed its <code class="epub__literal">giveRaise</code>, doing so would introduce
              code redundancy that would double our work in the future—changes
              made to <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> in the future
              would not be picked up automatically, but would have to be
              manually propagated to <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code>’s code. As usual, the
              cut-and-paste approach may seem quick now, but it doubles your
              work in the future.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>The <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>customizable hierarchies</em></span> we can build
          with classes provide a much better solution for software that will
          evolve over time. No other tools in Python support this development
          mode. Because we can tailor and extend our prior work by coding new
          subclasses, we can leverage what we’ve already done, rather than
          starting from scratch each time, breaking what already works, or
          introducing multiple copies of code that may all have to be updated
          in the future. When done right, OOP is a powerful programmer’s
          <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e65839"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e65841"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e65843"></a>ally.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Step 5: Customizing Constructors, Too"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
