<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Step 5: Customizing Constructors, Too</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="step_5_colon_customizing_constructors_t"></a>Step 5: Customizing Constructors, Too</h1>
<p>Our <a id="ch27classescodingconstcust"></a><a id="ch27constructorscust"></a>code works as it is, but if you study the current
        version closely, you may be struck by something a bit odd—it seems
        pointless to have to provide a <code class="epub__literal">mgr</code>
        job name for <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> objects when
        we create them: this is already implied by the class itself. It would
        be better if we could somehow fill in this value automatically when a
        <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> is made.</p>
<p>The trick we need to improve on this turns out to be the
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>same</em></span> as the one we employed in the prior section:
        we want to customize the constructor logic for <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code>s in such a way as to provide a job
        name automatically. In terms of code, we want to redefine an <code class="epub__literal">__init__</code> method in <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> that provides the <code class="epub__literal">mgr</code> string for us. And like with the
        <code class="epub__literal">giveRaise</code> customization, we also
        want to run the original <code class="epub__literal">__init__</code>
        in <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> by calling through the
        class name, so it still initializes our objects’ state information
        attributes.</p>
<p>The following extension will do the job—we’ve coded the new
        <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> constructor and changed the
        call that creates <code class="epub__literal">tom</code> to not pass
        in the <code class="epub__literal">mgr</code> job name:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e65912"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Add customization of constructor in a subclass</span></em>

class Person:
    def __init__(self, name, job=None, pay=0):
        self.name = name
        self.job  = job
        self.pay  = pay
    def lastName(self):
        return self.name.split()[-1]
    def giveRaise(self, percent):
        self.pay = int(self.pay * (1 + percent))
    def __str__(self):
        return '[Person: %s, %s]' % (self.name, self.pay)

class Manager(Person):
    <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __init__(self, name, pay):</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Redefine constructor</span></em>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Person.__init__(self, name, 'mgr', pay)</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Run original with 'mgr'</span></em>
    def giveRaise(self, percent, bonus=.10):
        Person.giveRaise(self, percent + bonus)

if __name__ == '__main__':
    bob = Person('Bob Smith')
    sue = Person('Sue Jones', job='dev', pay=100000)
    print(bob)
    print(sue)
    print(bob.lastName(), sue.lastName())
    sue.giveRaise(.10)
    print(sue)
    <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>tom = Manager('Tom Jones', 50000)</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Job name not needed:</span></em>
    tom.giveRaise(.10)                                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Implied/set by class</span></em>
    print(tom.lastName())
    print(tom)</pre>
<p>Again, we’re using the same technique to augment the <code class="epub__literal">__init__</code> constructor here that we used for
        <code class="epub__literal">giveRaise</code> earlier—running the
        superclass version by calling through the class name directly and
        passing the <code class="epub__literal">self</code> instance along
        explicitly. Although the constructor has a strange name, the effect is
        identical. Because we need <code class="epub__literal">Person</code>’s
        construction logic to run too (to initialize instance attributes), we
        really have to call it this way; otherwise, instances would not have
        any attributes attached.</p>
<p>Calling superclass constructors from redefinitions this way
        turns out to be a very common
        coding pattern in Python. By itself, Python uses inheritance to look
        for and call only <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>one</em></span> <code class="epub__literal">__init__</code> method at construction time—the
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>lowest</em></span> one in the class tree. If you need higher
        <code class="epub__literal">__init__</code> methods to be run at
        construction time (and you usually do), you must call them manually
        through the superclass’s name. The upside to this is that you can be
        explicit about which argument to pass up to the superclass’s
        constructor and can choose to not call it at all: not calling the
        superclass constructor allows you to replace its logic altogether,
        rather than augmenting it.</p>
<p>The output of this file’s self-test code is the same as
        before—we haven’t changed what it does, we’ve simply restructured to
        get rid of some logical redundancy:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e65971"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">[Person: Bob Smith, 0]
[Person: Sue Jones, 100000]
Smith Jones
[Person: Sue Jones, 110000]
Jones
[Person: Tom Jones, 60000]</pre>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="OOP Is Simpler Than You May Think"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="oop_is_simpler_than_you_may_think"></a>OOP Is Simpler Than You May Think</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In this complete form, <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e65978"></a>despite their sizes, our classes capture nearly all
          the important concepts in Python’s <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e65986"></a>OOP machinery:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Instance creation—filling out instance attributes</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Behavior methods—encapsulating logic in class
              methods</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Operator overloading—providing behavior for built-in
              operations like printing</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Customizing behavior—redefining methods in subclasses to
              specialize them</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Customizing constructors—adding initialization logic to
              superclass steps</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Most of these concepts are based upon just three simple ideas:
          the inheritance search for attributes in object trees, the special
          <code class="epub__literal">self</code> argument in methods, and
          operator overloading’s automatic dispatch to methods.</p>
<p>Along the way, we’ve also made our code easy to change in the
          future, by harnessing the class’s propensity for factoring code to
          reduce <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>redundancy</em></span>. For example, we wrapped up
          logic in methods and called back to superclass methods from
          extensions to avoid having multiple copies of the same code. Most of
          these steps were a natural outgrowth of the structuring power of
          classes.</p>
<p>By and large, that’s all there is to OOP in Python. Classes
          certainly can become larger than this, and there are some more
          advanced class concepts, such as decorators and metaclasses, which
          we will meet in later chapters. In terms of the basics, though, our
          classes already do it all. In fact, if you’ve grasped the workings
          of the classes we’ve written, most OOP Python code should now be
          within your reach.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Other Ways to Combine Classes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="other_ways_to_combine_classes"></a>Other Ways to Combine Classes</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Having <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e66025"></a>said that, I should also tell you that although the
          basic mechanics of OOP are simple in Python, some of the art in
          larger programs lies in the way that classes are put together. We’re
          focusing on <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>inheritance</em></span> in this tutorial
          because that’s the mechanism the Python language provides, but
          programmers sometimes combine classes in other ways, too. For
          example, a common coding pattern involves nesting objects inside
          each other to build up <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e66037"></a>composites</em></span>. We’ll explore this pattern in
          more detail in Chapter 30, which is
          really more about design than about Python; as a quick example,
          though, we could use this composition idea to code our <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> extension by <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e66048"></a><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>embedding</em></span> a <code class="epub__literal">Person</code>, instead of inheriting
          from it.</p>
<p>The following alternative does so by using the <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e67916"></a><code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code>
          operator overloading method we will meet in Chapter 29 to intercept undefined attribute
          fetches and delegate them to the embedded object with the <code class="epub__literal">getattr</code> built-in. The <code class="epub__literal">giveRaise</code> method here still achieves
          customization, by changing the argument passed along to the embedded
          object. In effect, <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code>
          becomes a controller layer that passes calls
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>down</em></span> to the embedded object, rather than
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>up</em></span> to superclass methods:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e66081"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Embedding-based Manager alternative</span></em>

class Person:
    <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...same...</code></em>

class Manager:
    def __init__(self, name, pay):
        self.person = Person(name, 'mgr', pay)      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Embed a Person object</span></em>
    def giveRaise(self, percent, bonus=.10):
        self.person.giveRaise(percent + bonus)      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Intercept and delegate</span></em>
    def __getattr__(self, attr):
        return getattr(self.person, attr)           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Delegate all other attrs</span></em>
    def __str__(self):
        return str(self.person)                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Must overload again (in 3.0)</span></em>

if __name__ == '__main__':
    <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...same...</code></em></pre>
<p>In fact, this <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code>
          alternative is representative of a general coding pattern usually
          known as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e66109"></a>delegation</em></span>—a composite-based structure that
          manages a wrapped object and propagates method calls to it. This
          pattern works in our example, but it requires about twice as much
          code and is less well suited than inheritance to the kinds of direct
          customizations we meant to express (in fact, no reasonable Python
          programmer would code this example this way in practice, except
          perhaps those writing general tutorials). <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> isn’t really a <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> here, so we need extra code to
          manually dispatch method calls to the embedded object; operator
          overloading methods like <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code>
          must be redefined (in 3.0, at least, as noted in the upcoming
          sidebar Catching Built-in Attributes in 3.0), and
          adding new <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> behavior is
          less straightforward since state information is one level
          removed.</p>
<p>Still, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e66132"></a>object embedding</em></span>, and design patterns based
          upon it, can be a very good fit when embedded objects require more
          limited interaction with the container than direct customization
          implies. A controller layer like this alternative <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code>, for example, might come in handy
          if we want to trace or validate calls to another object’s methods
          (indeed, we will use a nearly identical coding pattern when we study
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>class decorators</em></span> later in the book). Moreover,
          a hypothetical <code class="epub__literal">Department</code> class
          like the following could <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>aggregate</em></span> other
          objects in order to treat them as a set. Add this to the bottom of
          the <em class="epub__filename">person.py</em> file to try this
          on your own:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e66153"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Aggregate embedded objects into a composite</span></em>

...
bob = Person(...)
sue = Person(...)
tom = Manager(...)

class Department:
    def __init__(self, *args):
        self.members = list(args)
    def addMember(self, person):
        self.members.append(person)
    def giveRaises(self, percent):
        for person in self.members:
            person.giveRaise(percent)
    def showAll(self):
        for person in self.members:
            print(person)

development = Department(bob, sue)          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Embed objects in a composite</span></em>
development.addMember(tom)
development.giveRaises(.10)                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs embedded objects' giveRaise</span></em>
development.showAll()                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs embedded objects' __str__s</span></em></pre>
<p>Interestingly, this code uses both inheritance
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>and</em></span> composition—<code class="epub__literal">Department</code> is a composite that embeds and
          controls other objects to aggregate, but the embedded <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> and <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> objects themselves use inheritance
          to customize. As another example, a GUI might similarly use
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>inheritance</em></span> to customize the behavior or
          appearance of labels and buttons, but also
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>composition</em></span> to build up larger packages of
          embedded widgets, such as input forms, calculators, and text
          editors. The class structure to use depends on the objects you are
          trying to model.</p>
<p>Design issues like composition are explored in Chapter 30, so we’ll postpone further
          investigations for now. But again, in terms of the basic mechanics
          of OOP in Python, our <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> and
          <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> classes already tell the
          entire story. Having mastered the basics of OOP, though, developing
          general tools for applying it more easily in your scripts is often a
          natural next step—and the topic of the next section.</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="catching_built-in_attributes_in_3.0"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Catching Built-in Attributes in 3.0</p>
<p>In <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e66201"></a>Python 3.0 (and 2.6 if new-style classes are used),
            the alternative delegation-based <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> class we just coded will not be
            able to intercept and delegate operator overloading method
            attributes like <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> without
            redefining them. Although we know that <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> is the only such name used in
            our specific example, this a general issue for delegation-based
            classes.</p>
<p>Recall that built-in operations like printing and indexing
            implicitly invoke operator overloading methods such as <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> and <code class="epub__literal">__getitem__</code>. In 3.0, built-in operations
            like these do not route their implicit attribute fetches through
            generic attribute managers: neither <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> (run for undefined
            attributes) nor its cousin <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> (run for all
            attributes) is invoked. This is why we have to redefine <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> redundantly in the alternative
            <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code>, in order to ensure
            that printing is routed to the embedded <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> object when run in Python
            3.0.</p>
<p>Technically, this happens because classic classes normally
            look up operator overloading names in instances at runtime, but
            new-style classes do not—they skip the instance entirely and look
            up such methods in classes. In 2.6 classic classes, built-ins
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>do</em></span> route attributes generically—printing, for
            example, routes <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> through
            <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code>. New-style classes
            also inherit a default for <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> that would foil <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code>, but <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> doesn’t intercept the
            name in 3.0 either.</p>
<p>This is a change, but isn’t a show-stopper—delegation-based
            classes can generally redefine operator overloading methods to
            delegate them to wrapped objects in 3.0, either manually or via
            tools or superclasses. This topic is too advanced to explore
            further in this tutorial, though, so don’t sweat the details too
            much here. Watch for it to be revisited in the attribute
            management coverage of Chapter 37, and
            again in the context of <code class="epub__literal">Private</code>
            class decorators <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e66268"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e66270"></a>in Chapter 38.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Step 6: Using Introspection Tools"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
