<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Step 6: Using Introspection Tools</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="step_6_colon_using_introspection_tools"></a>Step 6: Using Introspection Tools</h1>
<p>Let’s <a id="ch27classescodingintrospection"></a>make one final tweak before we throw our objects onto a
        database. As they are, our classes are complete and demonstrate most
        of the basics of OOP in Python. They still have two remaining issues
        we probably should iron out, though, before we go live with
        them:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>First, if you look at the display of the objects as they are
            right now, you’ll notice that when you print <code class="epub__literal">tom</code> the <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> labels him as a <code class="epub__literal">Person</code>. That’s not technically
            incorrect, since <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> is a
            kind of customized and specialized <code class="epub__literal">Person</code>. Still, it would be more accurate
            to display objects with the most specific (that is,
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>lowest</em></span>) classes possible.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Second, and perhaps more importantly, the current display
            format shows <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>only</em></span> the attributes we include
            in our <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code>, and that might
            not account for future goals. For example, we can’t yet verify
            that <code class="epub__literal">tom</code>’s job name has been
            set to <code class="epub__literal">mgr</code> correctly by
            <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code>’s constructor, because
            the <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> we coded for
            <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> does not print this
            field. Worse, if we ever expand or otherwise change the set of
            attributes assigned to our objects in <code class="epub__literal">__init__</code>, we’ll have to remember to also
            update <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> for new names to
            be displayed, or it will become out of sync over time.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>The last point means that, yet again, we’ve made potential extra
        work for ourselves in the future by introducing
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>redundancy</em></span> in our code. Because any disparity in
        <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> will be reflected in the
        program’s output, this redundancy may be more obvious than the other
        forms we addressed earlier; still, avoiding extra work in the future
        is generally <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>a good thing</em></span>.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Special Class Attributes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="special_class_attributes"></a>Special Class Attributes</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>We can address both issues with Python’s
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>introspection tools</em></span>—special attributes and
          functions that give us access to some of the internals of objects’
          implementations. These tools are somewhat advanced and generally
          used more by people writing tools for other programmers to use than
          by programmers developing applications. Even so, a basic knowledge
          of some of these tools is useful because they allow us to write code
          that processes classes in generic ways. In our code, for example,
          there are two hooks that can help us out, both of which were
          introduced near the end of the preceding chapter:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The built-in <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>instance</code></em><code class="epub__literal">.__class__</code> attribute provides a link
              from an instance to the class from which it was created. Classes
              in turn have a <code class="epub__literal">__name__</code>, just
              like modules, and a <code class="epub__literal">__bases__</code>
              sequence that provides access to superclasses. We can use these
              here to print the name of the class from which an instance is
              made rather than one we’ve hardcoded.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The built-in <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>object</code></em><code class="epub__literal">.__dict__</code> attribute provides a
              dictionary with one key/value pair for every attribute attached
              to a namespace object (including modules, classes, and
              instances). Because it is a dictionary, we can fetch its keys
              list, index by key, iterate over its keys, and so on, to process
              all attributes generically. We can use this here to print every
              attribute in any instance, not just those we hardcode in custom
              displays.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Here’s what these tools look like in action at Python’s
          interactive prompt. Notice how we load <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> at the interactive prompt with a
          <code class="epub__literal">from</code> statement here—class names
          live in and are imported from modules, exactly like function names
          and other variables:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e66392"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from person import Person</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bob = Person('Bob Smith')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(bob)</code></strong>                                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Show bob's __str__</span></em>
[Person: Bob Smith, 0]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bob.__class__</code></strong>                              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Show bob's class and its name</span></em>
&lt;class 'person.Person'&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bob.__class__.__name__</code></strong>
'Person'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(bob.__dict__.keys())</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Attributes are really dict keys</span></em>
['pay', 'job', 'name']                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Use list to force list in 3.0</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for key in bob.__dict__:</code></strong>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(key, '=&gt;', bob.__dict__[key])</code></strong>    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Index manually</span></em>

pay =&gt; 0
job =&gt; None
name =&gt; Bob Smith

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for key in bob.__dict__:</code></strong>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(key, '=&gt;', getattr(bob, key))</code></strong>    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># obj.attr, but attr is a var</span></em>

pay =&gt; 0
job =&gt; None
name =&gt; Bob Smith</pre>
<p>As noted briefly in the prior chapter, some attributes
          accessible from an instance might not be stored in the <code class="epub__literal">__dict__</code> dictionary if the instance’s
          class defines <code class="epub__literal">__slots__</code>, an
          optional and relatively obscure feature of new-style classes (and
          all classes in Python 3.0) that stores attributes in an array and
          that we’ll discuss in Chapters 30
          and 31. Since slots really belong to
          classes instead of instances, and since they are very rarely used in
          any event, we can safely ignore them here and focus on the normal
          <code class="epub__literal">__dict__</code>.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="A Generic Display Tool"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="a_generic_display_tool"></a>A Generic Display Tool</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>We can put these interfaces to work in a superclass that
          displays accurate class names and formats all attributes of an
          instance of any class. Open a new file in your text editor to code
          the following—it’s a new, independent module named <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e68323"></a><em class="epub__filename">classtools.py</em>
          that implements just such a class. Because its <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> print overload uses generic
          introspection tools, it will work on <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>any
          instance</em></span>, regardless of its attributes set. And because
          this is a class, it automatically becomes a general formatting tool:
          thanks to inheritance, it can be mixed into <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>any
          class</em></span> that wishes to use its display format. As an added
          bonus, if we ever want to change how instances are displayed we need
          only change this class, as every class that inherits its <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> will automatically pick up the new
          format when it’s next run:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e66479"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># File classtools.py (new)</span></em>
"Assorted class utilities and tools"

class AttrDisplay:
    """
    Provides an inheritable print overload method that displays
    instances with their class names and a name=value pair for
    each attribute stored on the instance itself (but not attrs
    inherited from its classes). Can be mixed into any class,
    and will work on any instance.
    """
    def gatherAttrs(self):
        attrs = []
        for key in sorted(self.__dict__):
            attrs.append('%s=%s' % (key, getattr(self, key)))
        return ', '.join(attrs)
    def __str__(self):
        return '[%s: %s]' % (self.__class__.__name__, self.gatherAttrs())


if __name__ == '__main__':
    class TopTest(AttrDisplay):
        count = 0
        def __init__(self):
            self.attr1 = TopTest.count
            self.attr2 = TopTest.count+1
            TopTest.count += 2

    class SubTest(TopTest):
        pass

    X, Y = TopTest(), SubTest()
    print(X)                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Show all instance attrs</span></em>
    print(Y)                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Show lowest class name</span></em></pre>
<p>Notice the docstrings here—as a general-purpose tool, we want
          to add some functional documentation for potential users to read. As
          we saw in Chapter 15, docstrings
          can be placed at the top of simple functions and modules, and also
          at the start of classes and their methods; the <code class="epub__literal">help</code> function and the PyDoc tool extracts
          and displays these automatically (we’ll look at docstrings again in
          Chapter 28).</p>
<p>When run directly, this module’s self-test makes two instances
          and prints them; the <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code>
          defined here shows the instance’s class, and all its attributes
          names and values, in sorted attribute name order:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e66502"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>classtools.py</code></strong>
[TopTest: attr1=0, attr2=1]
[SubTest: attr1=2, attr2=3]</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Instance Versus Class Attributes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="instance_versus_class_attributes"></a>Instance Versus Class Attributes</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>If you study the <code class="epub__literal">classtools</code>
          module’s self-test code long enough, you’ll notice that its class
          displays only <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>instance attributes</em></span>, attached to
          the <code class="epub__literal">self</code> object at the bottom of
          the inheritance tree; that’s what <code class="epub__literal">self</code>’s <code class="epub__literal">__dict__</code> contains. As an intended
          consequence, we don’t see attributes inherited by the instance from
          classes above it in the tree (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">count</code> in this file’s self-test code).
          Inherited class attributes are attached to the class only, not
          copied down to instances.</p>
<p>If you ever do wish to include inherited attributes too, you
          can climb the <code class="epub__literal">__class__</code> link to
          the instance’s class, use the <code class="epub__literal">__dict__</code> there to fetch class attributes,
          and then iterate through the class’s <code class="epub__literal">__bases__</code> attribute to climb to even
          higher superclasses (repeating as necessary). If you’re a fan of
          simple code, running a built-in <code class="epub__literal">dir</code> call on the instance instead of using
          <code class="epub__literal">__dict__</code> and climbing would have
          much the same effect, since <code class="epub__literal">dir</code>
          results include inherited names in the sorted results list:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e66552"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from person import Person</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bob = Person('Bob Smith')</code></strong>

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># In Python 2.6:</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bob.__dict__.keys()</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Instance attrs only</span></em>
['pay', 'job', 'name']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dir(bob)</code></strong>                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># + inherited attrs in classes</span></em>
['__doc__', '__init__', '__module__', '__str__', 'giveRaise', 'job',
'lastName', 'name', 'pay']

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># In Python 3.0:</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(bob.__dict__.keys())</code></strong>           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 3.0 keys is a view, not a list</span></em>
['pay', 'job', 'name']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dir(bob)</code></strong>                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 3.0 includes class type methods</span></em>
['__class__', '__delattr__', '__dict__', '__doc__', '__eq__', '__format__',
'__ge__', '__getattribute__', '__gt__', '__hash__', '__init__', '__le__',
...more lines omitted...
'__setattr__', '__sizeof__', '__str__', '__subclasshook__', '__weakref__',
'giveRaise', 'job', 'lastName', 'name', 'pay']</pre>
<p>The output here varies between Python 2.6 and 3.0, because
          3.0’s <code class="epub__literal">dict.keys</code> is not a list,
          and 3.0’s <code class="epub__literal">dir</code> returns extra
          class-type implementation attributes. Technically, <code class="epub__literal">dir</code> returns more in 3.0 because classes
          are all “new style” and inherit a large set of operator overloading
          names from the class type. In fact, you’ll probably want to filter
          out most of the <code class="epub__literal">__</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>X</code></em><code class="epub__literal">__</code> names in the 3.0 <code class="epub__literal">dir</code> result, since they are internal
          implementation details and not something you’d normally want to
          display.</p>
<p>In the interest of space, we’ll leave optional display of
          inherited class attributes with either tree climbs or <code class="epub__literal">dir</code> as suggested experiments for now. For
          more hints on this front, though, watch for the <em class="epub__filename">classtree.py</em> inheritance tree climber we
          will write in Chapter 28, and the
          <em class="epub__filename">lister.py</em> attribute listers and
          climbers we’ll code in Chapter 30.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Name Considerations in Tool Classes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="name_considerations_in_tool_classes"></a>Name Considerations in Tool Classes</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>One last subtlety here: because our <code class="epub__literal">AttrDisplay</code> class in the <code class="epub__literal">classtools</code> module is a general tool
          designed to be mixed into other arbitrary classes, we have to be
          aware of the potential for unintended <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>name
          collisions</em></span> with client classes. As is, I’ve assumed that
          client subclasses may want to use both its <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> and <code class="epub__literal">gatherAttrs</code>, but the latter of these may
          be more than a subclass expects—if a subclass innocently defines a
          <code class="epub__literal">gatherAttrs</code> name of its own, it
          will likely break our class, because the lower version in the
          subclass will be used instead of ours.</p>
<p>To see this for yourself, add a <code class="epub__literal">gatherAttrs</code> to <code class="epub__literal">TopTest</code> in the file’s self-test code;
          unless the new method is identical, or intentionally customizes the
          original, our tool class will no longer work as planned:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e66661"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">    class TopTest(AttrDisplay):
        ....
        def gatherAttrs(self):         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Replaces method in AttrDisplay!</span></em>
            return 'Spam'</pre>
<p>This isn’t necessarily bad—sometimes we want other methods to
          be available to subclasses, either for direct calls or for
          customization. If we really meant to provide a <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> only, though, this is less than
          ideal.</p>
<p>To minimize the chances of name collisions like this, Python
          programmers often prefix methods not meant for external use with a
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>single underscore</em></span>: <code class="epub__literal">_gatherAttrs</code> in our case. This isn’t
          foolproof (what if another class defines <code class="epub__literal">_gatherAttrs</code>, too?), but it’s usually
          sufficient, and it’s a common Python naming convention for methods
          internal to a class.</p>
<p>A better and less commonly used solution would be to use
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>two underscores</em></span> at the front of the method name
          only: <code class="epub__literal">__gatherAttrs</code> for us.
          Python automatically expands such names to include the enclosing
          class’s name, which makes them truly unique. This is a feature
          usually called <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>pseudoprivate class attributes</em></span>,
          which we’ll expand on in Chapter 30.
          For now, we’ll make both our methods available.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Our Classes’ Final Form"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="our_classes_apostrophy_final_form"></a>Our Classes’ Final Form</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Now, to use this generic tool in our classes, all we need to
          do is import it from its module, mix it in by inheritance in our
          top-level class, and get rid of the more specific <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> we coded before. The new <code class="epub__literal">print</code> overload method will be inherited by
          instances of <code class="epub__literal">Person</code>, as well as
          <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code>; <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> gets <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> from <code class="epub__literal">Person</code>, which now obtains it from the
          <code class="epub__literal">AttrDisplay</code> coded in another
          module. Here is the final version of our <em class="epub__filename">person.py</em> file with these
          changes applied:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e66729"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># File person.py (final)</span></em>

<strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from classtools import AttrDisplay</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Use generic display tool</span></em>

<span class="epub__strong"><strong>class Person(AttrDisplay):</strong></span>
    """
    Create and process person records
    """
    def __init__(self, name, job=None, pay=0):
        self.name = name
        self.job  = job
        self.pay  = pay
    def lastName(self):                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Assumes last is last</span></em>
        return self.name.split()[-1]
    def giveRaise(self, percent):                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Percent must be 0..1</span></em>
        self.pay = int(self.pay * (1 + percent))

class Manager(Person):
    """
    A customized Person with special requirements
    """
    def __init__(self, name, pay):
        Person.__init__(self, name, 'mgr', pay)
    def giveRaise(self, percent, bonus=.10):
        Person.giveRaise(self, percent + bonus)

if __name__ == '__main__':
    bob = Person('Bob Smith')
    sue = Person('Sue Jones', job='dev', pay=100000)
    print(bob)
    print(sue)
    print(bob.lastName(), sue.lastName())
    sue.giveRaise(.10)
    print(sue)
    tom = Manager('Tom Jones', 50000)
    tom.giveRaise(.10)
    print(tom.lastName())
    print(tom)</pre>
<p>As this is the final revision, we’ve added a few
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>comments</em></span> here to document our work—docstrings for functional
          descriptions and <code class="epub__literal">#</code> for smaller
          notes, per best-practice conventions. When we run this code now, we
          see all the attributes of our objects, not just the ones we
          hardcoded in the original <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code>. And our final issue is resolved:
          because <code class="epub__literal">AttrDisplay</code> takes class
          names off the <code class="epub__literal">self</code> instance
          directly, each object is shown with the name of its closest (lowest)
          class—<code class="epub__literal">tom</code> displays as a <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> now, not a <code class="epub__literal">Person</code>, and we can finally verify that his
          job name has been correctly filled in by the <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> constructor:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e66784"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>person.py</code></strong>
[Person: job=None, name=Bob Smith, pay=0]
[Person: job=dev, name=Sue Jones, pay=100000]
Smith Jones
[Person: job=dev, name=Sue Jones, pay=110000]
Jones
[Manager: job=mgr, name=Tom Jones, pay=60000]</pre>
<p>This is the more useful display we were after. From a larger
          perspective, though, our attribute display class has become a
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>general tool</em></span>, which we can mix into any class
          by inheritance to leverage the display format it defines. Further,
          all its clients will automatically pick up future changes in our
          tool. Later in the book, we’ll meet even more powerful class tool
          concepts, such as decorators and metaclasses; along with Python’s
          introspection tools, they allow us to write code that augments and
          manages classes in structured and maintainable <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e66794"></a>ways.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Step 7 (Final): Storing Objects in a Database"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
