<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Step 7 (Final): Storing Objects in a Database</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="step_7_open_parenthesis_final_close_par"></a>Step 7 (Final): Storing Objects in a Database</h1>
<p>At <a id="ch27classescodingdatbasstorobjin"></a>this <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e66810"></a>point, <a id="ch27databasesstorobjin"></a>our work is almost complete. We now have a
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>two-module system</em></span> that not only implements our
        original design goals for representing people, but also provides a
        general attribute display tool we can use in other programs in the
        future. By coding functions and classes in module files, we’ve ensured
        that they naturally support reuse. And by coding our software as
        classes, we’ve ensured that it naturally supports extension.</p>
<p>Although our classes work as planned, though, the objects they
        create are not real database records. That is, if we kill Python, our
        instances will disappear—they’re transient objects in memory and are
        not stored in a more permanent medium like a file, so they won’t be
        available in future program runs. It turns out that it’s easy to make
        instance objects more permanent, with a Python feature called
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e66831"></a>object persistence</em></span>—making objects live on
        after the program that creates them exits. As a final step in this
        tutorial, let’s make our objects permanent.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Pickles and Shelves"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="pickles_and_shelves"></a>Pickles and Shelves</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Object <a id="ch27dbsstorobjinpicklesandshelves"></a>persistence is implemented by three standard library
          modules, available in every <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e66849"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e66852"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e66855"></a><a id="ch27shelvemodule"></a>Python:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">pickle</code></span>
</dt><dd>
<p>Serializes arbitrary Python objects to and from a string
                of bytes</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">dbm</code> (named <code class="epub__literal">anydbm</code> in Python 2.6)</span></dt><dd>
<p>Implements an access-by-key filesystem for storing
                strings</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">shelve</code></span>
</dt><dd>
<p>Uses the other two modules to store Python objects on a
                file by key</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>We met these modules very briefly in Chapter 9 when we studied
          file basics. They provide powerful data storage options. Although we
          can’t do them complete justice in this tutorial or book, they are
          simple enough that a brief introduction is enough to get you
          started.</p>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> module is a sort
          of super-general object formatting and deformatting tool: given a
          nearly arbitrary Python object in memory, it’s clever enough to
          convert the object to a string of bytes, which it can use later to
          reconstruct the original object in memory. The <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> module can handle almost any object
          you can create—lists, dictionaries, nested combinations thereof, and
          class instances. The latter are especially useful things to pickle,
          because they provide both data (attributes) and behavior (methods);
          in fact, the combination is roughly equivalent to “records” and
          “programs.” Because <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> is so
          general, it can replace extra code you might otherwise write to
          create and parse custom text file representations for your objects.
          By storing an object’s pickle string on a file, you effectively make
          it permanent and persistent: simply load and unpickle it later to
          re-create the original object.</p>
<p>Although it’s easy to use <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> by itself to store objects in
          simple flat files and load them from there later, the <code class="epub__literal">shelve</code> module provides an extra layer of
          structure that allows you to store pickled objects by
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>key</em></span>. <code class="epub__literal">shelve</code>
          translates an object to its pickled string with <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> and stores that string under a key
          in a <code class="epub__literal">dbm</code> file; when later
          loading, <code class="epub__literal">shelve</code> fetches the
          pickled string by key and re-creates the original object in memory
          with <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code>. This is all quite a
          trick, but to your script a shelve<sup>[62]</sup> of pickled objects looks just like a
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e66935"></a>dictionary</em></span>—you index by key to fetch,
          assign to keys to store, and use dictionary tools such as <code class="epub__literal">len</code>, <code class="epub__literal">in</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">dict.keys</code> to get information. Shelves
          automatically map dictionary operations to objects stored in a
          file.</p>
<p>In fact, to your script the only coding difference between a
          shelve and a normal dictionary is that you must
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>open</em></span> shelves initially and must
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>close</em></span> them after making changes. The net effect
          is that a shelve provides a simple database for storing and fetching
          native Python objects by keys, and thus makes them persistent across
          program runs. It does not support query tools such as SQL, and it
          lacks some advanced features found in enterprise-level databases
          (such as true transaction processing), but native Python objects
          stored on a shelve may be processed with the full power of the
          Python language once they are fetched back by key.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Storing Objects on a Shelve Database"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="storing_objects_on_a_shelve_database"></a>Storing Objects on a Shelve Database</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Pickling <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e66965"></a>and shelves are somewhat advanced topics, and we won’t
          go into all their details here; you can read more about them in the
          standard library manuals, as well as application-focused books such
          as <em class="epub__citetitle">Programming
          Python</em>. This is all simpler in Python than in
          English, though, so let’s jump into some code.</p>
<p>Let’s write a new script that throws objects of our classes
          onto a shelve. In your text editor, open a new file we’ll call
          <em class="epub__filename"><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e66978"></a>makedb.py</em>. Since this is a new file, we’ll
          need to import our classes in order to create a few instances to
          store. We used <code class="epub__literal">from</code> to load a
          class at the interactive prompt earlier, but really, as with
          functions and other variables, there are two ways to load a class
          from a file (class names are variables like any other, and not at
          all magic in this context):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e66986"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import person                                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Load class with import</span></em>
bob = person.Person(...)                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Go through module name</span></em>

from person import Person                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Load class with from</span></em>
bob = Person(...)                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Use name directly</span></em></pre>
<p>We’ll use <code class="epub__literal">from</code> to load in
          our script, just because it’s a bit less to type. Copy or retype
          this code to make instances of our classes in the new script, so we
          have something to store (this is a simple demo, so we won’t worry
          about the test-code redundancy here). Once we have some instances,
          it’s almost trivial to store them on a shelve. We simply import the
          <code class="epub__literal">shelve</code> module, open a new shelve
          with an external filename, assign the objects to keys in the shelve,
          and close the shelve when we’re done because we’ve made
          changes:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e67007"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># File makedb.py: store Person objects on a shelve database</span></em>

from person import Person, Manager              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Load our classes</span></em>
bob = Person('Bob Smith')                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Re-create objects to be stored</span></em>
sue = Person('Sue Jones', job='dev', pay=100000)
tom = Manager('Tom Jones', 50000)

import shelve
db = shelve.open('persondb')                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Filename where objects are stored</span></em>
for object in (bob, sue, tom):                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Use object's name attr as key</span></em>
    db[object.name] = object                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Store object on shelve by key</span></em>
db.close()                                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Close after making changes</span></em></pre>
<p>Notice how we assign objects to the shelve using their own
          names as keys. This is just for convenience; in a shelve, the
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>key</em></span> can be any string, including one we might
          create to be unique using tools such as process IDs and timestamps
          (available in the <code class="epub__literal">os</code> and <code class="epub__literal">time</code> standard library modules). The only
          rule is that the keys must be strings and should be unique, since we
          can store just one object per key (though that object can be a list
          or dictionary containing many objects). The
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>values</em></span> we store under keys, though, can be
          Python objects of almost any sort: built-in types like strings,
          lists, and dictionaries, as well as user-defined class instances,
          and nested combinations of all of these.</p>
<p>That’s all there is to it—if this script has no output when
          run, it means it probably worked; we’re not printing anything, just
          creating and storing objects:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e67045"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>makedb.py</code></strong></pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Exploring Shelves Interactively"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="exploring_shelves_interactively"></a>Exploring Shelves Interactively</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>At this point, <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e67054"></a>there are one or more real files in the current
          directory whose names all start with “persondb”. The actual files
          created can vary per platform, and just like in the built-in
          <code class="epub__literal">open</code> function, the filename in
          <code class="epub__literal">shelve.open()</code> is relative to the
          current working directory unless it includes a directory path.
          Wherever they are stored, these files implement a keyed-access file
          that contains the pickled representation of our three Python
          objects. Don’t delete these files—they are your database, and are
          what you’ll need to copy or transfer when you back up or move your
          storage.</p>
<p>You can look at the shelve’s files if you want to, either from
          Windows Explorer or the Python shell, but they are binary hash
          files, and most of their content makes little sense outside the
          context of the <code class="epub__literal">shelve</code> module.
          With Python 3.0 and no extra software installed, our database is
          stored in three files (in 2.6, it’s just one file, <em class="epub__filename">persondb</em>, because the <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e67075"></a>bsddb</code> extension module is preinstalled with
          Python for shelves; in 3.0, <code class="epub__literal">bsddb</code>
          is a third-party open source add-on):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e67083"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Directory listing module: verify files are present</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import glob</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>glob.glob('person*')</code></strong>
['person.py', 'person.pyc', 'persondb.bak', 'persondb.dat', 'persondb.dir']

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Type the file: text mode for string, binary mode for bytes</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(open('persondb.dir').read())</code></strong>
'Tom Jones', (1024, 91)
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...more omitted...</code></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(open('persondb.dat', 'rb').read())</code></strong>
b'\x80\x03cperson\nPerson\nq\x00)\x81q\x01}q\x02(X\x03\x00\x00\x00payq\x03K...
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...more omitted...</code></em></pre>
<p>This content isn’t impossible to decipher, but it can vary on
          different platforms and doesn’t exactly qualify as a user-friendly
          database interface! To verify our work better, we can write another
          script, or poke around our shelve at the interactive prompt. Because
          shelves are Python objects containing Python objects, we can process
          them with normal Python syntax and development modes. Here, the
          interactive prompt effectively becomes a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e67111"></a>database client</em></span>:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e67118"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import shelve</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>db = shelve.open('persondb')</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Reopen the shelve</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>len(db)</code></strong>                                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Three 'records' stored</span></em>
3
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(db.keys())</code></strong>                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># keys is the index</span></em>
['Tom Jones', 'Sue Jones', 'Bob Smith']         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># list to make a list in 3.0</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bob = db['Bob Smith']</code></strong>                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Fetch bob by key</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(bob)</code></strong>                                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs __str__ from AttrDisplay</span></em>
[Person: job=None, name=Bob Smith, pay=0]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bob.lastName()</code></strong>                              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs lastName from Person</span></em>
'Smith'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for key in db:</code></strong>                              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Iterate, fetch, print</span></em>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(key, '=&gt;', db[key])</code></strong>

Tom Jones =&gt; [Manager: job=mgr, name=Tom Jones, pay=50000]
Sue Jones =&gt; [Person: job=dev, name=Sue Jones, pay=100000]
Bob Smith =&gt; [Person: job=None, name=Bob Smith, pay=0]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for key in sorted(db):</code></strong>
        <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(key, '=&gt;', db[key])</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Iterate by sorted keys</span></em>

Bob Smith =&gt; [Person: job=None, name=Bob Smith, pay=0]
Sue Jones =&gt; [Person: job=dev, name=Sue Jones, pay=100000]
Tom Jones =&gt; [Manager: job=mgr, name=Tom Jones, pay=50000]</pre>
<p>Notice that we don’t have to import our <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> or <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> classes here in order to load or
          use our stored objects. For example, we can call <code class="epub__literal">bob</code>’s <code class="epub__literal">lastName</code> method freely, and get his custom
          print display format automatically, even though we don’t have his
          <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> class in our scope here.
          This works because when Python pickles a class instance, it records
          its <code class="epub__literal">self</code> instance attributes,
          along with the name of the class it was created from and the module
          where the class lives. When <code class="epub__literal">bob</code>
          is later fetched from the shelve and unpickled, Python will
          automatically reimport the class and link <code class="epub__literal">bob</code> to it.</p>
<p>The upshot of this scheme is that class instances
          automatically acquire all their class behavior when they are loaded
          in the future. We have to import our classes only to make new
          instances, not to process existing ones. <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e67212"></a>Although a deliberate feature, this scheme has
          somewhat mixed consequences:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>downside</em></span> is that classes and
              their module’s files must be importable when an instance is
              later loaded. More formally, pickleable classes must be coded at
              the top level of a module file accessible from a directory
              listed on the <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code> module
              search path (and shouldn’t live in the most script files’ module
              <code class="epub__literal">__main__</code> unless they’re
              always in that module when used). Because of this external
              module file requirement, some applications choose to pickle
              simpler objects such as dictionaries or lists, especially if
              they are to be transferred across the Internet.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>upside</em></span> is that changes in a
              class’s source code file are automatically picked up when
              instances of the class are loaded again; there is often no need
              to update stored objects themselves, since updating their
              class’s code changes their behavior.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Shelves also have well-known limitations (the database
          suggestions at the end of this chapter mention a few of these). For
          simple object storage, though, shelves and pickles are remarkably
          easy-to-use tools.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Updating Objects on a Shelve"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="updating_objects_on_a_shelve"></a>Updating Objects on a Shelve</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Now <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e67247"></a>for one last script: let’s write a program that
          updates an instance (record) each time it runs, to prove the point
          that our objects really are <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>persistent</em></span> (i.e.,
          that their current values are available every time a Python program
          runs). The following file, <em class="epub__filename">updatedb.py</em>, prints the database and
          gives a raise to one of our stored objects each time. If you trace
          through what’s going on here, you’ll notice that we’re getting a lot
          of utility “for free”—printing our objects automatically employs the
          general <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> overloading
          method, and we give raises by calling the <code class="epub__literal">giveRaise</code> method we wrote earlier. This
          all “just works” for objects based on OOP’s inheritance model, even
          when they live in a file:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e67265"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># File updatedb.py: update Person object on database</span></em>

import shelve
db = shelve.open('persondb')               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Reopen shelve with same filename</span></em>

for key in sorted(db):                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Iterate to display database objects</span></em>
    print(key, '\t=&gt;', db[key])            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Prints with custom format</span></em>

sue = db['Sue Jones']                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Index by key to fetch</span></em>
sue.giveRaise(.10)                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Update in memory using class method</span></em>
db['Sue Jones'] = sue                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Assign to key to update in shelve</span></em>
db.close()                                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Close after making changes</span></em></pre>
<p>Because this script prints the database when it starts up, we
          have to run it a few times to see our objects change. Here it is in
          action, displaying all records and increasing <code class="epub__literal">sue</code>’s pay each time it’s run (it’s a
          pretty good script for <code class="epub__literal">sue</code>...):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e67298"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">c:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>updatedb.py</code></strong>
Bob Smith       =&gt; [Person: job=None, name=Bob Smith, pay=0]
Sue Jones       =&gt; [Person: job=dev, name=Sue Jones, pay=100000]
Tom Jones       =&gt; [Manager: job=mgr, name=Tom Jones, pay=50000]

c:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>updatedb.py</code></strong>
Bob Smith       =&gt; [Person: job=None, name=Bob Smith, pay=0]
Sue Jones       =&gt; [Person: job=dev, name=Sue Jones, pay=110000]
Tom Jones       =&gt; [Manager: job=mgr, name=Tom Jones, pay=50000]

c:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>updatedb.py</code></strong>
Bob Smith       =&gt; [Person: job=None, name=Bob Smith, pay=0]
Sue Jones       =&gt; [Person: job=dev, name=Sue Jones, pay=121000]
Tom Jones       =&gt; [Manager: job=mgr, name=Tom Jones, pay=50000]

c:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>updatedb.py</code></strong>
Bob Smith       =&gt; [Person: job=None, name=Bob Smith, pay=0]
Sue Jones       =&gt; [Person: job=dev, name=Sue Jones, pay=133100]
Tom Jones       =&gt; [Manager: job=mgr, name=Tom Jones, pay=50000]</pre>
<p>Again, what we see here is a product of the <code class="epub__literal">shelve</code> and <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> tools we get from Python, and of
          the behavior we coded in our classes ourselves. And once again, we
          can verify our script’s work at the interactive prompt (the shelve’s
          equivalent of a database client):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e67320"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">c:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import shelve</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>db = shelve.open('persondb')</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Reopen database</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rec = db['Sue Jones']</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Fetch object by key</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(rec)</code></strong>
[Person: job=dev, name=Sue Jones, pay=146410]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rec.lastName()</code></strong>
'Jones'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>rec.pay</code></strong>
146410</pre>
<p>For another example of object persistence in this book, see
          the sidebar in Chapter 30 titled
          Why You Will Care: Classes and Persistence. It
          stores a somewhat larger composite object in a flat file with
          <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> instead of <code class="epub__literal">shelve</code>, but the effect is similar. For
          more details on both pickles and shelves, see other books or
          Python’s <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e67362"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e67364"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e67367"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e67369"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e67371"></a>manuals.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Future Directions"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
