<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Future Directions</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="future_directions"></a>Future Directions</h1>
<p>And that’s a wrap for this tutorial. At this point, you’ve seen
        all the basics of Python’s OOP machinery in action, and you’ve learned
        ways to avoid redundancy and its associated maintenance issues in your
        code. You’ve built full-featured classes that do real work. As an
        added bonus, you’ve made them real database records by storing them in
        a Python shelve, so their information lives on persistently.</p>
<p>There is much more we could explore here, of course. For
        example, we could extend our classes to make them more realistic, add
        new kinds of behavior to them, and so on. Giving a raise, for
        instance, should in practice verify that pay increase rates are
        between zero and one—an extension we’ll add when we meet decorators
        later in this book. You might also mutate this example into a personal
        contacts database, by changing the state information stored on
        objects, as well as the class methods used to process it. We’ll leave
        this a suggested exercise open to your imagination.</p>
<p>We could also expand our scope to use tools that either come
        with Python or are freely available in the open source world:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">GUIs</span></dt><dd>
<p>As is, <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e67390"></a>we can only process our database with the
              interactive prompt’s command-based interface, and scripts. We
              could also work on expanding our object database’s usability by
              adding a graphical user interface for browsing and updating its
              records. GUIs can be built portably with either Python’s
              <code class="epub__literal">tkinter</code> (<code class="epub__literal">Tkinter</code> in 2.6) standard library
              support, or third-party toolkits such as WxPython and PyQt.
              <code class="epub__literal">tkinter</code> ships with Python,
              lets you build simple GUIs quickly, and is ideal for learning
              GUI programming techniques; WxPython and PyQt tend to be more
              complex to use but often produce higher-grade GUIs in the
              end.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Websites</span></dt><dd>
<p>Although <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e67409"></a>GUIs are convenient and fast, the Web is hard to
              beat in terms of accessibility. We might also implement a
              website for browsing and updating records, instead of or in
              addition to GUIs and the interactive prompt. Websites can be
              constructed with either basic CGI scripting tools that come with
              Python, or full-featured third-party web frameworks such as
              Django, TurboGears, Pylons, web2Py, Zope, or Google’s App
              Engine. On the Web, your data can still be stored in a shelve,
              pickle file, or other Python-based medium; the scripts that
              process it are simply run automatically on a server in response
              to requests from web browsers and other clients, and they
              produce HTML to interact with a user, either directly or by
              interfacing with Framework APIs.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Web services</span></dt><dd>
<p>Although web clients can often parse information in the
              replies from websites (a technique colorfully known as “screen
              scraping”), we might go further and provide a more direct way to
              fetch records on the Web via a web services interface such as
              SOAP or XML-RPC calls—APIs supported by either Python itself or
              the third-party open source domain. Such APIs return data in a
              more direct form, rather than embedded in the HTML of a reply
              page.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Databases</span></dt><dd>
<p>If our <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e67425"></a>database becomes higher-volume or critical, we
              might eventually move it from shelves to a more full-featured
              storage mechanism such as the open source <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e67429"></a>ZODB object-oriented database system (OODB), or a
              more traditional SQL-based relational database system such as
              MySQL, Oracle, PostgreSQL, or SQLite. Python itself comes with
              the in-process SQLite database system built-in, but other open
              source options are freely available on the Web. ZODB, for
              example, is similar to Python’s <code class="epub__literal">shelve</code> but addresses many of its
              limitations, supporting larger databases, concurrent updates,
              transaction processing, and automatic write-through on in-memory
              changes. SQL-based systems like MySQL offer enterprise-level
              tools for database storage and may be directly used from a
              within a Python script.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">ORMs</span></dt><dd>
<p>If we do migrate to a relational database system for
              storage, we don’t have to sacrifice Python’s OOP tools.
              <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e67442"></a>Object-relational mappers (ORMs) like SQLObject
              and SQLAlchemy can automatically map relational tables and rows
              to and from Python classes and instances, such that we can
              process the stored data using normal Python class syntax. This
              approach provides an alternative to OODBs like <code class="epub__literal">shelve</code> and ZODB and leverages the
              power of both relational databases and Python’s class
              model.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>While I hope this introduction whets your appetite for future
        exploration, all of these topics are of course far beyond the scope of
        this tutorial and this book at large. If you want to explore any of
        them on your own, see the Web, Python’s standard library manuals, and
        application-focused books such as <em class="epub__citetitle">Programming
        Python</em>. In the latter I pick up this example where
        we’ve stopped here, showing how to add both a GUI and a website on top
        of the database to allow for browsing and updating instance records. I
        hope to see you there eventually, but first, let’s return to class
        fundamentals and finish up the rest of the core Python language
        story.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Chapter Summary"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
