<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="chapter_summary-id26"></a>Chapter Summary</h1>
<p>In this chapter, we explored all the fundamentals of Python
        classes and OOP in action, by building upon a simple but real example,
        step by step. We added constructors, methods, operator overloading,
        customization with subclasses, and introspection tools, and we met
        other concepts (such as composition, delegation, and polymorphism)
        along the way.</p>
<p>In the end, we took objects created by our classes and made them
        persistent by storing them on a shelve object database—an easy-to-use
        system for saving and retrieving native Python objects by key. While
        exploring class basics, we also encountered multiple ways to factor
        our code to reduce redundancy and minimize future maintenance costs.
        Finally, we briefly previewed ways to extend our code with
        application-programming tools such as GUIs and databases, covered in
        follow-up books.</p>
<p>In the next chapters of this part of the book we’ll return to
        our study of the details behind Python’s class model and investigate
        its application to some of the design concepts used to combine classes
        in larger programs. Before we move ahead, though, let’s work through
        this chapter’s quiz to review what we covered here. Since we’ve
        already done a lot of hands-on work in this chapter, we’ll close with
        a set of mostly theory-oriented questions designed to make you trace
        through some of the code and ponder some of the bigger ideas
        <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e67464"></a>behind it.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Test Your Knowledge: Quiz"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
