<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_answers-id26"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</h1>
<div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In the final version of our classes, <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> ultimately inherits its <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> printing method from <code class="epub__literal">AttrDisplay</code> in the separate <code class="epub__literal">classtools</code> module. <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> doesn’t have one itself, so the
            inheritance search climbs to its <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> superclass; because there is no
            <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> there either, the
            search climbs higher and finds it in <code class="epub__literal">AttrDisplay</code>. The class names listed in
            parentheses in a <code class="epub__literal">class</code>
            statement’s header line provide the
            links to higher superclasses.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Shelves (really, the <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> module they use) automatically
            relink an instance to the class it was created from when that
            instance is later loaded back into memory. Python reimports the
            class from its module internally, creates an instance with its
            stored attributes, and sets the instance’s <code class="epub__literal">__class__</code> link to point to its original
            class. This way, loaded instances automatically obtain all their
            original methods (like <code class="epub__literal">lastName</code>, <code class="epub__literal">giveRaise</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code>), even if we have not imported
            the instance’s class into our scope.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>It’s important to move processing into methods so that there
            is only one copy to change in the future, and so that the methods
            can be run on any instance. This is Python’s notion of
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>encapsulation</em></span>—wrapping up logic behind
            interfaces, to better support future code maintenance. If you
            don’t do so, you create code redundancy that can multiply your
            work effort as the code evolves in the future.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Customizing with subclasses reduces development effort. In
            OOP, we code by <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>customizing</em></span> what has already
            been done, rather than copying or changing existing code. This is
            the real “big idea” in OOP—because we can easily extend our prior
            work by coding new subclasses, we can leverage what we’ve already
            done. This is much better than either starting from scratch each
            time, or introducing multiple redundant copies of code that may
            all have to be updated in the future.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Copying and modifying code <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>doubles</em></span> your
            potential work effort in the future, regardless of the context. If
            a subclass needs to perform default actions coded in a superclass
            method, it’s much better to call back to the original through the
            superclass’s name than to copy its code. This also holds true for
            superclass constructors. Again, copying code creates redundancy,
            which is a major issue as code evolves.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Generic tools can avoid hardcoded solutions that must be
            kept in sync with the rest of the class as it evolves over time. A
            generic <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> print method,
            for example, need not be updated each time a new attribute is
            added to instances in an <code class="epub__literal">__init__</code> constructor. In addition, a
            generic <code class="epub__literal">print</code> method inherited
            by all classes only appears, and need only be modified, in one
            place—changes in the generic version are picked up by all classes
            that inherit from the generic class. Again, eliminating code
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>redundancy</em></span> cuts future development effort;
            that’s one of the primary assets classes bring to the
            table.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Inheritance is best at coding extensions based on direct
            customization (like our <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code>
            specialization of <code class="epub__literal">Person</code>).
            Composition is well suited to scenarios where multiple objects are
            aggregated into a whole and directed by a controller layer class.
            Inheritance passes calls up to reuse, and composition passes down
            to delegate. Inheritance and composition are not mutually
            exclusive; often, the objects embedded in a controller are
            themselves customizations based upon inheritance.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The classes in this chapter could be used as boilerplate
            “template” code to implement
            a variety of types of databases. Essentially, you can repurpose
            them by modifying the constructors to record different attributes
            and providing whatever methods are appropriate for the target
            application. For instance, you might use attributes such as <code class="epub__literal">name</code>, <code class="epub__literal">address</code>, <code class="epub__literal">birthday</code>, <code class="epub__literal">phone</code>, <code class="epub__literal">email</code>, and so on for a contacts
            database, and methods appropriate for this purpose. A method named
            <code class="epub__literal">sendmail</code>, for example, might
            use Python’s standard library <code class="epub__literal">smtplib</code> module to send an email to one
            of the contacts automatically when called (see Python’s manuals or
            application-level books for more details on such tools). The
            <code class="epub__literal">AttrDisplay</code> tool we wrote here
            could be used verbatim to print your objects, because it is
            intentionally generic. Most of the shelve database code here can
            be used to store your objects, too, with minor changes.</p></li></ol>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[62] </sup>Yes, we use “shelve” as a noun in Python, much to the
              chagrin of a variety of editors I’ve worked with over the years,
              both electronic and human.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
