<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>The class Statement</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="the_class_statement"></a>The class Statement</h1>
<p>Although <a id="ch28classescodingclassstatement"></a><a id="ch28classstatement"></a>the Python <code class="epub__literal">class</code>
        statement may seem similar to tools in other OOP languages on the
        surface, on closer inspection, it is quite different from what some
        programmers are used to. For example, as in C++, the <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement is Python’s main OOP tool,
        but unlike in C++, Python’s <code class="epub__literal">class</code>
        is not a declaration. Like a <code class="epub__literal">def</code>, a
        <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement is an object
        builder, and an implicit assignment—when run, it generates a class
        object and stores a reference to it in the name used in the header.
        Also like a <code class="epub__literal">def</code>, a <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement is true executable code—your
        class doesn’t exist until Python reaches and runs the <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement that defines it (typically
        while importing the module it is coded in, but not before).</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="General Form"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="general_form"></a>General Form</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p><code class="epub__literal">class</code> is a <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e67703"></a>compound statement, with a body of indented statements
          typically appearing under the header. In the header, superclasses
          are listed in parentheses after the class name, separated by commas.
          Listing more than one superclass leads to multiple inheritance
          (which we’ll discuss more formally in Chapter 30). Here is the statement’s
          general form:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e67711"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class &lt;name&gt;(superclass,...):         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Assign to name</span></em>
    data = value                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Shared class data</span></em>
    def method(self,...):             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Methods</span></em>
        self.member = value           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Per-instance data</span></em></pre>
<p>Within the <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement,
          any assignments generate class attributes, and specially named
          methods overload operators; for instance, a function called <code class="epub__literal">__init__</code> is called at instance object
          construction time, if defined.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Example"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="example"></a>Example</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As <a id="ch28classstatementexample"></a>we’ve seen, classes are mostly just namespaces—that
          is, tools for defining names (i.e., attributes) that export data and
          logic to clients. So, how do you get from the <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement to a namespace?</p>
<p>Here’s how. Just like in a module file, the statements nested
          in a <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement body create
          its attributes. When Python executes a <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement (not a call to a class),
          it runs all the statements in its body, from top to bottom.
          Assignments that happen during this process create names in the
          class’s local scope, which become attributes in the associated class
          object. Because of this, classes resemble both modules and
          functions:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Like functions, <code class="epub__literal">class</code>
              statements are local scopes where names created by nested
              assignments live.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Like names in a module, names assigned in a <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement become attributes in a
              class object.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>The main distinction for classes is that their namespaces are
          also the basis of inheritance in Python; reference attributes that
          are not found in a class or instance object are fetched from other
          classes.</p>
<p>Because <code class="epub__literal">class</code> is a compound
          statement, any sort of statement can be nested inside its
          body—<code class="epub__literal">print</code>, <code class="epub__literal">=</code>, <code class="epub__literal">if</code>,
          <code class="epub__literal">def</code>, and so on. All the
          statements inside the <code class="epub__literal">class</code>
          statement run when the <code class="epub__literal">class</code>
          statement itself runs (not when the class is later called to make an
          instance). Assigning names inside the <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement makes class attributes,
          and nested <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s make class methods, but other
          assignments make attributes, too.</p>
<p>For example, assignments of simple nonfunction objects to
          class attributes produce <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e67805"></a>data attributes</em></span>, shared by all
          instances:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e67810"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class SharedData:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>spam = 42</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Generates a class data attribute</span></em>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = SharedData()</code></strong>       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Make two instances</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y = SharedData()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.spam, y.spam</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># They inherit and share 'spam'</span></em>
(42, 42)</pre>
<p>Here, because the name <code class="epub__literal">spam</code> is assigned at the top level of a
          <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement, it is attached
          to the class and so will be shared by all instances. We can change
          it by going through the class name, and we can refer to it through
          either instances or the class.<sup>[63]</sup></p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e67854"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>SharedData.spam = 99</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.spam, y.spam, SharedData.spam</code></strong>
(99, 99, 99)</pre>
<p>Such class attributes can be used to manage information that
          spans all the instances—a counter of the number of instances
          generated, for example (we’ll expand on this idea by example in
          Chapter 31). Now, watch what happens
          if we assign the name <code class="epub__literal">spam</code>
          through an instance instead of the class:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e67870"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.spam = 88</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.spam, y.spam, SharedData.spam</code></strong>
(88, 99, 99)</pre>
<p>Assignments to instance attributes create or change the names
          in the instance, rather than in the shared class. More generally,
          inheritance searches occur only on attribute
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>references</em></span>, not on assignment: assigning to an
          object’s attribute always changes that object, and no
          other.<sup>[64]</sup> For example, <code class="epub__literal">y.spam</code>
          is looked up in the class by inheritance, but the assignment to
          <code class="epub__literal">x.spam</code> attaches a name to
          <code class="epub__literal">x</code> itself.</p>
<p>Here’s a more comprehensive example of this behavior that
          stores the same name in two places. Suppose we run the following
          class:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e67903"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class MixedNames:                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Define class</span></em>
    data = 'spam'                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Assign class attr</span></em>
    def __init__(self, value):               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Assign method name</span></em>
        self.data = value                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Assign instance attr</span></em>
    def display(self):
        print(self.data, MixedNames.data)    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Instance attr, class attr</span></em></pre>
<p>This class contains two <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s, which bind class attributes to
          method functions. It also contains an <code class="epub__literal">=</code> assignment statement; because this
          assignment assigns the name <code class="epub__literal">data</code>
          inside the <code class="epub__literal">class</code>, it lives in the
          class’s local scope and becomes an attribute of the class object.
          Like all class attributes, this <code class="epub__literal">data</code> is inherited and shared by all
          instances of the class that don’t have <code class="epub__literal">data</code> attributes of their own.</p>
<p>When we make instances of this class, the name <code class="epub__literal">data</code> is attached to those instances by the
          assignment to <code class="epub__literal">self.data</code> in the
          constructor method:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e67948"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = MixedNames(1)</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Make two instance objects</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y = MixedNames(2)</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Each has its own data</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.display(); y.display()</code></strong>   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># self.data differs, MixedNames.data is the same</span></em>
1 spam
2 spam</pre>
<p>The net result is that <code class="epub__literal">data</code>
          lives in two places: in the instance objects (created by the
          <code class="epub__literal">self.data</code> assignment in <code class="epub__literal">__init__</code>), and in the class from which
          they inherit names (created by the <code class="epub__literal">data</code> assignment in the <code class="epub__literal">class</code>). The class’s <code class="epub__literal">display</code> method prints both versions, by
          first qualifying the <code class="epub__literal">self</code>
          instance, and then the class.</p>
<p>By using these techniques to store attributes in different
          objects, we determine their scope of visibility. When attached to
          classes, names are shared; in instances, names record per-instance
          data, not shared behavior or data. Although inheritance searches
          look up names for us, we can always get to an attribute anywhere in
          a tree by accessing the desired object directly.</p>
<p>In the preceding example, for instance, specifying <code class="epub__literal">x.data</code> or <code class="epub__literal">self.data</code> will return an instance name,
          which normally hides the same name in the class; however, <code class="epub__literal">MixedNames.data</code> grabs the class name
          explicitly. We’ll see various roles for such coding patterns later;
          the next section describes one of the most <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e68006"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e68008"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e68010"></a>common.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Methods"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
