<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Methods</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="methods"></a>Methods</h1>
<p>Because <a id="ch28classescodingmethods"></a><a id="ch28methods"></a>you already know about functions, you also know about
        methods in classes. Methods are just function objects created by
        <code class="epub__literal">def</code> statements nested in a <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement’s body. From an abstract
        perspective, methods provide behavior for instance objects to inherit.
        From a programming perspective, methods work in exactly the same way
        as simple functions, with one crucial exception: a method’s first
        argument always receives the instance object that is the implied
        subject of the method call.</p>
<p>In other words, Python automatically maps instance method calls
        to class method functions as follows. Method calls made through an
        instance, like this:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e68037"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>instance</code></em>.<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>method</code></em>(<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>args...</code></em>)</pre>
<p>are automatically translated to class method function calls of
        this form:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e68049"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>class</code></em>.<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>method</code></em>(<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>instance</code></em>, <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>args...</code></em>)</pre>
<p>where the class is determined by locating the method name using
        Python’s inheritance search procedure. In fact, both call forms are
        valid in Python.</p>
<p>Besides the normal inheritance of method attribute names, the
        special first argument is the only real magic behind method calls. In
        a class method, the first argument is usually called <code class="epub__literal">self</code> by convention (technically, only its
        position is significant, not its name). This argument provides methods
        with a hook back to the instance that is the subject of the
        call—because classes generate many instance objects, they need to use
        this argument to manage data that varies per instance.</p>
<p>C++ programmers may recognize Python’s <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e68073"></a>self</code> argument as being similar to C++’s
        <code class="epub__literal">this</code> pointer. In Python, though,
        <code class="epub__literal">self</code> is always explicit in your
        code: methods must always go through <code class="epub__literal">self</code> to fetch or change attributes of the
        instance being processed by the current method call. This explicit
        nature of <code class="epub__literal">self</code> is by design—the
        presence of this name makes it obvious that you are using instance
        attribute names in your script, not names in the local or global
        scope.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Method Example"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="method_example"></a>Method Example</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e68095"></a>clarify <a id="ch28methodscallstomethods"></a>these concepts, let’s turn to an example. Suppose we
          define the following class:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e68107"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class NextClass:                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Define class</span></em>
    def printer(self, text):                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Define method</span></em>
        self.message = text                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Change instance</span></em>
        print(self.message)                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Access instance</span></em></pre>
<p>The name <code class="epub__literal">printer</code> references
          a function object; because it’s assigned in the <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement’s scope, it becomes a
          class object attribute and is inherited by every instance made from
          the class. Normally, because methods like <code class="epub__literal">printer</code> are designed to process instances,
          we call them through instances:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e68131"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = NextClass()</code></strong>                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Make instance</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.printer('instance call')</code></strong>              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Call its method</span></em>
instance call

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.message</code></strong>                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Instance changed</span></em>
'instance call'</pre>
<p>When we call the method by qualifying an instance like this,
          <code class="epub__literal">printer</code> is first located by
          inheritance, and then its <code class="epub__literal">self</code>
          argument is automatically assigned the instance object (<code class="epub__literal">x</code>); the <code class="epub__literal">text</code> argument gets the string passed at
          the call (<code class="epub__literal">'instance call'</code>).
          Notice that because Python automatically passes the first argument
          to <code class="epub__literal">self</code> for us, we only actually
          have to pass in one argument. Inside <code class="epub__literal">printer</code>, the name <code class="epub__literal">self</code> is used to access or set per-instance
          data because it refers back to the instance currently being
          processed.</p>
<p>Methods may be called in one of two ways—through an instance,
          or through the class itself. For example, we can also call <code class="epub__literal">printer</code> by going through the class name,
          provided we pass an instance to the <code class="epub__literal">self</code> argument explicitly:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e68187"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>NextClass.printer(x, 'class call')</code></strong>      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Direct class call</span></em>
class call

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.message</code></strong>                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Instance changed again</span></em>
'class call'</pre>
<p>Calls routed through the instance
          and the class have the exact same effect, as long as we pass the
          same instance object ourselves in the class form. By default, in
          fact, you get an error message if you try to call a method without
          any instance:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e68204"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>NextClass.printer('bad call')</code></strong>
TypeError: unbound method printer() must be called with NextClass instance...</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Calling Superclass Constructors"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="calling_superclass_constructors"></a>Calling Superclass Constructors</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Methods <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e68214"></a>are normally called through instances. Calls to
          methods through a class, though, do show up in a variety of special
          roles. One common scenario involves the constructor method. The
          <code class="epub__literal">__init__</code> method, like all
          attributes, is looked up by inheritance. This means that at
          construction time, Python locates and calls just one <code class="epub__literal">__init__</code>. If subclass constructors need to
          guarantee that superclass construction-time logic runs, too, they
          generally must call the superclass’s <code class="epub__literal">__init__</code> method explicitly through the
          class:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e68229"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Super:
    def __init__(self, x):
        <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...default code...</code></em>

class Sub(Super):
    def __init__(self, x, y):
        Super.__init__(self, x)             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Run superclass __init__</span></em>
        <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...custom code...</code></em>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Do my init actions</span></em>

I = Sub(1, 2)</pre>
<p>This is one of the few contexts in which your code is likely
          to call an operator overloading method directly. Naturally, you
          should only call the superclass constructor this way if you really
          want it to run—without the call, the subclass replaces it
          completely. For a more realistic illustration of this technique in
          action, see the <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> class
          example in the prior chapter’s tutorial.<sup>[65]</sup></p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Other Method Call Possibilities"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="other_method_call_possibilities"></a>Other Method Call Possibilities</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>This pattern of calling methods through a class is the general
          basis of extending (instead of completely replacing) inherited
          method behavior. In Chapter 31, we’ll
          also meet a new option added in Python 2.2, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e68265"></a>static methods</em></span>, <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e68270"></a>that allow you to code methods that do not expect
          instance objects in their first arguments. Such methods can act like
          simple instanceless functions, with names that are local to the
          classes in which they are coded, and may be used to manage class
          data. A related concept, the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e68277"></a>class method</em></span>, <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e68282"></a>receives a class when called instead of an instance
          and can be used to manage per-class data. These are advanced and
          optional extensions, though; normally, you must always pass an
          instance to a method, whether it is called through an instance or a
          <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e68289"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e68291"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e68293"></a>class.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Inheritance"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
