<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Namespaces: The Whole Story</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="namespaces_colon_the_whole_story"></a>Namespaces: The Whole Story</h1>
<p>Now <a id="ch28classescodingnamespaces"></a><a id="ch28namespaces"></a>that we’ve examined class and instance objects, the
        Python namespace story is complete. For reference, I’ll quickly
        summarize all the rules used to resolve names here. The first things
        you need to remember are that qualified and unqualified names are
        treated differently, and that some scopes serve to initialize object
        namespaces:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Unqualified names (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">X</code>) deal with scopes.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Qualified attribute names (e.g.,
            <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>object</code></em><code class="epub__literal">.X</code>) use object namespaces.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Some scopes initialize object namespaces (for modules and
            classes).</p></li></ul>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Simple Names: Global Unless Assigned"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="simple_names_colon_global_unless_assign"></a>Simple Names: Global Unless Assigned</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Unqualified <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e68995"></a>simple names follow the LEGB lexical scoping rule
          outlined for functions in Chapter 17:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Assignment (<code class="epub__literal">X =</code>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>value</code></em>)</span></dt><dd>
<p>Makes names local: creates or changes the name <code class="epub__literal">X</code> in the current local scope, unless
                declared global.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Reference (<code class="epub__literal">X</code>)</span></dt><dd>
<p>Looks for the name <code class="epub__literal">X</code>
                in the current local scope, then any and all enclosing
                functions, then the current global scope, then the built-in
                scope.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Attribute Names: Object Namespaces"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="attribute_names_colon_object_namespaces"></a>Attribute Names: Object Namespaces</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Qualified <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e69036"></a>attribute names refer to attributes of specific
          objects and obey the rules for modules and classes. For class and
          instance objects, the reference rules are augmented to include the
          inheritance search procedure:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Assignment (<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>object</code></em><code class="epub__literal">.X =</code>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>value</code></em>)</span></dt><dd>
<p>Creates or alters the attribute name <code class="epub__literal">X</code> in the namespace of the
                <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>object</code></em> being qualified, and none
                other. Inheritance-tree climbing happens only on attribute
                reference, not on attribute assignment.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Reference (<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>object</code></em><code class="epub__literal">.X</code>)</span></dt><dd>
<p>For class-based objects, searches for the attribute name
                <code class="epub__literal">X</code> in
                <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>object</code></em>, then in all accessible
                classes above it, using the inheritance search procedure. For
                nonclass objects such as modules, fetches <code class="epub__literal">X</code> from
                <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>object</code></em> directly.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The “Zen” of Python Namespaces: Assignments Classify Names"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_quotation_mark_zen_quotation_mark"></a>The “Zen” of Python Namespaces: Assignments Classify
          Names</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>With <a id="ch28namespacesnameassgnmnt"></a>distinct search procedures for qualified and
          unqualified names, and multiple lookup layers for both, it can
          sometimes be difficult to tell where a name will wind up going. In
          Python, the place where you <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>assign</em></span> a name is
          crucial—it fully determines the scope or object in which a name will
          reside. The file <em class="epub__filename"><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e69101"></a>manynames.py</em> illustrates how this principle
          translates to code and summarizes the namespace ideas we have seen
          throughout this book:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e69106"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># manynames.py</span></em>

X = 11                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Global (module) name/attribute (X, or manynames.X)</span></em>

def f():
    print(X)                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Access global X (11)</span></em>

def g():
    X = 22                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Local (function) variable (X, hides module X)</span></em>
    print(X)

class C:
    X = 33                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Class attribute (C.X)</span></em>
    def m(self):
        X = 44               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Local variable in method (X)</span></em>
        self.X = 55          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Instance attribute (instance.X)</span></em></pre>
<p>This file assigns the same name, <code class="epub__literal">X</code>, five times. Because this name is
          assigned in five different locations, though, all five <code class="epub__literal">X</code>s in this program are completely
          different variables. From top to bottom, the assignments to <code class="epub__literal">X</code> here generate: a module attribute
          (<code class="epub__literal">11</code>), a local variable in a
          function (<code class="epub__literal">22</code>), a class attribute
          (<code class="epub__literal">33</code>), a local variable in a
          method (<code class="epub__literal">44</code>), and an instance
          attribute (<code class="epub__literal">55</code>). Although all five
          are named <code class="epub__literal">X</code>, the fact that they
          are all assigned at different places in the source code or to
          different objects makes all of these unique variables.</p>
<p>You should take the time to study this example carefully
          because it collects ideas we’ve been exploring throughout the last
          few parts of this book. When it makes sense to you, you will have
          achieved a sort of Python namespace nirvana. Of course, an
          alternative route to nirvana is to simply run the program and see
          what happens. Here’s the remainder of this source file, which makes
          an instance and prints all the <code class="epub__literal">X</code>s
          that it can fetch:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e69163"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># manynames.py, continued</span></em>

if __name__ == '__main__':
    print(X)                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 11: module (a.k.a. manynames.X outside file)</span></em>
    f()                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 11: global</span></em>
    g()                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 22: local</span></em>
    print(X)                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 11: module name unchanged</span></em>

    obj = C()                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Make instance</span></em>
    print(obj.X)             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 33: class name inherited by instance</span></em>

    obj.m()                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Attach attribute name X to instance now</span></em>
    print(obj.X)             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 55: instance</span></em>
    print(C.X)               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 33: class (a.k.a. obj.X if no X in instance)</span></em>

    #print(C.m.X)            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># FAILS: only visible in method</span></em>
    #print(g.X)              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># FAILS: only visible in function</span></em></pre>
<p>The outputs that are printed when the file is run are noted in
          the comments in the code; trace through them to see which variable
          named <code class="epub__literal">X</code> is being accessed each
          time. Notice in particular that we can go through the class to fetch
          its attribute (<code class="epub__literal">C.X</code>), but we can
          never fetch local variables in functions or methods from outside
          their <code class="epub__literal">def</code> statements. Locals are
          visible only to other code within the <code class="epub__literal">def</code>, and in fact only live in memory while
          a call to the function or method is executing.</p>
<p>Some of the names defined by this file are visible
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>outside the file</em></span> to other modules, but recall
          that we must always import before we can access names in another
          file—that is the main point of modules, after all:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e69219"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># otherfile.py</span></em>

import manynames

X = 66
print(X)                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 66: the global here</span></em>
print(manynames.X)           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 11: globals become attributes after imports</span></em>

manynames.f()                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 11: manynames's X, not the one here!</span></em>
manynames.g()                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 22: local in other file's function</span></em>

print(manynames.C.X)         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 33: attribute of class in other module</span></em>
I = manynames.C()
print(I.X)                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 33: still from class here</span></em>
I.m()
print(I.X)                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 55: now from instance!</span></em></pre>
<p>Notice here how <code class="epub__literal">manynames.f()</code> prints the <code class="epub__literal">X</code> in <code class="epub__literal">manynames</code>, not the <code class="epub__literal">X</code> assigned in this file—scopes are always determined by
          the position of assignments in your source code (i.e., lexically)
          and are never influenced by what imports what or who imports whom.
          Also, notice that the instance’s own <code class="epub__literal">X</code> is not created until we call <code class="epub__literal">I.m()</code>—attributes, like all variables,
          spring into existence when assigned, and not before. Normally we
          create instance attributes by assigning them in class <code class="epub__literal">__init__</code> constructor methods, but this
          isn’t the only option.</p>
<p>Finally, as we learned in Chapter 17, it’s also
          possible for a function to <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>change</em></span> names outside
          itself, with <code class="epub__literal">global</code> and (in
          Python 3.0) <code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code>
          statements—these statements provide write access, but also modify
          assignment’s namespace binding rules:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e69285"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">X = 11                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Global in module</span></em>

def g1():
    print(X)                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Reference global in module</span></em>

def g2():
    global X
    X = 22                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Change global in module</span></em>

def h1():
    X = 33                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Local in function</span></em>
    def nested():
        print(X)             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Reference local in enclosing scope</span></em>

def h2():
    X = 33                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Local in function</span></em>
    def nested():
        nonlocal X           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Python 3.0 statement</span></em>
        X = 44               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Change local in enclosing scope</span></em></pre>
<p>Of course, you generally shouldn’t use the same name for every
          variable in your script—but as
          this example demonstrates, even if you do, Python’s namespaces will
          work to keep names used in one context from accidentally clashing
          with those used in <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e69316"></a>another.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Namespace Dictionaries"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="namespace_dictionaries"></a>Namespace Dictionaries</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In Chapter 22, we <a id="ch28namespacesnmspcdict"></a>learned that module namespaces are actually
          implemented as dictionaries and exposed with the built-in <code class="epub__literal">__dict__</code> attribute. The same holds for
          class and instance objects: attribute qualification is really a
          dictionary indexing operation internally, and attribute inheritance
          is just a matter of searching linked dictionaries. In fact, instance
          and class objects are mostly just dictionaries with links inside
          Python. Python exposes these dictionaries, as well as the links
          between them, for use in advanced roles (e.g., for coding
          tools).</p>
<p>To help you understand how attributes work internally, let’s
          work through an interactive session that traces the way namespace
          dictionaries grow when classes are involved. We saw a simpler
          version of this type of code in Chapter 26, but now that we know more about
          methods and superclasses, let’s embellish it here. First, let’s
          define a superclass and a subclass with methods that will store data
          in their instances:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e69339"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class super:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def hello(self):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>self.data1 = 'spam'</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class sub(super):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def hola(self):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>self.data2 = 'eggs'</code></strong>
...</pre>
<p>When we make an instance of the
          subclass, the instance starts out with an empty namespace
          dictionary, but it has links back to the class for the inheritance
          search to follow. In fact, the inheritance tree is explicitly
          available in special attributes, which you can inspect. Instances
          have a<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e69363"></a> <code class="epub__literal">__class__</code>
          attribute that links to their class, and classes have a<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e69370"></a> <code class="epub__literal">__bases__</code>
          attribute that is a tuple containing links to higher superclasses
          (I’m running this on Python 3.0; name formats and some internal
          attributes vary slightly in 2.6):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e69377"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = sub()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.__dict__</code></strong>                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Instance namespace dict</span></em>
{}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.__class__</code></strong>                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Class of instance</span></em>
&lt;class '__main__.sub'&gt;

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sub.__bases__</code></strong>                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Superclasses of class</span></em>
(&lt;class '__main__.super'&gt;,)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>super.__bases__</code></strong>                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># () empty tuple in Python 2.6</span></em>
(&lt;class 'object'&gt;,)</pre>
<p>As classes assign to <code class="epub__literal">self</code>
          attributes, they populate the instance objects—that is, attributes wind up in the instances’
          attribute namespace dictionaries, not in the classes’. An instance
          object’s namespace records data that can vary from instance to
          instance, and <code class="epub__literal">self</code> is a hook into
          that namespace:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e69418"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Y = sub()</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.hello()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.__dict__</code></strong>
{'data1': 'spam'}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.hola()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.__dict__</code></strong>
{'data1': 'spam', 'data2': 'eggs'}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sub.__dict__.keys()</code></strong>
['__module__', '__doc__', 'hola']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>super.__dict__.keys()</code></strong>
['__dict__', '__module__', '__weakref__', 'hello', '__doc__']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Y.__dict__</code></strong>
{}</pre>
<p>Notice the extra underscore names in the class dictionaries;
          Python sets these automatically. Most are not used in typical
          programs, but there are tools that use some of them (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">__doc__</code> holds the docstrings discussed in
          Chapter 15).</p>
<p>Also, observe that <code class="epub__literal">Y</code>, a second instance made at the start of
          this series, still has an empty namespace dictionary at the end, even though <code class="epub__literal">X</code>’s dictionary has been populated by
          assignments in methods. Again, each instance has an independent
          namespace dictionary, which
          starts out empty and can record completely different attributes than
          those recorded by the namespace dictionaries of other instances of
          the same class.</p>
<p>Because attributes are actually dictionary keys inside Python,
          there are really two ways to fetch and assign their values—by
          qualification, or by key indexing:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e69470"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.data1, X.__dict__['data1']</code></strong>
('spam', 'spam')

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.data3 = 'toast'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.__dict__</code></strong>
{'data1': 'spam', 'data3': 'toast', 'data2': 'eggs'}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.__dict__['data3'] = 'ham'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.data3</code></strong>
'ham'</pre>
<p>This equivalence applies only to attributes actually attached
          to the instance, though. Because attribute fetch qualification also
          performs an inheritance search, it can access attributes that
          namespace dictionary indexing cannot. The inherited attribute
          <code class="epub__literal">X.hello</code>, for instance, cannot be
          accessed by <code class="epub__literal">X.__dict__['hello']</code>.</p>
<p>Finally, here is the built-in <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e69498"></a>dir</code> function we met in Chapters 4 and 15 at work on class and instance
          objects. This function works on anything with attributes: <code class="epub__literal">dir(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>object</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code> is similar to an
          <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>object</code></em><code class="epub__literal">.__dict__.keys()</code> call. Notice, though,
          that <code class="epub__literal">dir</code> sorts its list and
          includes some system attributes. As of Python 2.2, <code class="epub__literal">dir</code> also collects inherited attributes
          automatically, and in 3.0 it includes names inherited from the
          <code class="epub__literal">object</code> class that is an implied
          superclass of all classes:<sup>[67]</sup></p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e69543"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.__dict__, Y.__dict__</code></strong>
({'data1': 'spam', 'data3': 'ham', 'data2': 'eggs'}, {})
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(X.__dict__.keys())</code></strong>                                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Need list in 3.0</span></em>
['data1', 'data3', 'data2']

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># In Python 2.6:</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dir(X)</code></strong>
['__doc__', '__module__', 'data1', 'data2', 'data3', 'hello', 'hola']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dir(sub)</code></strong>
['__doc__', '__module__', 'hello', 'hola']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dir(super)</code></strong>
['__doc__', '__module__', 'hello']

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># In Python 3.0:</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dir(X)</code></strong>
['__class__', '__delattr__', '__dict__', '__doc__', '__eq__', '__format__',
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...more omitted...</code></em>
'data1', 'data2', 'data3', 'hello', 'hola']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dir(sub)</code></strong>
['__class__', '__delattr__', '__dict__', '__doc__', '__eq__', '__format__',
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...more omitted...</code></em>
'hello', 'hola']

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dir(super)</code></strong>
['__class__', '__delattr__', '__dict__', '__doc__', '__eq__', '__format__',
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...more omitted...</code></em>
'hello'
]</pre>
<p>Experiment with these special attributes on your own to get a
          better feel for how namespaces actually do their attribute business.
          Even if you will never use these in the kinds of programs you write,
          seeing that they are just normal dictionaries will help demystify
          the notion of namespaces in <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e69591"></a>general.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Namespace Links"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="namespace_links"></a>Namespace Links</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e69599"></a>prior section introduced the special<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e69605"></a> <code class="epub__literal">__class__</code>
          and<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e69612"></a> <code class="epub__literal">__bases__</code> instance
          and class attributes, without really explaining why you might care
          about them. In short, these attributes allow you to inspect
          inheritance hierarchies within your own code. For example, they can
          be used to display a class tree, as in the following example:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e69619"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># classtree.py</span></em>

"""
Climb inheritance trees using namespace links,
displaying higher superclasses with indentation
"""

def classtree(cls, indent):
    print('.' * indent + cls.__name__)    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Print class name here</span></em>
    for supercls in cls.__bases__:        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Recur to all superclasses</span></em>
        classtree(supercls, indent+3)     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># May visit super &gt; once</span></em>

def instancetree(inst):
    print('Tree of %s' % inst)            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Show instance</span></em>
    classtree(inst.__class__, 3)          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Climb to its class</span></em>

def selftest():
    class A:      pass
    class B(A):   pass
    class C(A):   pass
    class D(B,C): pass
    class E:      pass
    class F(D,E): pass
    instancetree(B())
    instancetree(F())

if __name__ == '__main__': selftest()</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e69641"></a>classtree</code> function in this script is
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>recursive</em></span>—it prints a class’s name using
          <code class="epub__literal">__name__</code>, then climbs up to the
          superclasses by calling itself. This allows the function to traverse
          arbitrarily shaped class trees; the recursion climbs to the top, and
          stops at root superclasses that have empty <code class="epub__literal">__bases__</code> attributes. When using
          recursion, each active level of a function gets its own copy of the
          local scope; here, this means that <code class="epub__literal">cls</code> and <code class="epub__literal">indent</code> are different at each <code class="epub__literal">classtree</code> level.</p>
<p>Most of this file is self-test code. When run standalone in
          Python 3.0, it builds an empty class tree, makes two instances from
          it, and prints their class tree structures:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e69667"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python26\python classtree.py</code></strong>
Tree of &lt;__main__.B instance at 0x02557328&gt;
...B
......A
Tree of &lt;__main__.F instance at 0x02557328&gt;
...F
......D
.........B
............A
.........C
............A
......E</pre>
<p>When run under Python 3.0, the tree includes the implied
          <code class="epub__literal">object</code> superclasses that are
          automatically added above standalone classes, because all classes
          are “new style” in 3.0 (more on this change in Chapter 31):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e69679"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python30\python classtree.py</code></strong>
Tree of &lt;__main__.B object at 0x02810650&gt;
...B
......A
.........object
Tree of &lt;__main__.F object at 0x02810650&gt;
...F
......D
.........B
............A
...............object
.........C
............A
...............object
......E
.........object</pre>
<p>Here, indentation marked by periods is used to denote class
          tree height. Of course, we could improve on this output format, and
          perhaps even sketch it in a GUI display. Even as is, though, we can
          import these functions anywhere we want a quick class tree display:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e69689"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python30\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class Emp: pass</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class Person(Emp): pass</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bob = Person()</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import classtree</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>classtree.instancetree(bob)</code></strong>
Tree of &lt;__main__.Person object at 0x028203B0&gt;
...Person
......Emp
.........object</pre>
<p>Regardless of whether you will ever code or use such tools,
          this example demonstrates one of the many ways that you can make use
          of special attributes that expose interpreter internals. You’ll see
          another when we code the <em class="epub__filename">lister.py</em> general-purpose class display
          tools in the section Multiple Inheritance: “Mix-in” Classes—there, we will
          extend this technique to also display attributes in each object in a
          class tree. And in the last part of this book, we’ll revisit such
          tools in the context of Python tool building at large, to code tools
          that implement attribute privacy, argument validation, and more.
          While not for every Python programmer, access to internals enables
          powerful <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e69717"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e69719"></a>development tools.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Documentation Strings Revisited"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
