<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_answers-id27"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</h1>
<div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>An abstract superclass is a class that calls a method, but
            does not inherit or define it—it expects the method to be filled
            in by a subclass. This is often used as a way to generalize
            classes when behavior cannot be predicted until a more specific
            subclass is coded. OOP frameworks also use this as a way to
            dispatch to client-defined, customizable operations.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>When a simple assignment statement (<code class="epub__literal">X = Y</code>) appears at the top level of a
            <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement, it attaches a
            data attribute to the class
            (<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>Class</code></em><code class="epub__literal">.X</code>). Like all class attributes, this
            will be shared by all instances; data attributes are not callable
            method functions, though.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>A class must manually call the <code class="epub__literal">__init__</code> method in a superclass if it
            defines an <code class="epub__literal">__init__</code> constructor
            of its own and still wants the superclass’s construction code to
            run. Python itself automatically runs just one constructor—the
            lowest one in the tree. Superclass constructors are called through
            the class name, passing in the <code class="epub__literal">self</code> instance manually:
            <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>Superclass</code></em><code class="epub__literal">.__init__(self, ...)</code>.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>To augment instead of completely replacing an inherited
            method, redefine it in a subclass, but call back to the
            superclass’s version of the method manually from the new version
            of the method in the subclass. That is, pass the <code class="epub__literal">self</code> instance to the superclass’s
            version of the method manually:
            <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>Superclass</code></em><code class="epub__literal">.</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>method</code></em><code class="epub__literal">(self, ...)</code>.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Ashur (or Qalat Sherqat), Calah (or Nimrud), the short-lived
            Dur Sharrukin (or Khorsabad), and finally Nineveh.</p></li></ol>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[63] </sup>If you’ve used C++ you may recognize this as similar to
              the notion of C++’s “static” data members—members that are
              stored in the class, independent of instances. In Python, it’s
              nothing special: all class attributes are just names assigned in
              the <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement, whether
              they happen to reference functions (C++’s “methods”) or
              something else (C++’s “members”). In Chapter 31, we’ll also meet Python
              static methods (akin to those in C++), which are just self-less
              functions that usually process class attributes.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[64] </sup>Unless the class has redefined the attribute assignment
              operation to do something unique with the <code class="epub__literal">__setattr__</code> operator overloading
              method (discussed in Chapter 29).</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[65] </sup>On a somewhat related note, you can also code multiple
              <code class="epub__literal">__init__</code> methods within the
              same class, but only the last definition will be used; see Chapter 30 for more details on multiple
              method definitions.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[66] </sup>This description isn’t 100% complete, because we can also
              create instance and class attributes by assigning to objects
              outside <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statements—but
              that’s a much less common and sometimes more error-prone
              approach (changes aren’t isolated to <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statements). In Python, all
              attributes are always accessible by default. We’ll talk more
              about attribute name privacy in Chapter 29 when we study <code class="epub__literal">__setattr__</code>, in Chapter 30 when we meet <code class="epub__literal">__</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>X</code></em> names,
              and again in Chapter 38, where we’ll
              implement it with a class decorator.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[67] </sup>As you can see, the contents of attribute dictionaries and
              <code class="epub__literal">dir</code> call results may change
              over time. For example, because Python now allows built-in types
              to be subclassed like classes, the contents of <code class="epub__literal">dir</code> results for built-in types have
              expanded to include operator overloading methods, just like our
              <code class="epub__literal">dir</code> results here for
              user-defined classes under Python 3.0. In general, attribute
              names with leading and trailing double underscores are
              interpreter-specific. Type subclasses will be discussed further
              in Chapter 31.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
