<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Iterator Objects: __iter__ and __next__</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="iterator_objects_colon_underscore_under"></a>Iterator Objects: __iter__ and __next__</h1>
<p>Although <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e71036"></a>the <code class="epub__literal">__getitem__</code>
        technique of the prior section works, it’s really just a fallback for
        iteration. Today, all iteration contexts in Python will try the
        <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e71045"></a><code class="epub__literal">__iter__</code> method
        first, before trying <code class="epub__literal">__getitem__</code>.
        That is, they prefer the iteration protocol we learned about in Chapter 14 to repeatedly
        indexing an object; only if the object does not support the iteration
        protocol is indexing attempted instead. Generally speaking, you should
        prefer <code class="epub__literal">__iter__</code> too—it supports
        general iteration contexts better than <code class="epub__literal">__getitem__</code> can.</p>
<p>Technically, iteration contexts work by calling the <code class="epub__literal">iter</code> built-in function to try to find an
        <code class="epub__literal">__iter__</code> method, which is expected
        to return an iterator object. If it’s provided, Python then repeatedly
        calls this iterator object’s<a id="I_indexterm5_d1e71071"></a> <code class="epub__literal">__next__</code> method to
        produce items until a <code class="epub__literal">StopIteration</code>
        exception is raised. If no such <code class="epub__literal">__iter__</code> method is found, Python falls back
        on the <code class="epub__literal">__getitem__</code> scheme and
        repeatedly indexes by offsets as before, until an <code class="epub__literal">IndexError</code> exception is raised. A <code class="epub__literal">next</code> built-in function is also available as
        a convenience for manual iterations: <code class="epub__literal">next(I)</code> is the same as <code class="epub__literal">I.__next__()</code>.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Version skew note</em></span>: As described in Chapter 14, if you are
          using Python 2.6, the <code class="epub__literal">I.__next__()</code> method just described is
          named <code class="epub__literal">I.next()</code> in your Python,
          and the <code class="epub__literal">next(I)</code> built-in is
          present for portability: it calls <code class="epub__literal">I.next()</code> in 2.6 and <code class="epub__literal">I.__next__()</code> in 3.0. Iteration works the
          same in 2.6 in all other respects.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="User-Defined Iterators"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="user-defined_iterators"></a>User-Defined Iterators</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In the <code class="epub__literal">__iter__</code> scheme,
          <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e71131"></a>classes implement user-defined iterators by simply
          implementing the iteration protocol introduced in Chapters 14 and 20 (refer back to those chapters for
          more background details on iterators). For example, the following
          file, <em class="epub__filename">iters.py</em>, defines a
          user-defined iterator class that generates squares<a id="I_indexterm5_d1e71147"></a>:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e71151"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Squares:
    def __init__(self, start, stop):    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Save state when created</span></em>
        self.value = start - 1
        self.stop  = stop
    def __iter__(self):                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Get iterator object on iter</span></em>
        return self
    def __next__(self):                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Return a square on each iteration</span></em>
        if self.value == self.stop:     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Also called by next built-in</span></em>
            raise StopIteration
        self.value += 1
        return self.value ** 2

% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from iters import Squares</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for i in Squares(1, 5):</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># for calls iter, which calls __iter__</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(i, end=' ')</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Each iteration calls __next__</span></em>
...
1 4 9 16 25</pre>
<p>Here, the iterator object is simply the instance <code class="epub__literal">self</code>, because the <code class="epub__literal">__next__</code> method is part of this class. In
          more complex scenarios, the iterator object may be defined as a
          separate class and object with its own state information to support
          multiple active iterations over the same data (we’ll see an example
          of this in a moment). The end of the iteration is signaled with a
          Python <code class="epub__literal">raise</code> statement (more on
          raising exceptions in the next part of this book). Manual iterations
          work as for built-in types as well:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e71195"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = Squares(1, 5)</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Iterate manually: what loops do</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>I = iter(X)</code></strong>                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># iter calls __iter__</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(I)</code></strong>                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># next calls __next__</span></em>
1
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(I)</code></strong>
4
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...more omitted...</code></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(I)</code></strong>
25
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>next(I)</code></strong>                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Can catch this in try statement</span></em>
StopIteration</pre>
<p>An equivalent coding of this iterator with <code class="epub__literal">__getitem__</code> might be less natural, because
          the <code class="epub__literal">for</code> would then iterate
          through all offsets zero and higher; the offsets passed in would be
          only indirectly related to the range of values produced (<code class="epub__literal">0..N</code> would need to map to <code class="epub__literal">start..stop</code>). Because <code class="epub__literal">__iter__</code> objects retain explicitly managed
          state between <code class="epub__literal">next</code> calls, they
          can be more general than <code class="epub__literal">__getitem__</code>.</p>
<p>On the other hand, using iterators based on<a id="I_indexterm5_d1e71257"></a> <code class="epub__literal">__iter__</code> can
          sometimes be more complex and less convenient than using <code class="epub__literal">__getitem__</code>. They are really designed for
          iteration, not random indexing—in fact, they don’t overload the
          indexing expression at all:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e71269"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = Squares(1, 5)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X[1]</code></strong>
AttributeError: Squares instance has no attribute '__getitem__'</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">__iter__</code> scheme is also
          the implementation for all the other iteration contexts we saw in
          action for <code class="epub__literal">__getitem__</code>
          (membership tests, type constructors, sequence assignment, and so
          on). However, unlike our prior <code class="epub__literal">__getitem__</code> example, we also need to be
          aware that a class’s <code class="epub__literal">__iter__</code> may
          be designed for a single traversal, not many. For example, the
          <code class="epub__literal">Squares</code> class is a one-shot
          iteration; once you’ve iterated over an instance of that class, it’s
          empty. You need to make a new iterator object for each new
          iteration:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e71294"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = Squares(1, 5)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[n for n in X]</code></strong>                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Exhausts items</span></em>
[1, 4, 9, 16, 25]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[n for n in X]</code></strong>                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Now it's empty</span></em>
[]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[n for n in Squares(1, 5)]</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Make a new iterator object</span></em>
[1, 4, 9, 16, 25]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(Squares(1, 3))</code></strong>
[1, 4, 9]</pre>
<p>Notice that this example would probably be simpler if it were
          coded with generator functions or expressions (topics introduced in
          Chapter 20 and
          related to iterators):</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e71326"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def gsquares(start, stop):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for i in range(start, stop+1):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>yield i ** 2</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for i in gsquares(1, 5):</code></strong>  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">                    # or: (x ** 2 for x in range(1, 5))</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(i, end=' ')</code></strong>
...
1 4 9 16 25</pre>
<p>Unlike the class, the function automatically saves its state
          between iterations. Of course, for this artificial example, you
          could in fact skip both techniques and simply use a <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop, <code class="epub__literal">map</code>, or a list comprehension to build the
          list all at once. The best and fastest way to accomplish a task in
          Python is often also the simplest:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e71355"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[x ** 2 for x in range(1, 6)]</code></strong>
[1, 4, 9, 16, 25]</pre>
<p>However, classes may be better at modeling more complex
          iterations, especially when they can benefit from state information
          and inheritance hierarchies. The next section explores one such use
          case.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Multiple Iterators on One Object"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="multiple_iterators_on_one_object"></a>Multiple Iterators on One Object</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Earlier, I <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e71367"></a>mentioned that the iterator object may be defined as a
          separate class with its own state information to support multiple
          active iterations over the same data. Consider what happens when we
          step across a built-in type like a string:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e71375"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S = 'ace'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for x in S:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for y in S:</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(x + y, end=' ')</code></strong>
...
aa ac ae ca cc ce ea ec ee</pre>
<p>Here, the outer loop grabs an iterator from the string by
          calling <code class="epub__literal">iter</code>, and each nested
          loop does the same to get an independent iterator. Because each
          active iterator has its own state information, each loop can
          maintain its own position in the string, regardless of any other
          active loops.</p>
<p>We saw related examples earlier, in Chapters 14 and 20. For instance, generator
          functions and expressions, as well as built-ins like <code class="epub__literal">map</code> and <code class="epub__literal">zip</code>, proved to be single-iterator objects;
          by contrast, the <code class="epub__literal">range</code> built-in
          and other built-in types, like lists, support multiple active
          iterators with independent positions.</p>
<p>When we code user-defined iterators with classes, it’s up to
          us to decide whether we will support a single active iteration or
          many. To achieve the multiple-iterator effect, <code class="epub__literal">__iter__</code> simply needs to define a new
          stateful object for the iterator, instead of returning <code class="epub__literal">self</code>.</p>
<p>The following, for example, defines an iterator class that
          skips every other item on iterations. Because the iterator object is
          created anew for each iteration, it supports multiple active
          loops:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e71419"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class SkipIterator:
    def __init__(self, wrapped):
        self.wrapped = wrapped                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Iterator state information</span></em>
        self.offset  = 0
    def __next__(self):
        if self.offset &gt;= len(self.wrapped):      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Terminate iterations</span></em>
            raise StopIteration
        else:
            item = self.wrapped[self.offset]      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># else return and skip</span></em>
            self.offset += 2
            return item

class SkipObject:
    def __init__(self, wrapped):                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Save item to be used</span></em>
        self.wrapped = wrapped
    def __iter__(self):
        return SkipIterator(self.wrapped)         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># New iterator each time</span></em>

if __name__ == '__main__':
    alpha = 'abcdef'
    skipper = SkipObject(alpha)                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Make container object</span></em>
    I = iter(skipper)                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Make an iterator on it</span></em>
    print(next(I), next(I), next(I))              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Visit offsets 0, 2, 4</span></em>

    for x in skipper:               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># for calls __iter__ automatically</span></em>
        for y in skipper:           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Nested fors call __iter__ again each time</span></em>
            print(x + y, end=' ')   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Each iterator has its own state, offset</span></em></pre>
<p>When run, this example works like the nested loops with
          built-in strings. Each active loop has its own position in the
          string because each obtains an independent iterator object that
          records its own state information:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e71456"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python skipper.py</code></strong>
a c e
aa ac ae ca cc ce ea ec ee</pre>
<p>By contrast, our earlier <code class="epub__literal">Squares</code> example supports just one active
          iteration, unless we call <code class="epub__literal">Squares</code>
          again in nested loops to obtain new objects. Here, there is just one
          <code class="epub__literal">Skip</code><code class="epub__literal">Object</code>, with multiple iterator
          objects created from it.</p>
<p>As before, we could achieve similar results with built-in
          tools—for example, slicing with a third bound to skip items:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e71478"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S = 'abcdef'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for x in S[::2]:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for y in S[::2]:</code></strong>            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># New objects on each iteration</span></em>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(x + y, end=' ')</code></strong>
...
aa ac ae ca cc ce ea ec ee</pre>
<p>This isn’t quite the same, though, for two reasons. First,
          each slice expression here will physically store the result list all
          at once in memory; iterators, on the other hand, produce just one
          value at a time, which can save substantial space for large result
          lists. Second, slices produce new objects, so we’re not really
          iterating over the same object in multiple places here. To be closer
          to the class, we would need to make a single object to step across
          by slicing ahead of time:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e71497"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S = 'abcdef'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S = S[::2]</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>S</code></strong>
'ace'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for x in S:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for y in S:</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same object, new iterators</span></em>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(x + y, end=' ')</code></strong>
...
aa ac ae ca cc ce ea ec ee</pre>
<p>This is more similar to our class-based solution, but it still
          stores the slice result in memory all at once (there is no generator
          form of built-in slicing today), and it’s only equivalent for this
          particular case of skipping every other item.</p>
<p>Because iterators can do anything a class can do, they are
          much more general than this example may imply. Regardless of whether
          our applications require such generality, user-defined iterators are
          a powerful tool—they allow us to make arbitrary objects look and
          feel like the other sequences and iterables we have met in this
          book. We could use this technique with a database object, for
          example, to support iterations over database fetches, with multiple
          cursors into the same query result.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Membership: __contains__, __iter__, and __getitem__"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
