<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Attribute Reference: __getattr__ and __setattr__</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="attribute_reference_colon_underscore_un"></a>Attribute Reference: __getattr__ and __setattr__</h1>
<p>The<a id="I_indexterm5_d1e71770"></a> <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> method
        <a id="ch29operatoroverloadingattribref"></a>intercepts attribute qualifications. More specifically,
        it’s called with the attribute name as a string whenever you try to
        qualify an instance with an <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>undefined</em></span>
        (nonexistent) attribute name. It is not called if Python can find the
        attribute using its inheritance tree search procedure. Because of its
        behavior, <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> is useful as
        a hook for responding to attribute requests in a generic fashion. For
        example:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e71789"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class empty:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __getattr__(self, attrname):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if attrname == "age":</code></strong>
...             <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return 40</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>else:</code></strong>
...             <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>raise AttributeError(attrname</code></strong>)
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = empty()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.age</code></strong>
40
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.name</code></strong>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...error text omitted...</code></em>
AttributeError: name</pre>
<p>Here, the <code class="epub__literal">empty</code> class and its
        instance <code class="epub__literal">X</code> have no real attributes
        of their own, so the access to <code class="epub__literal">X.age</code> gets routed to the <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> method; <code class="epub__literal">self</code> is assigned the instance (<code class="epub__literal">X</code>), and <code class="epub__literal">attrname</code> is assigned the undefined attribute
        name string (<code class="epub__literal">"age"</code>). The class
        makes <code class="epub__literal">age</code> look like a real
        attribute by returning a real value as the result of the <code class="epub__literal">X.age</code> qualification expression (<code class="epub__literal">40</code>). In effect, <code class="epub__literal">age</code> becomes a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>dynamically
        computed</em></span> attribute.</p>
<p>For attributes that the class doesn’t know how to handle,
        <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> raises the built-in
        <code class="epub__literal">AttributeError</code> exception to tell
        Python that these are bona fide undefined names; asking for <code class="epub__literal">X.name</code> triggers the error. You’ll see
        <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> again when we see
        delegation and properties at work in the next two chapters, and I’ll
        say more about exceptions in Part VII.</p>
<p>A related overloading method,<a id="I_indexterm5_d1e71883"></a> <code class="epub__literal">__setattr__</code>,
        intercepts <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>all</em></span> attribute assignments. If this
        method is defined, <code class="epub__literal">self.attr =</code>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>value</code></em> becomes <code class="epub__literal">self.__setattr__('</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>attr</code></em><code class="epub__literal">',</code> <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>value</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code>. This is a bit trickier to use because
        assigning to any <code class="epub__literal">self</code> attributes
        within <code class="epub__literal">__setattr__</code> calls <code class="epub__literal">__setattr__</code> again, causing an infinite
        recursion loop (and eventually, a stack overflow exception!). If you
        want to use this method, be sure that it assigns any instance
        attributes by indexing the
        attribute dictionary, discussed in the next section. That is, use
        <code class="epub__literal">self.__dict__['name'] = x</code>, not
        <code class="epub__literal">self.name = x</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e71931"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class accesscontrol:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __setattr__(self, attr, value):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if attr == 'age'</code></strong>:
...             <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>self.__dict__[attr] = value</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>else:</code></strong>
...             <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>raise AttributeError(attr + ' not allowed'</code></strong>)
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = accesscontrol()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.age = 40</code></strong>                                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Calls __setattr__</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.age</code></strong>
40
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.name = 'mel'</code></strong>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...text omitted...</code></em>
AttributeError: name not allowed</pre>
<p>These two attribute-access overloading methods allow you to
        control or specialize access to attributes in your objects. They tend
        to play highly specialized roles, some of which we’ll explore later in
        this book.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Other Attribute Management Tools"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="other_attribute_management_tools"></a>Other Attribute Management Tools</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>For future reference, also note that there are other ways to
          manage attribute access in Python:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code>
              method intercepts all attribute fetches, not just those that are
              undefined, but when using it you must be more cautious than with
              <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> to avoid
              loops.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">property</code> built-in
              function allows us to associate methods with fetch and set
              operations on a specific class attribute.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Descriptors</em></span> provide a protocol for
              associating <code class="epub__literal">__get__</code> and
              <code class="epub__literal">__set__</code> methods of a class
              with accesses to a specific class attribute.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Because these are somewhat advanced tools not of interest to
          every Python programmer, we’ll defer a look at properties until
          Chapter 31 and detailed coverage of
          all the attribute management techniques until Chapter 37.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Emulating Privacy for Instance Attributes: Part 1"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="emulating_privacy_for_instance_attribut"></a>Emulating Privacy for Instance Attributes: Part 1</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e74028"></a>The <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e72017"></a>following code generalizes the previous example, to
          allow each subclass to have its own list of private names that
          cannot be assigned to its instances:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e72025"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class PrivateExc(Exception): pass                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># More on exceptions later</span></em>

class Privacy:
    def __setattr__(self, attrname, value):         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On self.attrname = value</span></em>
        if attrname in self.privates:
            raise PrivateExc(attrname, self)
        else:
            self.__dict__[attrname] = value         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># self.attrname = value loops!</span></em>

class Test1(Privacy):
    privates = ['age']

class Test2(Privacy):
    privates = ['name', 'pay']
    def __init__(self):
        self.__dict__['name'] = 'Tom'

x = Test1()
y = Test2()

x.name = 'Bob'
y.name = 'Sue'                                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Fails</span></em>

y.age  = 30
x.age  = 40                                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Fails</span></em></pre>
<p>In fact, this is a first-cut solution for an implementation of
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>attribute privacy</em></span> in Python (i.e., disallowing
          changes to attribute names outside a class). Although Python doesn’t
          support private declarations per se, techniques like this can
          emulate much of their purpose. This is a partial solution, though;
          to make it more effective, it must be augmented to allow subclasses
          to set private attributes more naturally, too, and to use <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> and a wrapper (sometimes
          called a proxy) class to check for private attribute fetches.</p>
<p>We’ll postpone a more complete solution to attribute privacy
          until Chapter 38, where we’ll use <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>class
          decorators</em></span> to intercept and validate attributes more
          generally. Even though privacy can be emulated this way, though, it
          almost never is in practice. Python programmers are able to write
          large OOP frameworks and applications without private
          declarations—an interesting finding about access controls in general
          that is beyond the scope of our purposes here.</p>
<p>Catching attribute references and assignments is generally a
          useful technique; it supports <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e72059"></a>delegation</em></span>, a design technique that allows
          controller objects to wrap up embedded objects, add new behaviors,
          and route other operations back to the wrapped objects<a id="I_indexterm5_d1e72064"></a> (more on delegation and wrapper classes in Chapter 30).</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="String Representation: __repr__ and __str__"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
