<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Comparisons: __lt__, __gt__, and Others</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="comparisons_colon_underscore_underscore"></a>Comparisons: __lt__, __gt__, and Others</h1>
<p>As <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e73188"></a>suggested in Table 29-1, classes can define
        methods to catch all six <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e73196"></a>comparison operators: <code class="epub__literal">&lt;</code>, <code class="epub__literal">&gt;</code>, <code class="epub__literal">&lt;=</code>, <code class="epub__literal">&gt;=</code>, <code class="epub__literal">==</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">!=</code>. These <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e73219"></a>methods <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e73223"></a>are generally straightforward to use, but keep the
        following qualifications in mind<a id="I_indexterm5_d1e73230"></a><a id="I_indexterm5_d1e73233"></a>:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Unlike the <code class="epub__literal">__add__</code>/<code class="epub__literal">__radd__</code> pairings discussed earlier,
            there are no right-side variants of comparison methods.
            Instead, reflective methods are used when only one operand
            supports comparison (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">__lt__</code> and <code class="epub__literal">__gt__</code> are each other’s reflection).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>There are no implicit relationships among the comparison
            operators. The truth of <code class="epub__literal">==</code> does
            not imply that <code class="epub__literal">!=</code> is false, for
            example, so both<a id="I_indexterm5_d1e73270"></a> <code class="epub__literal">__eq__</code> and
            <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e73277"></a><code class="epub__literal">__ne__</code> should be
            defined to ensure that both operators behave correctly.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In Python 2.6, a<a id="I_indexterm5_d1e73286"></a> <code class="epub__literal">__cmp__</code> method
            is used by all comparisons if no more specific comparison methods
            are defined; it returns a number that is less than, equal to, or
            greater than zero, to signal less than, equal, and greater than
            results for the comparison of its two arguments (<code class="epub__literal">self</code> and another operand). This method
            often uses the <code class="epub__literal">cmp(x, y)</code>
            built-in to compute its result. Both the <code class="epub__literal">__cmp__</code> method and the <code class="epub__literal">cmp</code> built-in function are removed in
            Python 3.0: use the more specific methods instead.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>We don’t have space for an in-depth exploration of comparison
        methods, but as a quick introduction, consider the following class and
        test code:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e73308"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class C:
    data = 'spam'
    def __gt__(self, other):               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 3.0 and 2.6 version</span></em>
        return self.data &gt; other
    def __lt__(self, other):
        return self.data &lt; other

X = C()
print(X &gt; 'ham')                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># True  (runs __gt__)</span></em>
print(X &lt; 'ham')                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># False (runs __lt__)</span></em></pre>
<p>When run under Python 3.0 or 2.6, the prints at the end display
        the expected results noted in their comments, because the class’s
        methods intercept and implement comparison expressions.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The 2.6 __cmp__ Method (Removed in 3.0)"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_2.6_underscore_underscore_cmp_under"></a>The 2.6 __cmp__ Method (Removed in 3.0)</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In Python 2.6, the <code class="epub__literal">__cmp__</code>
          method is used as a fallback if more specific methods are not
          defined: its integer result is used to evaluate the operator being
          run. The following produces the same result under 2.6, for example,
          but fails in 3.0 because <code class="epub__literal">__cmp__</code>
          is no longer used:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e73331"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class C:
    data = 'spam'                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 2.6 only</span></em>
    def __cmp__(self, other):              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># __cmp__ not used in 3.0</span></em>
        return cmp(self.data, other)       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># cmp not defined in 3.0</span></em>

X = C()
print(X &gt; 'ham')                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># True  (runs __cmp__)</span></em>
print(X &lt; 'ham')                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># False (runs __cmp__)</span></em></pre>
<p>Notice that this fails in 3.0 because <code class="epub__literal">__cmp__</code> is no longer special, not because
          the <code class="epub__literal">cmp</code> built-in function is no
          longer present. If we change the prior class to the following to try
          to simulate the <code class="epub__literal">cmp</code> call, the
          code still works in 2.6 but fails in 3.0:</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e73358"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class C:
    data = 'spam'
    def __cmp__(self, other):
        return (self.data &gt; other) - (self.data &lt; other)</pre><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p>So why, you might be asking, did I just show you a
            comparison method that is no longer supported in 3.0? While it
            would be easier to erase history entirely, this book is designed
            to support both 2.6 and 3.0 readers. Because <code class="epub__literal">__cmp__</code> may appear in code 2.6 readers
            must reuse or maintain, it’s fair game in this book. Moreover,
            <code class="epub__literal">__cmp__</code> was removed more
            abruptly than the <code class="epub__literal">__getslice__</code>
            method described earlier, and so may endure longer. If you use
            3.0, though, or care about running your code under 3.0 in the
            future, don’t use <code class="epub__literal">__cmp__</code>
            anymore: use the more specific comparison methods instead.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Boolean Tests: __bool__ and __len__"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
