<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Object Destruction: __del__</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="object_destruction_colon_underscore_und"></a>Object Destruction: __del__</h1>
<p>We’ve seen how the <code class="epub__literal">__init__</code>
<a id="I_indexterm5_d1e73654"></a>constructor is called whenever an instance is generated.
        Its counterpart, the <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e73660"></a>destructor method<a id="I_indexterm5_d1e73664"></a> <code class="epub__literal">__del__</code>, is run
        automatically when an instance’s space is <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e73672"></a>being reclaimed (i.e., at “garbage collection”
        time):</p><a id="I_programlisting5_d1e73678"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class Life:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __init__(self, name='unknown'):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('Hello', name)</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>self.name = name</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __del__(self):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('Goodbye', self.name)</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>brian = Life('Brian')</code></strong>
Hello Brian
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>brian = 'loretta'</code></strong>
Goodbye Brian</pre>
<p>Here, when <code class="epub__literal">brian</code> is assigned a string, we lose the last
        reference to the <code class="epub__literal">Life</code> instance and
        so trigger its destructor method. This works, and it may be useful for
        implementing some cleanup activities (such as terminating server
        connections). However, destructors are not as commonly used in Python
        as in some OOP languages, for a number of reasons.</p>
<p>For one thing, because Python automatically reclaims all space
        held by an instance when the instance is reclaimed, destructors are
        not necessary for space management.<sup>[68]</sup> For another, because you cannot always easily predict
        when an instance will be reclaimed, it’s often better to code
        termination activities in an explicitly called method (or <code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">finally</code> statement, described in the next
        part of the book); in some cases, there may be lingering references to
        your objects in system tables that prevent destructors from <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e73734"></a>running.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p>In fact, <code class="epub__literal">__del__</code> can be
          tricky to use for even more subtle reasons. Exceptions raised within
          it, for example, simply print a warning message to <code class="epub__literal">sys.stderr</code> (the standard error stream)
          rather than triggering an exception event, because of the
          unpredictable context under which it is run by the garbage
          collector. In addition, cyclic (a.k.a. circular) references among
          objects may prevent garbage collection from happening when you
          expect it to; an optional cycle detector, enabled by default, can
          automatically collect such objects eventually, but only if they do
          not have <code class="epub__literal">__del__</code> methods. Since
          this is relatively obscure, we’ll ignore further details here; see
          Python’s standard manuals’ coverage of both <code class="epub__literal">__del__</code> and the <code class="epub__literal">gc</code> garbage collector module for more
          information.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Chapter Summary"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
