<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="chapter_summary-id28"></a>Chapter Summary</h1>
<p>That’s as many overloading examples as we have space for here.
        Most of the other operator overloading methods work similarly to the
        ones we’ve explored, and all are just hooks for intercepting built-in
        type operations; some overloading methods, for example, have unique
        argument lists or return values. We’ll see a few others in action
        later in the book:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Chapter 33 uses the
            <code class="epub__literal">__enter__</code> and <code class="epub__literal">__exit__ with</code> statement context manager
            methods.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Chapter 37 uses the <code class="epub__literal">__get__</code> and <code class="epub__literal">__set__</code> class descriptor fetch/set
            methods.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Chapter 39 uses the <code class="epub__literal">__new__</code> object creation method in the
            context of metaclasses.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>In addition, some of the methods we’ve
        studied here, such as <code class="epub__literal">__call__</code> and
        <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code>, will be employed by later
        examples in this book. For complete coverage, though, I’ll defer to
        other documentation sources—see Python’s standard language manual or
        reference books for details on additional overloading methods.</p>
<p>In the next chapter, we leave the realm of class mechanics
        behind to explore common design patterns—the ways that classes are
        commonly used and combined to optimize code reuse. Before you read on,
        though, take a moment to work though the chapter quiz below to review
        the concepts we’ve <a id="I_indexterm5_d1e73799"></a>covered.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Test Your Knowledge: Quiz"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
