<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_answers-id28"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</h1>
<div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Classes can support iteration by defining (or inheriting)
            <code class="epub__literal">__getitem__</code> or <code class="epub__literal">__iter__</code>. In all iteration contexts,
            Python tries to use <code class="epub__literal">__iter__</code>
            (which returns an object that supports the iteration protocol with
            a <code class="epub__literal">__next__</code> method) first: if no
            <code class="epub__literal">__iter__</code> is found by
            inheritance search, Python falls back on the <code class="epub__literal">__getitem__</code> indexing method (which is
            called repeatedly, with successively higher indexes).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> and <code class="epub__literal">__repr__</code> methods implement object print
            displays. The former is called by the <code class="epub__literal">print</code> and <code class="epub__literal">str</code> built-in functions; the latter is
            called by <code class="epub__literal">print</code> and <code class="epub__literal">str</code> if there is no <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code>, and always by the <code class="epub__literal">repr</code> built-in, interactive echoes, and
            nested appearances. That is, <code class="epub__literal">__repr__</code> is used everywhere, except by
            <code class="epub__literal">print</code> and <code class="epub__literal">str</code> when a <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> is defined. A <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> is usually used for
            user-friendly displays; <code class="epub__literal">__repr__</code> gives extra details or the
            object’s as-code form.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Slicing is caught by the <code class="epub__literal">__getitem__</code> indexing method: it is
            called with a slice object, instead of a simple index. In Python
            2.6, <code class="epub__literal">__getslice__</code> (defunct in
            3.0) may be used as well.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In-place addition tries <code class="epub__literal">__iadd__</code> first, and <code class="epub__literal">__add__</code> with an assignment second. The
            same pattern holds true for all binary operators. The <code class="epub__literal">__radd__</code> method is also available for
            right-side addition.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>When a class naturally matches, or needs to emulate, a
            built-in type’s interfaces. For example, collections might imitate
            sequence or mapping interfaces. You generally shouldn’t implement
            expression operators if they don’t naturally map to your objects,
            though—use normally named methods instead.</p></li></ol>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[68] </sup>In the current C implementation of Python, you also don’t
            need to close file objects held by the instance in destructors
            because they are automatically closed when reclaimed. However, as
            mentioned in Chapter 9, it’s better
            to explicitly call file close methods because
            auto-close-on-reclaim is a feature of the implementation, not of
            the language itself (this behavior can vary under Jython, for
            instance).</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
