<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Python and OOP</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="python_and_oop"></a>Python and OOP</h1>
<p>Let’s begin with a review—Python’s implementation of OOP can be
        summarized by three ideas:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Inheritance</span></dt><dd>
<p>Inheritance is based on attribute lookup in Python (in
              <code class="epub__literal">X.name</code> expressions).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Polymorphism</span></dt><dd>
<p>In <code class="epub__literal">X.method</code>, the
              meaning of <code class="epub__literal">method</code> depends on
              the type (class) of <code class="epub__literal">X</code>.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Encapsulation</span></dt><dd>
<p>Methods and operators implement behavior; data hiding is a
              convention by default.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>By now, you should have a good feel for what inheritance is all
        about in Python. We’ve also talked about Python’s polymorphism a few
        times already; it flows from Python’s lack of type declarations.
        Because attributes are always resolved at runtime, objects that
        implement the same interfaces are interchangeable; clients don’t need
        to know what sorts of objects are implementing the methods they
        call.</p>
<p>Encapsulation means packaging in
        Python—that is, hiding implementation details behind an object’s
        interface. It does not mean enforced privacy, though that can be
        implemented with code, as we’ll
        see in Chapter 38. Encapsulation allows the
        implementation of an object’s interface to be changed without
        impacting the users of that object.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Overloading by Call Signatures (or Not)"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="overloading_by_call_signatures_open_par"></a>Overloading by Call Signatures (or Not)</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Some OOP languages also define <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e73988"></a>polymorphism<a id="I_indexterm6_d1e73994"></a> to mean overloading functions based on the type
          signatures of their arguments. But because there are no type
          declarations in Python, this concept doesn’t really apply;
          polymorphism in Python is based on object
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>interfaces</em></span>, not types.</p>
<p>You can try to overload methods by their argument lists, like
          this:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e74007"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class C:
    def meth(self, x):
        ...
    def meth(self, x, y, z):
        ...</pre>
<p>This code will run, but because the <code class="epub__literal">def</code> simply assigns an object to a name in
          the class’s scope, the last definition of the method function is the
          only one that will be retained (it’s just as if you say <code class="epub__literal">X = 1</code> and then <code class="epub__literal">X
          = 2</code>; <code class="epub__literal">X</code> will be <code class="epub__literal">2</code>).</p>
<p>Type-based selections can always be coded using the
          type-testing ideas we met in Chapters 4 and 9, or the argument list tools
          introduced in Chapter 18:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e74034"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class C:
    def meth(self, *args):
        if len(args) == 1:
            ...
        elif type(arg[0]) == int:
            ...</pre>
<p>You normally shouldn’t do this, though—as described in Chapter 16, you should write your code to expect
          an object interface, not a specific data type. That way, it will be
          useful for a broader category of types and applications, both now
          and in the future:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e74040"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class C:
    def meth(self, x):
        x.operation()                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Assume x does the right thing</span></em></pre>
<p>It’s also generally considered better to use distinct method
          names for distinct operations, rather than relying on call
          signatures (no matter what language you code in).</p>
<p>Although Python’s object model is straightforward, much of the
          art in OOP is in the way we combine classes to achieve a program’s
          goals. The next section begins a tour of some of the ways larger
          programs use classes to their advantage.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="OOP and Inheritance: “Is-a” Relationships"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
