<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>OOP and Inheritance: “Is-a” Relationships</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="oop_and_inheritance_colon_quotation_mark"></a>OOP and Inheritance: “Is-a” Relationships</h1>
<p>We’ve <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e74053"></a>explored the mechanics of <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e74061"></a>inheritance <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e74067"></a>in depth already, but I’d like to show you an example of
        how it can be used to model real-world relationships. From a
        programmer’s point of view, inheritance is kicked off by attribute
        qualifications, which trigger searches for names in instances, their
        classes, and then any superclasses. From a designer’s point of view,
        inheritance is a way to specify set membership: a class defines a set
        of properties that may be inherited and customized by more specific
        sets (i.e., subclasses).</p>
<p>To illustrate, let’s put that pizza-making robot we talked about
        at the start of this part of the book to work. Suppose we’ve decided
        to explore alternative career paths and open a pizza restaurant. One
        of the first things we’ll need to do is hire employees to serve
        customers, prepare the food, and so on. Being engineers at heart,
        we’ve decided to build a robot to make the pizzas; but being
        politically and cybernetically correct, we’ve also decided to make our
        robot a full-fledged employee with a salary.</p>
<p>Our pizza shop team can be defined by the four classes in the
        example file, <em class="epub__filename">employees.py</em>. The most general class,
        <code class="epub__literal">Employee</code>, provides common behavior
        such as bumping up salaries (<code class="epub__literal">giveRaise</code>) and printing (<code class="epub__literal">__repr__</code>). There are two kinds of employees,
        and so two subclasses of <code class="epub__literal">Employee</code>:
        <code class="epub__literal">Chef</code> and <code class="epub__literal">Server</code>. Both override the inherited <code class="epub__literal">work</code> method to print more specific messages.
        Finally, our pizza robot is modeled by an even more specific class:
        <code class="epub__literal">PizzaRobot</code> is a kind of <code class="epub__literal">Chef</code>, which is a kind of <code class="epub__literal">Employee</code>. In OOP terms, we call these
        relationships “is-a” links: a robot is a chef, which is a(n) employee.
        Here’s the <em class="epub__filename">employees.py</em>
        file:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e74116"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Employee:
    def __init__(self, name, salary=0):
        self.name   = name
        self.salary = salary
    def giveRaise(self, percent):
        self.salary = self.salary + (self.salary * percent)
    def work(self):
        print(self.name, "does stuff")
    def __repr__(self):
        return "&lt;Employee: name=%s, salary=%s&gt;" % (self.name, self.salary)

class Chef(Employee):
    def __init__(self, name):
        Employee.__init__(self, name, 50000)
    def work(self):
        print(self.name, "makes food")

class Server(Employee):
    def __init__(self, name):
        Employee.__init__(self, name, 40000)
    def work(self):
        print(self.name, "interfaces with customer")

class PizzaRobot(Chef):
    def __init__(self, name):
        Chef.__init__(self, name)
    def work(self):
        print(self.name, "makes pizza")

if __name__ == "__main__":
    bob = PizzaRobot('bob')       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Make a robot named bob</span></em>
    print(bob)                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Run inherited __repr__</span></em>
    bob.work()                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Run type-specific action</span></em>
    bob.giveRaise(0.20)           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Give bob a 20% raise</span></em>
    print(bob); print()

    for klass in Employee, Chef, Server, PizzaRobot:
        obj = klass(klass.__name__)
        obj.work()</pre>
<p>When we run the self-test code included in this module, we
        create a pizza-making robot named <code class="epub__literal">bob</code>, which inherits names from three
        classes: <code class="epub__literal">PizzaRobot</code>, <code class="epub__literal">Chef</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">Employee</code>. For instance, printing <code class="epub__literal">bob</code> runs the <code class="epub__literal">Employee.__repr__</code> method, and giving
        <code class="epub__literal">bob</code> a raise invokes <code class="epub__literal">Employee.giveRaise</code> because that’s where the
        inheritance search finds that method:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e74157"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\python\examples&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python employees.py</code></strong>
&lt;Employee: name=bob, salary=50000&gt;
bob makes pizza
&lt;Employee: name=bob, salary=60000.0&gt;

Employee does stuff
Chef makes food
Server interfaces with customer
PizzaRobot makes pizza</pre>
<p>In a class hierarchy like this, you can usually make instances
        of any of the classes, not just the ones at the bottom. For instance,
        the <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop in this module’s
        self-test code creates instances of all four classes; each responds
        differently when asked to work because the <code class="epub__literal">work</code> method is different in each. Really,
        these classes just simulate real-world objects; <code class="epub__literal">work</code> prints a message for the time being,
        but it could be expanded to do real work later.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="OOP and Composition: “Has-a” Relationships"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
