<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>OOP and Composition: “Has-a” Relationships</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="oop_and_composition_colon_quotation_mark"></a>OOP and Composition: “Has-a” Relationships</h1>
<p>The <a id="ch30OOPdesignisscomposition"></a>notion of composition was introduced in Chapter 25. From a programmer’s point of
        view, <a id="ch30composition"></a>composition involves embedding other objects in a
        container object, and activating them to implement container methods.
        To a designer, composition is another way to represent relationships
        in a problem domain. But, rather than set membership, composition has
        to do with components—parts of a whole.</p>
<p>Composition also reflects the relationships between parts,
        called a <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e74194"></a>“has-a” relationships. Some OOP design texts refer to
        composition as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>aggregation</em></span> (or distinguish
        between the two terms by using aggregation to describe a weaker
        dependency between container and contained); in this text, a
        “composition” simply refers to a collection of embedded objects. The
        composite class generally provides an interface all its own and
        implements it by directing the embedded objects.</p>
<p>Now that we’ve implemented our employees, let’s put them in the
        pizza shop and let them get busy. Our pizza shop is a composite
        object: it has an oven, and it has employees like servers and chefs.
        When a customer enters and places an order, the components of the shop
        spring into action—the server takes the order, the chef makes the
        pizza, and so on. The following example <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e74203"></a>(the file <em class="epub__filename">pizzashop.py</em>) simulates all the objects and
        relationships in this scenario:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e74210"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from employees import PizzaRobot, Server

class Customer:
    def __init__(self, name):
        self.name = name
    def order(self, server):
        print(self.name, "orders from", server)
    def pay(self, server):
        print(self.name, "pays for item to", server)

class Oven:
    def bake(self):
        print("oven bakes")

class PizzaShop:
    def __init__(self):
        self.server = Server('Pat')         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Embed other objects</span></em>
        self.chef   = PizzaRobot('Bob')     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># A robot named bob</span></em>
        self.oven   = Oven()

    def order(self, name):
        customer = Customer(name)           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Activate other objects</span></em>
        customer.order(self.server)         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Customer orders from server</span></em>
        self.chef.work()
        self.oven.bake()
        customer.pay(self.server)

if __name__ == "__main__":
    scene = PizzaShop()                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Make the composite</span></em>
    scene.order('Homer')                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Simulate Homer's order</span></em>
    print('...')
    scene.order('Shaggy')                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Simulate Shaggy's order</span></em></pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">PizzaShop</code> class is a
        container and controller; its constructor makes and embeds instances
        of the employee classes we wrote in the last section, as well as an
        <code class="epub__literal">Oven</code> class defined here. When this
        module’s self-test code calls the <code class="epub__literal">PizzaShop
        order</code> method, the embedded objects are asked to carry out
        their actions in turn. Notice that we make a new <code class="epub__literal">Customer</code> object for each order, and we pass
        on the embedded <code class="epub__literal">Server</code> object to
        <code class="epub__literal">Customer</code> methods; customers come
        and go, but the server is part of the pizza shop composite. Also
        notice that employees are still involved in an inheritance
        relationship; composition and inheritance are complementary
        tools.</p>
<p>When we run this module, our pizza shop handles two orders—one
        from Homer, and then one from Shaggy:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e74256"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\python\examples&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python pizzashop.py</code></strong>
Homer orders from &lt;Employee: name=Pat, salary=40000&gt;
Bob makes pizza
oven bakes
Homer pays for item to &lt;Employee: name=Pat, salary=40000&gt;
...
Shaggy orders from &lt;Employee: name=Pat, salary=40000&gt;
Bob makes pizza
oven bakes
Shaggy pays for item to &lt;Employee: name=Pat, salary=40000&gt;</pre>
<p>Again, this is mostly just a toy simulation, but the objects and
        interactions are representative of composites at work. As a rule of
        thumb, classes can represent just about any objects and relationships
        you can express in a sentence; just replace <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>nouns</em></span>
        with classes, and <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>verbs</em></span> with methods, and you’ll
        have a first cut at a design.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Stream Processors Revisited"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="stream_processors_revisited"></a>Stream Processors Revisited</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>For a <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e74274"></a>more realistic composition example, recall the generic
          data <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e74280"></a>stream processor function we partially coded in the
          introduction to OOP in Chapter 25:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e74286"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def processor(reader, converter, writer):
    while 1:
        data = reader.read()
        if not data: break
        data = converter(data)
        writer.write(data)</pre>
<p>Rather than using a simple function here, we might code this
          as a class that uses composition to do its work to provide more
          structure and support inheritance. The following file, <em class="epub__filename">streams.py</em>, demonstrates one way to code
          the class:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e74293"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Processor:
    def __init__(self, reader, writer):
        self.reader = reader
        self.writer = writer
    def process(self):
        while 1:
            data = self.reader.readline()
            if not data: break
            data = self.converter(data)
            self.writer.write(data)
    def converter(self, data):
        assert False, 'converter must be defined'       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Or raise exception</span></em></pre>
<p>This class defines a <code class="epub__literal">converter</code> method that it expects
          subclasses to fill in; it’s an example of the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm6_d1e74303"></a>abstract superclass</em></span> model we outlined in
          Chapter 28 (more on <code class="epub__literal">assert</code> in Part VII). Coded this way, <code class="epub__literal">reader</code> and <code class="epub__literal">writer</code> objects are embedded within the
          class instance (<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>composition</em></span>), and we supply the
          conversion logic in a subclass rather than passing in a converter
          function (<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>inheritance</em></span>). The file <em class="epub__filename">converters.py</em> shows how:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e74333"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from streams import Processor

class Uppercase(Processor):
    def converter(self, data):
        return data.upper()

if __name__ == '__main__':
    import sys
    obj = Uppercase(open('spam.txt'), sys.stdout)
    obj.process()</pre>
<p>Here, the <code class="epub__literal">Uppercase</code> class
          inherits the stream-processing loop logic (and anything else that
          may be coded in its superclasses). It needs to define only what is
          unique about it—the data
          conversion logic. When this file is run, it makes and runs an
          instance that reads from the file <em class="epub__filename">spam.txt</em> and writes the uppercase
          equivalent of that file to the <code class="epub__literal">stdout</code> stream:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e74349"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\lp4e&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type spam.txt</code></strong>
spam
Spam
SPAM!

C:\lp4e&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python converters.py</code></strong>
SPAM
SPAM
SPAM!</pre>
<p>To process different sorts of streams, pass in different sorts
          of objects to the class construction call. Here, we use an output
          file instead of a stream:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e74359"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\lp4e&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import converters</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>prog = converters.Uppercase(open('spam.txt'), open('spamup.txt', 'w'))</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>prog.process()</code></strong>

C:\lp4e&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type spamup.txt</code></strong>
SPAM
SPAM
SPAM!</pre>
<p>But, as suggested earlier, we could also pass in arbitrary
          objects wrapped up in classes that define the required input and
          output method interfaces. Here’s a simple example that passes in a
          writer class that wraps up the text inside HTML tags:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e74379"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\lp4e&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from converters import Uppercase</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class HTMLize:</code></strong>
...      <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def write(self, line):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('&lt;PRE&gt;%s&lt;/PRE&gt;' % line.rstrip())</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Uppercase(open('spam.txt'), HTMLize()).process()</code></strong>
&lt;PRE&gt;SPAM&lt;/PRE&gt;
&lt;PRE&gt;SPAM&lt;/PRE&gt;
&lt;PRE&gt;SPAM!&lt;/PRE&gt;</pre>
<p>If you trace through this example’s control flow, you’ll see
          that we get both uppercase conversion (by inheritance) and HTML
          formatting (by composition), even though the core processing logic
          in the original <code class="epub__literal">Processor</code>
          superclass knows nothing about either step. The processing code only
          cares that writers have a <code class="epub__literal">write</code>
          method and that a method named <code class="epub__literal">convert</code> is defined; it doesn’t care what
          those methods do when they are called. Such polymorphism and
          encapsulation of logic is behind much of the power of
          classes.</p>
<p>As is, the <code class="epub__literal">Processor</code>
          superclass only provides a file-scanning loop. In more realistic
          work, we might extend it to support additional programming tools for
          its subclasses, and, in the process, turn it into a full-blown
          framework. Coding such a tool once in a superclass enables you to
          reuse it in all of your programs. Even in this simple example,
          because so much is packaged and inherited with classes, all we had
          to code was the HTML formatting step; the rest was free.</p>
<p>For another example of composition at work, see exercise 9 at
          the end of Chapter 31 and its solution
          in Appendix B; it’s
          similar to the pizza shop example. We’ve focused on inheritance in
          this book because that is the main tool that the Python language
          itself provides for OOP. But, in practice, composition is used as
          much as inheritance as a way to structure classes, especially in
          larger systems. As we’ve seen, inheritance and composition are often
          complementary (and sometimes alternative) techniques. Because
          composition is a design issue outside the scope of the Python
          language and this book, though, I’ll defer to other resources for
          more on this topic.</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="why_you_will_care_colon_classes_and_per"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Why You Will Care: Classes and Persistence</p>
<p>I’ve <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e74427"></a>mentioned Python’s <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e74433"></a><code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> and
            <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm6_d1e74440"></a>shelve</code> object persistence support a few
            times in this part of the book because it works especially well
            with class instances. In fact, these tools are often compelling
            enough to motivate the use of classes in general—by pickling or
            shelving a class instance, we get data storage that contains both
            data and logic combined.</p>
<p>For example, besides allowing us to simulate real-world
            interactions, the pizza shop classes developed in this chapter
            could also be used as the basis of a persistent restaurant
            database. Instances of classes can be stored away on disk in a
            single step using Python’s <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code> or <code class="epub__literal">shelve</code> modules. We used shelves to store
            instances of classes in the OOP tutorial in Chapter 27, but the object pickling
            interface is remarkably easy to use as well:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e74458"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import pickle
object = someClass()
file   = open(filename, 'wb')     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Create external file</span></em>
pickle.dump(object, file)         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Save object in file</span></em>

import pickle
file   = open(filename, 'rb')
object = pickle.load(file)        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Fetch it back later</span></em></pre>
<p>Pickling converts in-memory
            objects to serialized byte streams (really, strings), which may be
            stored in files, sent across a network, and so on; unpickling
            converts back from byte streams to identical in-memory objects.
            Shelves are similar, but they automatically pickle objects to an
            access-by-key database, which exports a dictionary-like
            interface:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e74471"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import shelve
object = someClass()
dbase  = shelve.open('filename')
dbase['key'] = object             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Save under key</span></em>

import shelve
dbase  = shelve.open('filename')
object = dbase['key']             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Fetch it back later</span></em></pre>
<p>In our pizza shop example, using classes to model employees
            means we can get a simple database of employees and shops with
            little extra work—pickling such instance objects to a file makes
            them persistent across Python program executions:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e74480"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from pizzashop import PizzaShop</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>shop = PizzaShop()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>shop.server, shop.chef</code></strong>
(&lt;Employee: name=Pat, salary=40000&gt;, &lt;Employee: name=Bob, salary=50000&gt;)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import pickle</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pickle.dump(shop, open('shopfile.dat', 'wb'))</code></strong></pre>
<p>This stores an entire composite <code class="epub__literal">shop</code> object in a file all at once. To
            bring it back later in another session or program, a single step
            suffices as well. In fact, objects restored this way retain both
            state and behavior:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e74501"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import pickle</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>obj = pickle.load(open('shopfile.dat', 'rb'))</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>obj.server, obj.chef</code></strong>
(&lt;Employee: name=Pat, salary=40000&gt;, &lt;Employee: name=Bob, salary=50000&gt;)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>obj.order('Sue')</code></strong>
Sue orders from &lt;Employee: name=Pat, salary=40000&gt;
Bob makes pizza
oven bakes
Sue pays for item to &lt;Employee: name=Pat, salary=40000&gt;</pre>
<p>See the standard library manual and later examples for more
            on pickles and <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e74517"></a><a id="I_indexterm6_d1e74519"></a>shelves.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="OOP and Delegation: “Wrapper” Objects"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
