<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>OOP and Delegation: “Wrapper” Objects</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="oop_and_delegation_colon_quotation_mark"></a>OOP and Delegation: “Wrapper” Objects</h1>
<p>Beside <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e74527"></a>inheritance and composition, object-oriented programmers
        often also talk about something called <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm6_d1e74536"></a>delegation</em></span>, which usually implies controller
        objects that embed other objects to which they pass off operation
        requests. The controllers can take care of administrative activities,
        such as keeping track of accesses and so on. In Python, delegation is
        often implemented with the<a id="I_indexterm6_d1e74541"></a> <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> method
        hook; because it intercepts accesses to nonexistent attributes, a
        <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e74550"></a><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>wrapper</em></span> class (sometimes called a
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm6_d1e74558"></a>proxy</em></span> class) can use <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> to route arbitrary accesses to a
        wrapped object. The wrapper class retains the interface of the wrapped
        object and may add additional operations of its own.</p>
<p>Consider the file <em class="epub__filename">trace.py</em>,
        for instance:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e74571"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class wrapper:
    def __init__(self, object):
        self.wrapped = object                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Save object</span></em>
    def __getattr__(self, attrname):
        print('Trace:', attrname)                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Trace fetch</span></em>
        return getattr(self.wrapped, attrname)   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Delegate fetch</span></em></pre>
<p>Recall from Chapter 29 that
        <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> gets the attribute name
        as a string. This code makes use of the <code class="epub__literal">getattr</code> built-in function to fetch an
        attribute from the wrapped object by name string—<code class="epub__literal">getattr(X,N)</code> is like <code class="epub__literal">X.N</code>, except that <code class="epub__literal">N</code> is an expression that evaluates to a
        string at runtime, not a variable. In fact, <code class="epub__literal">getattr(X,N)</code> is similar to <code class="epub__literal">X.__dict__[N]</code>, but the former also performs
        an inheritance search, like <code class="epub__literal">X.N</code>,
        while the latter does not (see Namespace Dictionaries for more on the <code class="epub__literal">__dict__</code> attribute).</p>
<p>You can use the approach of this module’s wrapper class to
        manage access to any object with attributes—lists, dictionaries, and
        even classes and instances. Here, the <code class="epub__literal">wrapper</code> class simply prints a trace message
        on each attribute access and delegates the attribute request to the
        embedded <code class="epub__literal">wrapped</code> object:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e74623"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from trace import wrapper</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = wrapper([1,2,3])</code></strong>                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Wrap a list</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.append(4)</code></strong>                                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Delegate to list method</span></em>
Trace: append
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.wrapped</code></strong>                                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Print my member</span></em>
[1, 2, 3, 4]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = wrapper({"a": 1, "b": 2})</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Wrap a dictionary</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(x.keys())</code></strong>                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Delegate to dictionary method</span></em>
Trace: keys
['a', 'b']</pre>
<p>The net effect is to augment the entire interface of the
        <code class="epub__literal">wrapped</code> object, with additional
        code in the <code class="epub__literal">wrapper</code> class. We can
        use this to log our method calls, route method calls to extra or
        custom logic, and so on.</p>
<p>We’ll revive the notions of wrapped objects and delegated
        operations as one way to extend built-in types in Chapter 31. If you are interested in the
        delegation design pattern, also watch for the discussions in Chapters
        31 and 38 of <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>function
        decorators</em></span>, a strongly related concept designed to augment
        a specific function or method call rather than the entire interface of
        an object, and <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>class decorators</em></span>, which serve as a
        way to automatically add such delegation-based wrappers to all
        instances of a class.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Version skew note</em></span>: In <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e74686"></a>Python 2.6, operator overloading <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e74692"></a>methods run by built-in operations are routed through
          generic attribute interception methods like <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code>. Printing a wrapped object
          directly, for example, calls this method for <code class="epub__literal">__repr__</code> or <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code>, which then passes the call on to
          the wrapped object. In Python 3.0, this no longer happens: printing
          does not trigger <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code>, and
          a default display is used instead. In 3.0, new-style classes look up
          operator overloading methods in classes and skip the normal instance
          lookup entirely. We’ll return to this issue in Chapter 37, in the context of managed
          attributes; for now, keep in mind that you may need to redefine
          operator overloading methods in wrapper classes (either by hand, by
          tools, or by superclasses) if you want them to be intercepted in
          3.0.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Pseudoprivate Class Attributes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
