<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Pseudoprivate Class Attributes</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="pseudoprivate_class_attributes"></a>Pseudoprivate Class Attributes</h1>
<p>Besides <a id="ch30OOPdesignissuespseudoprivateclsatt"></a>larger structuring goals, class designs often must
        address name usage too. In Part V, we learned that
        every name assigned at the top level of a module file is exported. By
        default, the same holds for classes—data hiding is a convention, and
        clients may fetch or change any class or instance attribute they like.
        In fact, attributes are all “public” and “virtual,” in C++ terms;
        they’re all accessible everywhere and are looked up dynamically at
        runtime.<sup>[69]</sup></p>
<p>That said, Python today does support the notion of <a id="ch30namemangling"></a>name “mangling” (i.e., expansion) to localize some names
        in classes. Mangled names are sometimes misleadingly called “private
        attributes,” but really this is just a way to
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>localize</em></span> a name to the class that created it—name
        mangling does not prevent access by code outside the class. This
        feature is mostly intended to avoid namespace collisions in instances,
        not to restrict access to names in general; mangled names are
        therefore better called “pseudoprivate” than “private.”</p>
<p><a id="I_indexterm6_d1e74751"></a>Pseudoprivate names are an advanced and entirely
        optional feature, and you probably won’t find them very useful until
        you start writing general tools or larger class hierarchies for use in
        multiprogrammer projects. In fact, they are not always used even when
        they probably should be—more commonly, Python programmers code
        internal names with a single underscore (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">_X</code>), which is just an informal convention to
        let you know that a name shouldn’t be changed (it means nothing to
        Python itself).</p>
<p>Because you may see this feature in other people’s code, though,
        you need to be somewhat aware of it, even if you don’t use it
        yourself.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Name Mangling Overview"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="name_mangling_overview"></a>Name Mangling Overview</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Here’s how name mangling works: names inside a <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement that start with two
          underscores but don’t end with two underscores are automatically
          expanded to include the name of the enclosing class. For instance, a
          name like <code class="epub__literal">__X</code> within a class
          named <code class="epub__literal">Spam</code> is changed to <code class="epub__literal">_Spam__X</code> automatically: the original name
          is prefixed with a single underscore and the enclosing class’s name.
          Because the modified name contains the name of the enclosing class,
          it’s somewhat unique; it won’t clash with similar names created by
          other classes in a hierarchy.</p>
<p>Name mangling happens only in <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statements, and only for names that
          begin with two leading underscores. However, it happens for
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>every</em></span> name preceded with double
          underscores—both class attributes (like method names) and instance
          attribute names assigned to <code class="epub__literal">self</code>
          attributes. For example, in a class named <code class="epub__literal">Spam</code>, a method named <code class="epub__literal">__meth</code> is mangled to <code class="epub__literal">_Spam__meth</code>, and an instance attribute
          reference <code class="epub__literal">self.__X</code> is transformed
          to <code class="epub__literal">self._Spam__X</code>. Because more
          than one class may add attributes to an instance, this mangling
          helps avoid clashes—but we need to move on to an example to see
          how.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Why Use Pseudoprivate Attributes?"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="why_use_pseudoprivate_attributes_questi"></a>Why Use Pseudoprivate Attributes?</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>One of the main problems that the <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e74809"></a>pseudoprivate attribute feature is meant to alleviate
          has to do with the way instance attributes are stored. In Python,
          all instance attributes wind up in the single instance object at the
          bottom of the class tree. This is different from the C++ model,
          where each class gets its own space for data members it
          defines.</p>
<p>Within a class method in Python, whenever a method assigns to
          a <code class="epub__literal">self</code> attribute (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">self.</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>attr</code></em>
<code class="epub__literal">=</code>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>value</code></em>), it changes or creates an
          attribute in the instance (inheritance searches happen only on
          reference, not on assignment). Because this is true even if multiple
          classes in a hierarchy assign to the same attribute, collisions are
          possible.</p>
<p>For example, suppose that when a programmer codes a class, she
          assumes that she owns the attribute name <code class="epub__literal">X</code> in the instance. In this class’s
          methods, the name is set, and later fetched:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e74834"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class C1:
    def meth1(self): self.X = 88         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># I assume X is mine</span></em>
    def meth2(self): print(self.X)</pre>
<p>Suppose further that another programmer, working in isolation,
          makes the same assumption in a class that he codes:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e74841"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class C2:
    def metha(self): self.X = 99         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Me too</span></em>
    def methb(self): print(self.X)</pre>
<p>Both of these classes work by themselves. The problem arises
          if the two classes are ever mixed together in the same class
          tree:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e74848"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class C3(C1, C2): ...
I = C3()                                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Only 1 X in I!</span></em></pre>
<p>Now, the value that each class gets back when it says <code class="epub__literal">self.X</code> will depend on which class assigned
          it last. Because all assignments to <code class="epub__literal">self.X</code> refer to the same single instance,
          there is only one <code class="epub__literal">X</code>
          attribute—<code class="epub__literal">I.X</code>—no matter how many
          classes use that attribute name.</p>
<p>To guarantee that an attribute belongs to the class that uses
          it, prefix the name with double underscores everywhere it is used in
          the class, as in this file, <em class="epub__filename">private.py</em>:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e74872"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class C1:
    def meth1(self): self.__X = 88       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Now X is mine</span></em>
    def meth2(self): print(self.__X)     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Becomes _C1__X in I</span></em>
class C2:
    def metha(self): self.__X = 99       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Me too</span></em>
    def methb(self): print(self.__X)     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Becomes _C2__X in I</span></em>

class C3(C1, C2): pass
I = C3()                                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Two X names in I</span></em>

I.meth1(); I.metha()
print(I.__dict__)
I.meth2(); I.methb()</pre>
<p>When thus prefixed, the <code class="epub__literal">X</code>
          attributes will be expanded to include the names of their classes
          before being added to the instance. If you run a <code class="epub__literal">dir</code> call on <code class="epub__literal">I</code> or inspect its namespace dictionary
          after the attributes have been assigned, you’ll see the expanded
          names, <code class="epub__literal">_C1__X</code> and <code class="epub__literal">_C2__X</code>, but not <code class="epub__literal">X</code>. Because the expansion makes the names
          unique within the instance, the class coders can safely assume that
          they truly own any names that they prefix with two
          underscores:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e74910"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python private.py</code></strong>
{'_C2__X': 99, '_C1__X': 88}
88
99</pre>
<p>This trick can avoid potential name collisions in the
          instance, but note that it does not amount to true privacy. If you
          know the name of the enclosing class, you can still access either of
          these attributes anywhere you have a reference to the instance by
          using the fully expanded name (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">I._C1__X = 77</code>). On the other hand, this
          feature makes it less likely that you will
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>accidentally</em></span> step on a class’s names.</p>
<p>Pseudoprivate attributes are also useful in larger frameworks
          or tools, both to avoid introducing new method names that might
          accidentally hide definitions elsewhere in the class tree and to
          reduce the chance of internal methods being replaced by names
          defined lower in the tree. If a method is intended for use only
          within a class that may be mixed into other classes, the double
          underscore prefix ensures that the method won’t interfere with other
          names in the tree, especially in multiple-inheritance
          scenarios:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e74925"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Super:
    def method(self): ...                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># A real application method</span></em>

class Tool:
    def __method(self): ...                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Becomes _Tool__method</span></em>
    def other(self): self.__method()       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Use my internal method</span></em>

class Sub1(Tool, Super): ...
    def actions(self): self.method()       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs Super.method as expected</span></em>

class Sub2(Tool):
    def __init__(self): self.method = 99   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Doesn't break Tool.__method</span></em></pre>
<p>We met multiple inheritance briefly in Chapter 25 and will explore it in more
          detail later in this chapter. Recall that superclasses are searched
          according to their left-to-right order in <code class="epub__literal">class</code> header lines. Here, this means
          <code class="epub__literal">Sub1</code> prefers <code class="epub__literal">Tool</code> attributes to those in <code class="epub__literal">Super</code>. Although in this example we could
          force Python to pick the application class’s methods first by
          switching the order of the superclasses listed in the <code class="epub__literal">Sub1</code> class header, pseudoprivate
          attributes resolve the issue altogether. Pseudoprivate names also
          prevent subclasses from accidentally redefining the internal
          method’s names, as in <code class="epub__literal">Sub2</code>.</p>
<p>Again, I should note that this feature tends to be of use
          primarily for larger, multiprogrammer projects, and then
          only for selected names. Don’t be tempted to clutter your code
          unnecessarily; only use this feature for names that truly need to be
          controlled by a single class. For simpler programs, it’s probably
          overkill.</p>
<p>For more examples that make use of the <code class="epub__literal">__X</code> naming feature, see the <em class="epub__filename">lister.py</em> mix-in classes introduced later in
          this chapter, in the section on multiple inheritance, as well as the discussion of <code class="epub__literal">Private</code> class decorators in Chapter 38. If you care
          about privacy in general, you might want to review the
          emulation of private instance
          attributes sketched in the section Attribute Reference: __getattr__ and __setattr__ in Chapter 29, and watch for the <code class="epub__literal">Private</code> class decorator in Chapter 38 that we will base upon this special method.
          Although it’s possible to emulate true access controls in Python
          classes, this is rarely done in practice, even for large
          systems<a id="I_indexterm6_d1e75005"></a><a id="I_indexterm6_d1e75007"></a>.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Methods Are Objects: Bound or Unbound"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
