<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Methods Are Objects: Bound or Unbound</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="methods_are_objects_colon_bound_or_unbo"></a>Methods Are Objects: Bound or Unbound</h1>
<p>Methods <a id="ch30OOPdesissboundandunboundmethods"></a>in general, and <a id="ch30boundmethods"></a>bound methods in particular, <a id="ch30methodsboundandunbound"></a>simplify the <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e75033"></a>implementation of many design goals in Python. We met
        bound methods briefly while studying <code class="epub__literal">__call__</code> in Chapter 29. The full story, which we’ll flesh
        out here, turns out to be more general and flexible than you might
        expect.</p>
<p>In Chapter 19, we learned how
        functions can be processed as normal objects. Methods are a kind of
        object too, and can be used generically in much the same way as other
        objects—they can be assigned, passed to functions, stored in data
        structures, and so on. Because class methods can be accessed from an
        instance or a class, though, they actually come in two flavors in
        Python:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Unbound class method objects: no <code class="epub__literal">self</code></span>
</dt><dd>
<p>Accessing a function attribute of a class by qualifying
              the class returns an unbound method object. To call the method,
              you must provide an instance object explicitly as the first
              argument. In Python 3.0, an unbound method is the same as a
              simple function and can be called though the class’s name; in
              2.6 it’s a distinct type and cannot be called without providing
              an instance.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Bound instance method objects: <code class="epub__literal">self</code> + function pairs</span></dt><dd>
<p>Accessing a function attribute of a class by qualifying an
              instance returns a bound method object. Python automatically
              packages the instance with the function in the bound method
              object, so you don’t need to pass an instance to call the
              method.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Both kinds of methods are full-fledged objects; they can be
        transferred around a program at will, just like strings and numbers.
        Both also require an instance in their first argument when run (i.e.,
        a value for <code class="epub__literal">self</code>). This is why we
        had to pass in an instance explicitly when calling superclass methods
        from subclass methods in the previous chapter; technically, such calls
        produce unbound method objects.</p>
<p>When calling a bound method object, Python provides an instance
        for you automatically—the instance used to create the bound method
        object. This means that bound method objects are usually
        interchangeable with simple function objects, and makes them
        especially useful for interfaces originally written for functions (see
        the sidebar Why You Will Care: Bound Methods and Callbacks
        for a realistic example).</p>
<p>To illustrate, suppose we define the following class:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e75076"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Spam:
    def doit(self, message):
        print(message)</pre>
<p>Now, in normal operation, we make an instance and call its
        method in a single step to print the passed-in argument:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e75080"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">object1 = Spam()
object1.doit('hello world')</pre>
<p>Really, though, a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>bound</em></span> method object is
        generated along the way, just before the method call’s parentheses. In
        fact, we can fetch a bound method without actually calling it. An
        <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>object</code></em><code class="epub__literal">.</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>name</code></em>
        qualification is an object expression. In the following, it returns a
        bound method object that packages the instance (<code class="epub__literal">object1</code>) with the method function (<code class="epub__literal">Spam.doit</code>). We can assign this bound method
        pair to another name and then call it as though it were a simple
        function:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e75101"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">object1 = Spam()
x = object1.doit        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Bound method object: instance+function</span></em>
x('hello world')        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same effect as object1.doit('...')</span></em></pre>
<p>On the other hand, if we qualify the
        class to get to <code class="epub__literal">doit</code>, we get back
        an <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>unbound</em></span> method object, which is simply a
        reference to the function object. To call this type of method, we must
        pass in an instance as the leftmost argument:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e75117"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">object1 = Spam()
t = Spam.doit           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Unbound method object (a function in 3.0: see ahead)</span></em>
t(object1, 'howdy')     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Pass in instance (if the method expects one in 3.0)</span></em></pre>
<p>By extension, the same rules apply within a class’s method if we
        reference <code class="epub__literal">self</code> attributes that
        refer to functions in the class. A <code class="epub__literal">self.</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>method</code></em>
        expression is a bound method object because <code class="epub__literal">self</code> is an instance object:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e75137"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Eggs:
    def m1(self, n):
        print(n)
    def m2(self):
        x = self.m1     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Another bound method object</span></em>
        x(42)           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Looks like a simple function</span></em>

Eggs().m2()             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Prints 42</span></em></pre>
<p>Most of the time, you call methods immediately after fetching
        them with attribute qualification, so you don’t always notice the
        method objects generated along the way. But if you start writing code
        that calls objects generically, you need to be careful to treat
        unbound methods specially—they normally require an explicit instance
        object to be passed in.<sup>[70]</sup></p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Unbound Methods are Functions in 3.0"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="unbound_methods_are_functions_in_3.0"></a>Unbound Methods are Functions in 3.0</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In Python 3.0, the <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e75159"></a>language has dropped the notion of <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>unbound
          methods</em></span>. What we describe as an unbound method here is
          treated as a simple function in 3.0. For most purposes, this makes
          no difference to your code; either way, an instance will be passed
          to a method’s first argument when it’s called through an
          instance.</p>
<p>Programs that do explicit type testing might be impacted,
          though—if you print the type of an instance-less class method, it
          displays “unbound method” in 2.6, and “function” in 3.0.</p>
<p>Moreover, in 3.0 it is OK to call a method without an
          instance, as long as the method does not expect one and you call it
          only through the class and never through an instance. That is,
          Python 3.0 will pass along an instance to methods only for
          through-instance calls. When calling through a class, you must pass
          an instance manually only if the method expects one:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e75172"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python30\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class Selfless:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __init__(self, data):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>self.data = data</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def selfless(arg1, arg2):</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># A simple function in 3.0</span></em>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return arg1 + arg2</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def normal(self, arg1, arg2):</code></strong>           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Instance expected when called</span></em>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return self.data + arg1 + arg2</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = Selfless(2)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.normal(3, 4)</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Instance passed to self automatically</span></em>
9
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Selfless.normal(X, 3, 4)</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># self expected by method: pass manually</span></em>
9
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Selfless.selfless(3, 4)</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># No instance: works in 3.0, fails in 2.6!</span></em>
7</pre>
<p>The last test in this fails in 2.6, because unbound methods
          require an instance to be passed by default; it works in 3.0 because
          such methods are treated as simple functions not requiring an
          instance. Although this removes some potential error trapping in 3.0
          (what if a programmer accidentally forgets to pass an instance?), it
          allows class methods to be used as simple functions as long as they
          are not passed and do not expect a “self” instance argument.</p>
<p>The following two calls still fail in both 3.0 and 2.6,
          though—the first (calling through an instance) automatically passes
          an instance to a method that does not expect one, while the second
          (calling through a class) does not pass an instance to a method that
          does expect one:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e75231"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.selfless(3, 4)</code></strong>
TypeError: selfless() takes exactly 2 positional arguments (3 given)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Selfless.normal(3, 4)</code></strong>
TypeError: normal() takes exactly 3 positional arguments (2 given)</pre>
<p>Because of this change, the <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e77259"></a><code class="epub__literal">staticmethod</code>
          decorator described in the next chapter is not needed in 3.0 for
          methods without a <code class="epub__literal">self</code> argument
          that are called only through the class name, and never through an
          instance—such methods are run as simple functions, without receiving
          an instance argument. In 2.6, such calls are errors unless an
          instance is passed manually (more on static methods in the next
          chapter).</p>
<p>It’s important to be aware of the differences in behavior in
          3.0, but bound methods are generally more important from a practical
          perspective anyway. Because they pair together the instance and
          function in a single object, they can be treated as callables
          generically. The next section demonstrates what this means in
          code.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p>For a more visual illustration of unbound method treatment
            in Python 3.0 and 2.6, see also the <em class="epub__filename">lister.py</em> example in the multiple
            inheritance section later in this chapter. Its classes print the
            value of methods fetched from both instances and classes, in both
            versions of Python.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Bound Methods and Other Callable Objects"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="bound_methods_and_other_callable_object"></a>Bound Methods and Other Callable Objects</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e75260"></a>mentioned earlier, bound methods can be processed as
          generic objects, just like simple functions—they can be passed
          around a program arbitrarily. Moreover, because bound methods
          combine both a function and an instance in a single package, they
          can be treated like any other callable object and require no special
          syntax when invoked. The following, for example, stores four bound
          method objects in a list and calls them later with normal call
          expressions:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e75266"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class Number:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __init__(self, base):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>self.base = base</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def double(self):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return self.base * 2</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def triple(self):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return self.base * 3</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = Number(2)</code></strong>                                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Class instance objects</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y = Number(3)</code></strong>                                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># State + methods</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>z = Number(4)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.double()</code></strong>                                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Normal immediate calls</span></em>
4

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>acts = [x.double, y.double, y.triple, z.double]</code></strong>     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># List of bound methods</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for act in acts:</code></strong>                                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Calls are deferred</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(act())</code></strong>                                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Call as though functions</span></em>
...
4
6
9
8</pre>
<p>Like simple functions, bound method objects have introspection
          information of their own, including attributes that give access to
          the instance object and method function they pair. Calling the bound
          method simply dispatches the pair:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e75333"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bound = x.double</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bound.__self__, bound.__func__</code></strong>
(&lt;__main__.Number object at 0x0278F610&gt;, &lt;function double at 0x027A4ED0&gt;)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bound.__self__.base</code></strong>
2
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>bound()</code></strong>                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Calls bound.__func__(bound.__self__, ...)</span></em>
4</pre>
<p>In fact, bound methods are just one of a handful of callable
          object types in Python. As the following demonstrates, simple
          functions coded with a <code class="epub__literal">def</code> or
          <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>, instances that inherit a
          <code class="epub__literal">__call__</code>, and bound instance
          methods can all be treated and called the same way:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e75361"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def square(arg):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return arg ** 2</code></strong>                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Simple functions (def or lambda)</span></em>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class Sum:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __init__(self, val):</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Callable instances</span></em>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>self.val = val</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __call__(self, arg):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return self.val + arg</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class Product:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __init__(self, val):</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Bound methods</span></em>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>self.val = val</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def method(self, arg):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return self.val * arg</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>sobject = Sum(2)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pobject = Product(3)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>actions = [square, sobject, pobject.method]</code></strong>  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Function, instance, method</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for act in actions:</code></strong>                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># All 3 called same way</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(act(5))</code></strong>                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Call any 1-arg callable</span></em>
...
25
7
15
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>actions[-1](5)</code></strong>                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Index, comprehensions, maps</span></em>
15
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[act(5) for act in actions]</code></strong>
[25, 7, 15]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(map(lambda act: act(5), actions))</code></strong>
[25, 7, 15]</pre>
<p>Technically speaking, classes belong in the callable objects
          category too, but we normally call them to generate instances rather
          than to do actual work, as shown here:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e75450"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class Negate:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __init__(self, val):</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Classes are callables too</span></em>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>self.val = -val</code></strong>                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># But called for object, not work</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __repr__(self):</code></strong>                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Instance print format</span></em>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return str(self.val)</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>actions = [square, sobject, pobject.method, Negate]</code></strong>     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Call a class too</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for act in actions:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(act(5))</code></strong>
...
25
7
15
-5
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[act(5) for act in actions]</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs __repr__ not __str__!</span></em>
[25, 7, 15, −5]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>table = {act(5): act for act in actions}</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 3.0 dict comprehension</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for (key, value) in table.items():</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('{0:2} =&gt; {1}'.format(key, value))</code></strong>    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 2.6/3.0 str.format</span></em>
...
-5 =&gt; &lt;class '__main__.Negate'&gt;
25 =&gt; &lt;function square at 0x025D4978&gt;
15 =&gt; &lt;bound method Product.method of &lt;__main__.Product object at 0x025D0F90&gt;&gt;
 7 =&gt; &lt;__main__.Sum object at 0x025D0F70&gt;</pre>
<p>As you can see, bound methods, and Python’s callable objects
          model in general, are some of the many ways that Python’s design
          makes for an incredibly flexible language.</p>
<p>You should now understand the method object model. For other
          examples of bound methods at work, see the upcoming sidebar  as well as the prior chapter’s
          discussion of callback handlers in the section on the method
          <code class="epub__literal">__call__</code>.</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="why_you_will_care_colon_bound_methods_a"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Why You Will Care: Bound Methods and Callbacks</p>
<p>Because bound methods automatically pair an instance with a
            class method function, you can use them anywhere a simple function
            is expected. One of the most common places you’ll see this idea
            put to work is in code that registers methods as event callback
            handlers in the <code class="epub__literal">tkinter</code> GUI
            interface (named <code class="epub__literal">Tkinter</code> in
            Python 2.6). Here’s the simple case:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e75533"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def handler():
    ...<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>use globals for state</code></em>...
...
widget = Button(text='spam', command=handler)</pre>
<p>To register a handler for button click events, we usually
            pass a callable object that takes no arguments to the <code class="epub__literal">command</code> keyword argument. Function names
            (and <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>s) work here, and so
            do class methods, as long as they are bound methods:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e75546"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class MyWidget:
    def handler(self):
        ...<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>use self.attr for state</code></em>...
    def makewidgets(self):
        b = Button(text='spam', command=self.handler)</pre>
<p>Here, the event handler is <code class="epub__literal">self.handler</code>—a bound method object that
            remembers both <code class="epub__literal">self</code> and
            <code class="epub__literal">MyGui.handler</code>. Because <code class="epub__literal">self</code> will refer to the original instance
            when <code class="epub__literal">handler</code> is later invoked
            on events, the method will have access to instance attributes that
            can retain state between events. With simple functions, state
            normally must be retained in global variables or enclosing
            function scopes instead. See also the discussion of <code class="epub__literal">__call__</code> operator overloading in Chapter 29 for another way to make classes
            compatible with function-based <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e75574"></a><a id="I_indexterm6_d1e75576"></a>APIs.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Multiple Inheritance: “Mix-in” Classes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
