<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Multiple Inheritance: “Mix-in” Classes</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="multiple_inheritance_colon_quotation_mar"></a>Multiple Inheritance: “Mix-in” Classes</h1>
<p>Many <a id="ch30OOPdesissmultipleinheritance"></a>class-based designs call for combining disparate sets of
        methods. In a <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement, more
        than one superclass can be listed in parentheses in the header line.
        When you do this, you use something called <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="ch30multipleinheritance"></a>multiple inheritance</em></span>—the class and its
        instances inherit names from <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>all</em></span> the listed
        superclasses.</p>
<p>When searching for an attribute,
        Python’s inheritance search traverses all superclasses in the class
        header from left to right until a match is found. Technically, because
        any of the superclasses may have superclasses of its own, this search
        can be a bit more complex for larger class tress:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In classic classes (the default until Python 3.0), the
            attribute search proceeds depth-first all the way to the top of
            the inheritance tree, and then from left to right.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In new-style classes (and all classes in 3.0), the attribute
            search proceeds across by tree levels, in a more breadth-first
            fashion (see the new-style class discussion in the next
            chapter).</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>In either model, though, when a class has multiple superclasses,
        they are searched from left to right according to the order listed in
        the <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement header
        lines.</p>
<p>In general, multiple inheritance is good for modeling objects
        that belong to more than one set. For instance, a person may be an
        engineer, a writer, a musician, and so on, and inherit properties from
        all such sets. With multiple inheritance, objects obtain the union of the behavior in all their
        superclasses.</p>
<p>Perhaps the most common way multiple inheritance is used is to
        “mix in” general-purpose methods from superclasses. Such superclasses
        are usually called <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm6_d1e75627"></a>mix-in </em></span>
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>classes</em></span>—they
        provide methods you add to application classes by inheritance. In a
        sense, mix-in classes are similar to modules: they provide packages of
        methods for use in their client subclasses. Unlike simple functions in
        modules, though, methods in mix-ins also have access to the <code class="epub__literal">self</code> instance, for using state information
        and other methods. The next section demonstrates one common use case
        for such tools.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Coding Mix-in Display Classes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="coding_mix-in_display_classes"></a>Coding Mix-in Display Classes</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As <a id="ch30mix-inclassescoding"></a>we’ve seen, <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e75650"></a>Python’s default way to print a class instance object
          isn’t incredibly useful:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e75658"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class Spam:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __init__(self):</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># No __repr__ or __str__</span></em>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>self.data1 = "food"</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = Spam()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(X)</code></strong>                                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Default: class, address</span></em>
&lt;__main__.Spam object at 0x00864818&gt;          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Displays "instance" in Python 2.6</span></em></pre>
<p>As you saw in Chapter 29 when
          studying operator overloading, you can provide a <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> or <code class="epub__literal">__repr__</code> method to implement a custom
          string representation of your own. But, rather than coding one of
          these in each and every class you wish to print, why not code it
          once in a general-purpose tool class and inherit it in all your
          classes?</p>
<p>That’s what mix-ins are for. Defining a display method in a
          mix-in superclass once enables us to reuse it anywhere we want to
          see a custom display format. We’ve already seen tools that do
          related work:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Chapter 27’s <code class="epub__literal">AttrDisplay</code> class formatted instance
              attributes in a generic <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> method, but it did not climb
              class trees and was used in single-inheritance mode only.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Chapter 28’s <em class="epub__filename">classtree.py</em> module defined functions
              for climbing and sketching class trees, but it did not display
              object attributes along the way and was not architected as an
              inheritable class.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Here, we’re going to revisit these examples’ techniques and
          expand upon them to code a set of three mix-in classes that serve as
          generic display tools for listing instance attributes, inherited
          attributes, and attributes on all objects in a class tree. We’ll
          also use our tools in multiple-inheritance mode and deploy coding
          techniques that make classes better suited to use as generic
          tools.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Listing instance attributes with __dict__"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="listing_instance_attributes_with_unders"></a>Listing instance attributes with __dict__</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Let’s <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e75721"></a>get started with the simple case—listing attributes
            attached to an instance. The following class, coded in the file
            <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e75729"></a><em class="epub__filename">lister.py</em>,
            defines a mix-in called <code class="epub__literal"><a id="ch30ListInstanceclass"></a>ListInstance</code> that overloads the <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> method for all classes that
            include it in their header lines. Because this is coded as a
            class, <code class="epub__literal">ListInstance</code> is a
            generic tool whose formatting logic can be used for instances of
            any subclass:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e75747"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># File lister.py</span></em>

class ListInstance:
    """
    Mix-in class that provides a formatted print() or str() of
    instances via inheritance of __str__, coded here; displays
    instance attrs only; self is the instance of lowest class;
    uses __X names to avoid clashing with client's attrs
    """
    def __str__(self):
        return '&lt;Instance of %s, address %s:\n%s&gt;' % (
                           self.__class__.__name__,         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># My class's name</span></em>
                           id(self),                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># My address</span></em>
                           self.__attrnames())              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># name=value list</span></em>
    def __attrnames(self):
        result = ''
        for attr in sorted(self.__dict__):                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Instance attr dict</span></em>
            result += '\tname %s=%s\n' % (attr, self.__dict__ [attr])
        return result</pre>
<p><code class="epub__literal">ListInstance</code> uses some
            previously explored tricks to extract the instance’s class name
            and attributes:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Each instance has a built-in <code class="epub__literal">__class__</code> attribute that references
                the class from which it was created, and each class has a
                <code class="epub__literal">__name__</code> attribute that
                references the name in the header, so the expression <code class="epub__literal">self.__class__.__name__</code> fetches the
                name of an instance’s class.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>This class does most of its work by simply scanning the
                instance’s attribute dictionary (remember, it’s exported in
                <code class="epub__literal">__dict__</code>) to build up a
                string showing the names and values of all instance
                attributes. The dictionary’s keys are sorted to finesse any
                ordering differences across Python releases.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>In these respects, <code class="epub__literal">ListInstance</code> is similar to Chapter 27’s attribute display; in
            fact, it’s largely just a variation on a theme. Our class here
            uses two additional techniques, though:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>It displays the instance’s memory address by calling the
                <code class="epub__literal">id</code> built-function, which
                returns any object’s address (by definition, a unique object
                identifier, which will be useful in later mutations of this
                code).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>It uses the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>pseudoprivate</em></span> naming
                pattern for its worker method: <code class="epub__literal">__attrnames</code>. As we learned earlier
                in his chapter, Python automatically localizes any such name
                to its enclosing class by expanding the attribute name to
                include the class name (in this case, it becomes <code class="epub__literal">_ListInstance__attrnames</code>). This
                holds true for both class attributes (like methods) and
                instance attributes attached to <code class="epub__literal">self</code>. This behavior is useful in a
                general tool like this, as it ensures that its names don’t
                clash with any names used in its client subclasses.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Because <code class="epub__literal">ListInstance</code>
            defines a <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> operator
            overloading method, instances derived from this class display
            their attributes automatically when printed, giving a bit more
            information than a simple address. Here is the class in action, in
            single-inheritance mode (this code works the same in both Python
            3.0 and 2.6):</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e75824"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from lister import ListInstance</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class Spam(ListInstance):</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Inherit a __str__ method</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __init__(self):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>self.data1 = 'food'</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = Spam()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(x)</code></strong>                                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># print() and str() run __str__</span></em>
&lt;Instance of Spam, address 40240880:
        name data1=food
&gt;</pre>
<p>You can also fetch the listing output as a string without
            printing it with <code class="epub__literal">str</code>, and
            interactive echoes still use the default format:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e75856"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>str(x)</code></strong>
'&lt;Instance of Spam, address 40240880:\n\tname data1=food\n&gt;'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x</code></strong>                                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># The __repr__ still is a default</span></em>
&lt;__main__.Spam object at 0x026606F0&gt;</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">ListInstance</code> class is
            useful for any classes you write—even classes that already have
            one or more superclasses. This is where <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>multiple
            inheritance</em></span> comes in handy: by adding <code class="epub__literal">ListInstance</code> to the list of superclasses
            in a class header (i.e., mixing it in), you get its <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> “for free” while still
            inheriting from the existing superclass(es). The file <em class="epub__filename">testmixin.py</em> demonstrates<a id="I_indexterm6_d1e75886"></a>:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e75890"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># File testmixin.py</span></em>

from lister import *                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Get lister tool classes</span></em>

class Super:
    def __init__(self):               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Superclass __init__</span></em>
        self.data1 = 'spam'           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Create instance attrs</span></em>
    def ham(self):
        pass

class Sub(Super, ListInstance):       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Mix in ham and a __str__</span></em>
    def __init__(self):               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># listers have access to self</span></em>
        Super.__init__(self)
        self.data2 = 'eggs'           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># More instance attrs</span></em>
        self.data3 = 42
    def spam(self):                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Define another method here</span></em>
        pass

if __name__ == '__main__':
    X = Sub()
    print(X)                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Run mixed-in __str__</span></em></pre>
<p>Here, <code class="epub__literal">Sub</code> inherits names
            from both <code class="epub__literal">Super</code> and <code class="epub__literal">ListInstance</code>; it’s a composite of its
            own names and names in both its superclasses. When you make a
            <code class="epub__literal">Sub</code> instance and print it, you
            automatically get the custom representation mixed in from <code class="epub__literal">ListInstance</code> (in this case, this
            script’s output is the same under both Python 3.0 and 2.6, except
            for object addresses):</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e75935"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>C:\python30\python testmixin.py</code></strong>
&lt;Instance of Sub, address 40962576:
        name data1=spam
        name data2=eggs
        name data3=42
&gt;</pre>
<p><code class="epub__literal">ListInstance</code> works in any
            class it’s mixed into because <code class="epub__literal">self</code> refers to an instance of the
            subclass that pulls this class in, whatever that may be. In a
            sense, mix-in classes are the class equivalent of modules—packages
            of methods useful in a variety of clients. For example, here is
            <code class="epub__literal">Lister</code> working again in
            single-inheritance mode on a different class’s instances, with
            <code class="epub__literal">import</code> and attributes set
            outside the class:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e75953"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import lister</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class C(lister.ListInstance): pass</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = C()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.a = 1; x.b = 2; x.c = 3</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(x)</code></strong>
&lt;Instance of C, address 40961776:
        name a=1
        name b=2
        name c=3
&gt;</pre>
<p>Besides the utility they provide, mix-ins optimize code
            maintenance, like all classes do. For example, if you later decide
            to extend <code class="epub__literal">ListInstance</code>’s
            <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> to also print all the
            class attributes that an instance inherits, you’re safe; because
            it’s an inherited method, changing <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> automatically updates the
            display of each subclass that imports the class and mixes it in.
            Since it’s now officially “later,” let’s move on to the next
            section to see what such an extension might look <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e75981"></a>like.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Listing inherited attributes with dir"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="listing_inherited_attributes_with_dir"></a>Listing inherited attributes with dir</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As it is, <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e75989"></a>our <code class="epub__literal">Lister</code> mix-in
            displays instance attributes only (i.e., names attached to the
            instance object itself). It’s trivial to extend the class to
            display all the attributes accessible from an instance,
            though—both its own and those it inherits from its classes. The
            trick is to use the <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm6_d1e76001"></a>dir</code> built-in function instead of scanning
            the instance’s <code class="epub__literal">__dict__</code>
            dictionary; the latter holds instance attributes only, but the
            former also collects all inherited attributes in Python 2.2 and
            later.</p>
<p>The following mutation codes this scheme; I’ve renamed it to
            facilitate simple testing, but if this were to
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>replace</em></span> the original version, all existing
            clients would pick up the new display automatically:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e76016"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># File lister.py, continued</span></em>

class ListInherited:
    """
    Use dir() to collect both instance attrs and names
    inherited from its classes; Python 3.0 shows more
    names than 2.6 because of the implied object superclass
    in the new-style class model; getattr() fetches inherited
    names not in self.__dict__; use __str__, not __repr__,
    or else this loops when printing bound methods!
    """
    def __str__(self):
        return '&lt;Instance of %s, address %s:\n%s&gt;' % (
                           self.__class__.__name__,         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># My class's name</span></em>
                           id(self),                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># My address</span></em>
                           self.__attrnames())              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># name=value list</span></em>
    def __attrnames(self):
        result = ''
        for attr in dir(self):                              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Instance dir()</span></em>
            if attr[:2] == '__' and attr[-2:] == '__':      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Skip internals</span></em>
                result += '\tname %s=&lt;&gt;\n' % attr
            else:
                result += '\tname %s=%s\n' % (attr, getattr(self, attr))
        return result</pre>
<p>Notice that this code skips <code class="epub__literal">__</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>X</code></em><code class="epub__literal">__</code> names’ values; most of these are
            internal names that we don’t generally care about in a generic
            listing like this. This version also must use the <code class="epub__literal">getattr</code> built-in function to fetch
            attributes by name string instead of using instance attribute
            dictionary indexing—<code class="epub__literal">getattr</code>
            employs the inheritance search protocol, and some of the names
            we’re listing here are not stored on the instance itself.</p>
<p>To test the new version, change the <em class="epub__filename">testmixin.py</em> file to use this new class
            instead:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e76055"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Sub(Super, ListInherited):                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Mix in a __str__</span></em></pre>
<p>This file’s output varies per release. In Python 2.6, we get
            the following; notice the name mangling at work in the lister’s
            method name (I shortened its full value display to fit on this
            page):</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e76061"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python26\python testmixin.py</code></strong>
&lt;Instance of Sub, address 40073136:
        name _ListInherited__attrnames=&lt;bound method Sub.__attrnames of &lt;...<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>more</code></em>...&gt;&gt;
        name __doc__=&lt;&gt;
        name __init__=&lt;&gt;
        name __module__=&lt;&gt;
        name __str__=&lt;&gt;
        name data1=spam
        name data2=eggs
        name data3=42
        name ham=&lt;bound method Sub.ham of &lt;__main__.Sub instance at 0x026377B0&gt;&gt;
        name spam=&lt;bound method Sub.spam of &lt;__main__.Sub instance at 0x026377B0&gt;&gt;
&gt;</pre>
<p>In Python 3.0, more attributes are displayed because all
            classes are “new-style” and inherit names from the implied
            <code class="epub__literal">object</code> superclass (more on this
            in Chapter 31). Because so many
            names are inherited from the default superclass, I’ve omitted many
            here; run this on your own for the full listing:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e76076"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python30\python testmixin.py</code></strong>
&lt;Instance of Sub, address 40831792:
        name _ListInherited__attrnames=&lt;bound method Sub.__attrnames of &lt;...<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>more</code></em>...&gt;&gt;
        name __class__=&lt;&gt;
        name __delattr__=&lt;&gt;
        name __dict__=&lt;&gt;
        name __doc__=&lt;&gt;
        name __eq__=&lt;&gt;
        <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...more names omitted...</code></em>
        name __repr__=&lt;&gt;
        name __setattr__=&lt;&gt;
        name __sizeof__=&lt;&gt;
        name __str__=&lt;&gt;
        name __subclasshook__=&lt;&gt;
        name __weakref__=&lt;&gt;
        name data1=spam
        name data2=eggs
        name data3=42
        name ham=&lt;bound method Sub.ham of &lt;__main__.Sub object at 0x026F0B30&gt;&gt;
        name spam=&lt;bound method Sub.spam of &lt;__main__.Sub object at 0x026F0B30&gt;&gt;
&gt;</pre>
<p>One caution here—now that we’re displaying inherited methods
            too, we have to use <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code>
            instead of <code class="epub__literal">__repr__</code> to overload
            printing. With <code class="epub__literal">__repr__</code>, this
            code will <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>loop</em></span>—displaying the value of a
            method triggers the <code class="epub__literal">__repr__</code> of
            the method’s class, in order to display the class. That is, if the
            lister’s <code class="epub__literal">__repr__</code> tries to
            display a method, displaying the method’s class will trigger the
            lister’s <code class="epub__literal">__repr__</code> again.
            Subtle, but true! Change <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> to <code class="epub__literal">__repr__</code> here to see this for yourself.
            If you must use <code class="epub__literal">__repr__</code> in
            such a context, you can avoid the loops by using <code class="epub__literal">isinstance</code> to compare the type of
            attribute values against <code class="epub__literal">types.MethodType</code> in the standard
            library, to know which items to skip.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Listing attributes per object in class trees"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="listing_attributes_per_object_in_class"></a>Listing attributes per object in class trees</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Let’s <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e76133"></a>code one last extension. As it is, our lister
            doesn’t tell us which class an inherited name comes from. As we
            saw in the <em class="epub__filename">classtree.py</em>
            example near the end of Chapter 28,
            though, it’s straightforward to climb class inheritance trees in
            code. The following mix-in class makes use of this same technique
            to display attributes grouped by the classes they live in—it
            sketches the full class tree, displaying attributes attached to
            each object along the way. It does so by traversing the
            inheritance tree from an instance’s <code class="epub__literal">__class__</code> to its class, and then from
            the class’s <code class="epub__literal">__bases__</code> to all
            superclasses recursively, scanning object <code class="epub__literal">__dicts__</code>s along the way:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e76156"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># File lister.py, continued</span></em>

class ListTree:
    """
    Mix-in that returns an __str__ trace of the entire class
    tree and all its objects' attrs at and above self;
    run by print(), str() returns constructed string;
    uses __X attr names to avoid impacting clients;
    uses generator expr to recurse to superclasses;
    uses str.format() to make substitutions clearer
    """
    def __str__(self):
        self.__visited = {}
        return '&lt;Instance of {0}, address {1}:\n{2}{3}&gt;'.format(
                           self.__class__.__name__,
                           id(self),
                           self.__attrnames(self, 0),
                           self.__listclass(self.__class__, 4))

    def __listclass(self, aClass, indent):
        dots = '.' * indent
        if aClass in self.__visited:
            return '\n{0}&lt;Class {1}:, address {2}: (see above)&gt;\n'.format(
                           dots,
                           aClass.__name__,
                           id(aClass))
        else:
            self.__visited[aClass] = True
            genabove = (self.__listclass(c, indent+4) for c in aClass.__bases__)
            return '\n{0}&lt;Class {1}, address {2}:\n{3}{4}{5}&gt;\n'.format(
                           dots,
                           aClass.__name__,
                           id(aClass),
                           self.__attrnames(aClass, indent),
                           ''.join(genabove),
                           dots)

    def __attrnames(self, obj, indent):
        spaces = ' ' * (indent + 4)
        result = ''
        for attr in sorted(obj.__dict__):
            if attr.startswith('__') and attr.endswith('__'):
                result += spaces + '{0}=&lt;&gt;\n'.format(attr)
            else:
                result += spaces + '{0}={1}\n'.format(attr, getattr(obj, attr))
        return result</pre>
<p>Note the use of a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm6_d1e76163"></a>generator expression</em></span> to direct the
            recursive calls for superclasses; it’s activated by the nested
            string <code class="epub__literal">join</code> method. Also see
            how this version uses the Python 3.0 and 2.6 string <code class="epub__literal">format</code> method instead of <code class="epub__literal">%</code> formatting expressions, to make
            substitutions clearer; when many substitutions are applied like
            this, explicit argument numbers may make the code easier to
            decipher. In short, in this version we exchange the first of the
            following lines for the second:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e76177"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">        return '&lt;Instance of %s, address %s:\n%s%s&gt;' % (...)          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Expression</span></em>
        return '&lt;Instance of {0}, address {1}:\n{2}{3}&gt;'.format(...)  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Method</span></em></pre>
<p>Now, change <em class="epub__filename">testmixin.py</em> to inherit from this new
            class again to test:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e76189"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Sub(Super, ListTree):         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Mix in a __str__</span></em></pre>
<p>The file’s tree-sketcher output in Python 2.6 is then as
            follows:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e76195"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python26\python testmixin.py</code></strong>
&lt;Instance of Sub, address 40728496:
    _ListTree__visited={}
    data1=spam
    data2=eggs
    data3=42

....&lt;Class Sub, address 40701168:
        __doc__=&lt;&gt;
        __init__=&lt;&gt;
        __module__=&lt;&gt;
        spam=&lt;unbound method Sub.spam&gt;

........&lt;Class Super, address 40701120:
            __doc__=&lt;&gt;
            __init__=&lt;&gt;
            __module__=&lt;&gt;
            ham=&lt;unbound method Super.ham&gt;
........&gt;

........&lt;Class ListTree, address 40700688:
            _ListTree__attrnames=&lt;unbound method ListTree.__attrnames&gt;
            _ListTree__listclass=&lt;unbound method ListTree.__listclass&gt;
            __doc__=&lt;&gt;
            __module__=&lt;&gt;
            __str__=&lt;&gt;
........&gt;
....&gt;
&gt;</pre>
<p>Notice in this output how methods are
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>unbound</em></span> now under 2.6, because we fetch them
            from classes directly, instead of from instances. Also observe how
            the lister’s <code class="epub__literal">__visited</code> table has its name
            mangled in the instance’s attribute dictionary; unless we’re very
            unlucky, this won’t clash with other data there.</p>
<p>Under Python 3.0, we get extra attributes and superclasses
            again. Notice that unbound methods are simple
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>functions</em></span> in 3.0, as described in an earlier
            note in this chapter (and that again, I’ve deleted most built-in
            attributes in <code class="epub__literal">object</code> to save
            space here; run this on your own for the complete listing):</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e76218"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python30\python testmixin.py</code></strong>
&lt;Instance of Sub, address 40635216:
    _ListTree__visited={}
    data1=spam
    data2=eggs
    data3=42

....&lt;Class Sub, address 40914752:
        __doc__=&lt;&gt;
        __init__=&lt;&gt;
        __module__=&lt;&gt;
        spam=&lt;function spam at 0x026D53D8&gt;

........&lt;Class Super, address 40829952:
            __dict__=&lt;&gt;
            __doc__=&lt;&gt;
            __init__=&lt;&gt;
            __module__=&lt;&gt;
            __weakref__=&lt;&gt;
            ham=&lt;function ham at 0x026D5228&gt;

............&lt;Class object, address 505114624:
                __class__=&lt;&gt;
                __delattr__=&lt;&gt;
                __doc__=&lt;&gt;
                __eq__=&lt;&gt;
                <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...more omitted...</code></em>
                __repr__=&lt;&gt;
                __setattr__=&lt;&gt;
                __sizeof__=&lt;&gt;
                __str__=&lt;&gt;
                __subclasshook__=&lt;&gt;
............&gt;
........&gt;

........&lt;Class ListTree, address 40829496:
            _ListTree__attrnames=&lt;function __attrnames at 0x026D5660&gt;
            _ListTree__listclass=&lt;function __listclass at 0x026D56A8&gt;
            __dict__=&lt;&gt;
            __doc__=&lt;&gt;
            __module__=&lt;&gt;
            __str__=&lt;&gt;
            __weakref__=&lt;&gt;

............&lt;Class object:, address 505114624: (see above)&gt;
........&gt;
....&gt;
&gt;</pre>
<p>This version avoids listing the same class object twice by
            keeping a table of classes <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>visited</em></span> so far
            (this is why an object’s <code class="epub__literal">id</code> is
            included—to serve as a key for a previously displayed item). Like
            the transitive module reloader of Chapter 24, a dictionary works to avoid
            repeats and cycles here because class objects may be dictionary
            keys; a set would provide similar functionality.</p>
<p>This version also takes care to avoid large internal objects
            by skipping <code class="epub__literal">__</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>X</code></em><code class="epub__literal">__</code> names again. If you comment out the
            test for these names, their values will display normally. Here’s
            an excerpt from the output in 2.6 with this temporary change made
            (it’s much larger in its entirety, and it gets even worse in 3.0,
            which is why these names are probably better skipped!):</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e76245"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python26\python testmixin.py</code></strong>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...more omitted...</code></em>

........&lt;Class ListTree, address 40700688:
            _ListTree__attrnames=&lt;unbound method ListTree.__attrnames&gt;
            _ListTree__listclass=&lt;unbound method ListTree.__listclass&gt;
            __doc__=
    Mix-in that returns the __str__ trace of the entire class
    tree and all its objects' attrs at and above self;
    run by print, str returns constructed string;
    uses __X attr names to avoid impacting clients;
    uses generator expr to recurse to superclasses;
    uses str.format() to make substitutions clearer

            __module__=lister
            __str__=&lt;unbound method ListTree.__str__&gt;
........&gt;</pre>
<p>For more fun, try mixing this class into something more
            substantial, like the <code class="epub__literal">Button</code>
            class of Python’s <code class="epub__literal">tkinter</code> GUI
            toolkit module. In general, you’ll want to name <code class="epub__literal">ListTree</code> first (leftmost) in a <code class="epub__literal">class</code> header, so its <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> is picked up; <code class="epub__literal">Button</code> has one, too, and the leftmost
            superclass is searched first in multiple inheritance. The output
            of the following is fairly
            massive (18K characters), so run this code on your own to see the
            full listing (and if you’re using Python 2.6, recall that you
            should use <code class="epub__literal">Tkinter</code> for the module name instead of <code class="epub__literal">tkinter</code>):</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e76286"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from lister import ListTree</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from tkinter import Button</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Both classes have a __str__</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class MyButton(ListTree, Button): pass</code></strong>      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># ListTree first: use its __str__</span></em>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>B = MyButton(text='spam')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('savetree.txt', 'w').write(str(B))</code></strong>     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Save to a file for later viewing</span></em>
18247
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(B)</code></strong>                                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Print the display here</span></em>
&lt;Instance of MyButton, address 44355632:
    _ListTree__visited={}
    _name=44355632
    _tclCommands=[]
    <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...much more omitted...</code></em>
&gt;</pre>
<p>Of course, there’s much more we could do here (sketching the
            tree in a GUI might be a natural next step), but we’ll leave
            further work as a suggested exercise. We’ll also extend this code
            in the exercises at the end of this part of the book, to list
            superclass names in parentheses at the start of instance and class
            displays.</p>
<p>The main point here is that OOP is all about code reuse, and
            mix-in classes are a powerful example. Like almost everything else
            in programming, multiple inheritance can be a useful device when
            applied well. In practice, though, it is an advanced feature and
            can become complicated if used carelessly or excessively. We’ll
            revisit this topic as a gotcha at the end of the next chapter. In
            that chapter, we’ll also meet the new-style class model, which
            modifies the search order for one special multiple inheritance
            case. For more ideas, see also Python manuals for the <code class="epub__literal">class.mro()</code> new-style class object
            method, which returns a list giving the class tree search order
            used by inheritance; this could be used by a class lister to show
            attribute sources.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Supporting slots</em></span>: <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e76331"></a>Because they scan instance dictionaries, the
              <code class="epub__literal">ListInstance</code> and <code class="epub__literal">ListTree</code> classes presented here don’t
              directly support attributes stored in
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>slots</em></span>—a newer and relatively rarely used
              option we’ll meet in the next chapter, where instance attributes
              are declared in a <code class="epub__literal">__slots__</code>
              class attribute. For example, if in <em class="epub__filename">textmixin.py</em> we assign <code class="epub__literal">__slots__=['data1']</code> in <code class="epub__literal">Super</code> and <code class="epub__literal">__slots__=['data3']</code> in <code class="epub__literal">Sub</code>, only the <code class="epub__literal">data2</code> attribute is displayed in the
              instance by these two lister classes; <code class="epub__literal">ListTree</code> also displays <code class="epub__literal">data1</code> and <code class="epub__literal">data3</code>, but as attributes of the
              <code class="epub__literal">Super</code> and <code class="epub__literal">Sub</code> class objects and with a special
              format for their values (technically, they are class-level
              descriptors).</p>
<p>To better support slot attributes in these classes, change
              the <code class="epub__literal">__dict__</code> scanning loops
              to also iterate through <code class="epub__literal">__slots__</code> lists using code the next
              chapter will present, and use the <code class="epub__literal">getattr</code> built-in function to fetch
              values instead of <code class="epub__literal">__dict__</code>
              indexing (<code class="epub__literal">ListTree</code> already
              does). Since instances inherit only the lowest class’s <code class="epub__literal">__slots__</code>, you may also need to come
              up with a policy when <code class="epub__literal">__slots__</code> lists appear in multiple
              superclasses (<code class="epub__literal">ListTree</code> already displays
              them as class attributes). <code class="epub__literal">ListInherited</code> is immune to all this,
              because <code class="epub__literal">dir</code> results combine
              both <code class="epub__literal">__dict__</code> names and all
              classes’ <code class="epub__literal">__slots__</code>
              names.</p>
<p>Alternatively, as a policy we could simply let our code
              handle slot-based attributes as it currently does, rather than
              complicating it for a rare, advanced feature. Slots and normal
              instance attributes are different kinds of names. We’ll
              investigate slots further in the next chapter; I omitted
              addressing them in these examples to avoid a forward
              dependency (not counting
              this note, of course!)—not exactly a valid design goal, but
              reasonable for a <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e76429"></a><a id="I_indexterm6_d1e76431"></a><a id="I_indexterm6_d1e76433"></a>book.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Classes Are Objects: Generic Object Factories"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
