<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Classes Are Objects: Generic Object Factories</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="classes_are_objects_colon_generic_objec"></a>Classes Are Objects: Generic Object Factories</h1>
<p>Sometimes, <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e76441"></a>class-based designs require objects to be created in
        response to conditions that can’t be predicted when a program is
        written. The <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e76449"></a>factory design pattern allows such a deferred approach.
        Due in large part to Python’s flexibility, factories can take multiple
        forms, some of which don’t seem special at all.</p>
<p>Because classes are objects, it’s easy to pass them around a
        program, store them in data structures, and so on. You can also pass
        classes to functions that generate arbitrary kinds of objects; such
        functions are sometimes called <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="ch30factories"></a>factories</em></span> in OOP design circles. Factories
        are a major undertaking in a strongly typed language such as C++ but
        are almost trivial to implement in Python. The call syntax we met in
        Chapter 18 can call any class with any number of
        constructor arguments in one step to generate any sort of
        instance:<sup>[71]</sup></p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e76477"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def factory(aClass, *args):           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Varargs tuple</span></em>
    return aClass(*args)              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Call aClass (or apply in 2.6 only)</span></em>

class Spam:
    def doit(self, message):
        print(message)

class Person:
    def __init__(self, name, job):
        self.name = name
        self.job  = job

object1 = factory(Spam)                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Make a Spam object</span></em>
object2 = factory(Person, "Guido", "guru")   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Make a Person object</span></em></pre>
<p>In this code, we define an object generator function called
        <code class="epub__literal">factory</code>. It expects to be passed a
        class object (any class will do) along with one or more arguments for
        the class’s constructor. The function uses special “varargs” call
        syntax to call the function and return an instance.</p>
<p>The rest of the example simply defines two classes and generates
        instances of both by passing them to the <code class="epub__literal">factory</code> function. And that’s the only
        factory function you’ll ever need to write in Python; it works for any
        class and any constructor arguments.</p>
<p>One possible improvement worth noting is that to support keyword
        arguments in constructor calls, the factory can collect them with a
        <code class="epub__literal">**args</code> argument and pass them along
        in the class call, too:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e76505"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def factory(aClass, *args, **kwargs):        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># +kwargs dict</span></em>
    return aClass(*args, **kwargs)           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Call aClass</span></em></pre>
<p>By now, you should know that everything is an “object” in
        Python, including things like classes, which are just compiler input
        in languages like C++. However, as mentioned at the start of this part
        of the book, only objects <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>derived</em></span> from classes
        are OOP objects in Python.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Why Factories?"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="why_factories_question"></a>Why Factories?</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>So what <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e76522"></a>good is the <code class="epub__literal">factory</code>
          function (besides providing an excuse to illustrate class objects in
          this book)? Unfortunately, it’s difficult to show applications of
          this design pattern without listing much more code than we have
          space for here. In general, though, such a factory might allow code
          to be insulated from the details of dynamically configured object
          construction.</p>
<p>For instance, recall the <code class="epub__literal">processor</code> example presented in the
          abstract in Chapter 25, and then
          again as a composition example in this chapter. It accepts reader
          and writer objects for processing arbitrary data streams. The
          original version of this example manually passed in instances of
          specialized classes like <code class="epub__literal">FileWriter</code> and <code class="epub__literal">SocketReader</code> to customize the data streams
          being processed; later, we passed in hardcoded file, stream, and
          formatter objects. In a more
          dynamic scenario, external devices such as configuration files or
          GUIs might be used to configure the streams.</p>
<p>In such a dynamic world, we might not be able to hardcode the
          creation of stream interface objects in our scripts, but might
          instead create them at runtime according to the contents of a
          configuration file.</p>
<p>For example, the file might simply give the string name of a
          stream class to be imported from a module, plus an optional
          constructor call argument. Factory-style functions or code might
          come in handy here because they would allow us to fetch and pass in
          classes that are not hardcoded in our program ahead of time. Indeed,
          those classes might not even have existed at all when we wrote our
          code:</p><a id="I_programlisting6_d1e76551"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">classname = <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...parse from config file...</code></em>
classarg  = <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...parse from config file...</code></em>

import streamtypes                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Customizable code</span></em>
aclass = getattr(streamtypes, classname)     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Fetch from module</span></em>
reader = factory(aclass, classarg)           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Or aclass(classarg)</span></em>
processor(reader, ...)</pre>
<p>Here, the <code class="epub__literal">getattr</code> built-in
          is again used to fetch a module attribute given a string name (it’s
          like saying <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>obj</code></em><code class="epub__literal">.</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>attr</code></em>, but
          <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>attr</code></em> is a string). Because this code
          snippet assumes a single constructor argument, it doesn’t strictly
          need <code class="epub__literal">factory</code> or <code class="epub__literal">apply</code>—we could make an instance with just
          <code class="epub__literal">aclass(classarg)</code>. They may prove
          more useful in the presence of unknown argument lists, however, and
          the general factory coding pattern can improve the code’s <a id="I_indexterm6_d1e76593"></a>flexibility.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Other Design-Related Topics"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
