<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_answers-id29"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</h1>
<div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Multiple inheritance occurs when a class inherits from more
            than one superclass; it’s useful for mixing together multiple
            packages of class-based code. The left-to-right order in <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement headers determines the
            order of attribute searches.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Delegation involves wrapping an object in a proxy class,
            which adds extra behavior and passes other operations to the
            wrapped object. The proxy retains the interface of the wrapped
            object.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Composition is a technique whereby a controller class embeds
            and directs a number of objects, and provides an interface all its
            own; it’s a way to build up larger structures with classes.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Bound methods combine an instance and a method function; you
            can call them without passing in an instance object explicitly
            because the original instance is still available.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Pseudoprivate attributes (whose names begin with two leading
            underscores: <code class="epub__literal">__</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>X</code></em>) are used
            to localize names to the enclosing class. This includes both class
            attributes like methods defined inside the class, and <code class="epub__literal">self</code> instance attributes assigned inside
            the class. Such names are expanded to include the class name,
            which makes them unique.</p></li></ol>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[69] </sup>This tends to scare people with a C++ background
            unnecessarily. In Python, it’s even possible to change or
            completely delete a class method at runtime. On the other hand,
            almost nobody ever does this in practical programs. As a scripting
            language, Python is more about enabling than restricting. Also,
            recall from our discussion of operator overloading in Chapter 29 that <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> and <code class="epub__literal">__setattr__</code> can be used to emulate
            privacy, but are generally not used for this purpose in practice.
            More on this when we code a more realistic privacy decorator Chapter 38.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[70] </sup>See the discussion of static and class methods in Chapter 31 for an optional exception to
            this rule. Like bound methods, static methods can masquerade as
            basic functions because they do not expect instances when called.
            Python supports three kinds of class methods—instance, static, and
            class—and 3.0 allows simple functions in classes, too.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[71] </sup>Actually, this syntax can invoke any callable object,
            including functions, classes, and methods. Hence, the <code class="epub__literal">factory</code> function here can also run any
            callable object, not just a class (despite the argument name).
            Also, as we learned in Chapter 18, Python 2.6
            has an alternative to <code class="epub__literal">aClass(*args)</code>: the <code class="epub__literal">apply(aClass, args)</code> built-in call, which
            has been removed in Python 3.0 because of its redundancy and
            limitations.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
