<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 31. Advanced Class Topics</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 31. Advanced Class Topics"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h1 class="epub__title"><a id="advanced_class_topics"></a>Chapter 31. Advanced Class Topics</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>This chapter concludes our look at OOP in Python by presenting a
      few more advanced class-related topics: we will survey subclassing
      built-in types, “new-style” class changes and extensions, static and
      class methods, function decorators, and more.</p>
<p>As we’ve seen, Python’s OOP model is, at its core, very simple,
      and some of the topics presented in this chapter are so advanced and
      optional that you may not encounter them very often in your Python
      applications-programming career. In the interest of completeness,
      though, we’ll round out our discussion of classes with a brief look at
      these advanced tools for OOP work.</p>
<p>As usual, because this is the last chapter in this part of the
      book, it ends with a section on class-related “gotchas,” and the set of
      lab exercises for this part. I encourage you to work through the
      exercises to help cement the ideas we’ve studied here. I also suggest
      working on or studying larger OOP Python projects as a supplement to
      this book. As with much in computing, the benefits of OOP tend to become
      more apparent with practice.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Content note</em></span>: This chapter collects
        advanced class topics, but some are even too advanced for this chapter
        to cover well. Topics such as properties, descriptors, decorators, and
        metaclasses are only briefly mentioned here, and are covered more
        fully in the final part of this book. Be sure to look ahead for more
        complete examples and extended coverage of some of the subjects that
        fall into this chapter’s category.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Extending Built-in Types"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
