<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Extending Built-in Types</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="extending_built-in_types"></a>Extending Built-in Types</h1>
<p>Besides <a id="ch31classesbuilt-intypesext"></a>implementing new kinds of objects, classes are sometimes
        used to extend the functionality of Python’s built-in types to support
        more exotic data structures. For instance, to add queue insert and
        delete methods to lists, you can code classes that wrap (embed) a list
        object and export insert and delete methods that process the list
        specially, like the delegation technique we studied in Chapter 30. As of Python 2.2, you can also
        use inheritance to specialize built-in types. The next two sections
        show both techniques in action.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Extending Types by Embedding"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="extending_types_by_embedding"></a>Extending Types by Embedding</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Remember <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e76755"></a>those set functions we wrote in Chapters 16 and
          18? Here’s
          what they look like brought back to life as a Python class. The
          following example (the file <em class="epub__filename">setwrapper.py</em>) implements a new set
          object type by moving some of the set functions to methods and
          adding some basic operator overloading. For the most part, this
          class just wraps a Python list with extra set operations. But
          because it’s a class, it also supports multiple instances and
          customization by inheritance in subclasses. Unlike our earlier
          functions, using classes here allows us to make multiple
          self-contained set objects with preset data and behavior, rather
          than passing lists into functions manually:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e76770"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Set:
   def __init__(self, value = []):    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Constructor</span></em>
       self.data = []                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Manages a list</span></em>
       self.concat(value)

   def intersect(self, other):        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># other is any sequence</span></em>
       res = []                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># self is the subject</span></em>
       for x in self.data:
           if x in other:             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Pick common items</span></em>
               res.append(x)
       return Set(res)                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Return a new Set</span></em>

   def union(self, other):            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># other is any sequence</span></em>
       res = self.data[:]             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Copy of my list</span></em>
       for x in other:                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Add items in other</span></em>
           if not x in res:
               res.append(x)
       return Set(res)

   def concat(self, value):           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># value: list, Set...</span></em>
       for x in value:                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Removes duplicates</span></em>
          if not x in self.data:
               self.data.append(x)

   def __len__(self):          return len(self.data)            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># len(self)</span></em>
   def __getitem__(self, key): return self.data[key]            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># self[i]</span></em>
   def __and__(self, other):   return self.intersect(other)     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># self &amp; other</span></em>
   def __or__(self, other):    return self.union(other)         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># self | other</span></em>
   def __repr__(self):         return 'Set:' + repr(self.data)  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># print()</span></em></pre>
<p>To use this class, we make instances, call methods, and run
          defined operators as usual:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e76823"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">x = Set([1, 3, 5, 7])
print(x.union(Set([1, 4, 7])))       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># prints Set:[1, 3, 5, 7, 4]</span></em>
print(x | Set([1, 4, 6]))            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># prints Set:[1, 3, 5, 7, 4, 6]</span></em></pre>
<p>Overloading operations such as indexing enables instances of
          our <code class="epub__literal">Set</code> class to masquerade as
          real lists. Because you will interact with and extend this class in
          an exercise at the end of this chapter, I won’t say much more about
          this code until Appendix B.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Extending Types by Subclassing"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="extending_types_by_subclassing"></a>Extending Types by Subclassing</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Beginning <a id="ch31classesbuiltintypessubclassing"></a>with Python 2.2, all the built-in types in the
          language can now be subclassed directly. Type-conversion functions
          such as <code class="epub__literal">list</code>, <code class="epub__literal">str</code>, <code class="epub__literal">dict</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">tuple</code> have become built-in type
          names—although transparent to your script, a type-conversion call
          (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">list('spam')</code>) is now
          really an invocation of a type’s object constructor.</p>
<p>This change allows you to customize or extend the behavior of
          built-in types with user-defined <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statements: simply subclass the new
          type names to customize them. Instances of your type subclasses can
          be used anywhere that the original built-in type can appear. For
          example, suppose you have trouble getting used to the fact that
          Python list offsets begin at 0 instead of 1. Not to worry—you can
          always code your own subclass that customizes this core behavior of
          lists. The file <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e76871"></a><em class="epub__filename">typesubclass.py</em>
          shows how:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e76877"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Subclass built-in list type/class</span></em>
# Map 1..N to 0..N-1; call back to built-in version.

class MyList(list):
    def __getitem__(self, offset):
        print('(indexing %s at %s)' % (self, offset))
        return list.__getitem__(self, offset - 1)

if __name__ == '__main__':
    print(list('abc'))
    x = MyList('abc')               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># __init__ inherited from list</span></em>
    print(x)                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># __repr__ inherited from list</span></em>

    print(x[1])                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># MyList.__getitem__</span></em>
    print(x[3])                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Customizes list superclass method</span></em>

    x.append('spam'); print(x)      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Attributes from list superclass</span></em>
    x.reverse();      print(x)</pre>
<p>In this file, the <code class="epub__literal">MyList</code>
          subclass extends the built-in list’s <code class="epub__literal">__getitem__</code> indexing method only to map
          indexes 1 to N back to the required 0 to N−1. All it really does is
          decrement the submitted index and call back to the superclass’s
          version of indexing, but it’s enough to do the trick:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e76904"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python typesubclass.py</code></strong>
['a', 'b', 'c']
['a', 'b', 'c']
(indexing ['a', 'b', 'c'] at 1)
a
(indexing ['a', 'b', 'c'] at 3)
c
['a', 'b', 'c', 'spam']
['spam', 'c', 'b', 'a']</pre>
<p>This output also includes tracing text the class prints on
          indexing. Of course, whether changing indexing this way is a good
          idea in general is another issue—users of your <code class="epub__literal">MyList</code> class may very well be confused by
          such a core departure from Python sequence behavior. The ability to
          customize built-in types this way can be a powerful asset,
          though.</p>
<p>For instance, this coding pattern gives rise to an alternative
          way to code a set—as a subclass of the built-in list type, rather
          than a standalone class that manages an embedded list object, as
          shown earlier in this section. As we learned in Chapter 5, Python today comes with a powerful
          built-in set object, along with literal and comprehension syntax for
          making new sets. Coding one yourself, though, is still a great way
          to learn about type subclassing in general.</p>
<p>The following class, coded in the file <em class="epub__filename"><a id="I_indexterm7_d1e76921"></a>setsubclass.py</em>, customizes lists to add
          just methods and operators related to set processing. Because all
          other behavior is inherited from the built-in <code class="epub__literal">list</code> superclass, this makes for a shorter
          and simpler alternative:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e76929"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Set(list):
    def __init__(self, value = []):      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Constructor</span></em>
        list.__init__([])                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Customizes list</span></em>
        self.concat(value)               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Copies mutable defaults</span></em>

    def intersect(self, other):          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># other is any sequence</span></em>
        res = []                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># self is the subject</span></em>
        for x in self:
            if x in other:               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Pick common items</span></em>
                res.append(x)
        return Set(res)                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Return a new Set</span></em>

    def union(self, other):              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># other is any sequence</span></em>
        res = Set(self)                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Copy me and my list</span></em>
        res.concat(other)
        return res

    def concat(self, value):             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># value: list, Set . . .</span></em>
        for x in value:                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Removes duplicates</span></em>
            if not x in self:
                self.append(x)

    def __and__(self, other): return self.intersect(other)
    def __or__(self, other):  return self.union(other)
    def __repr__(self):       return 'Set:' + list.__repr__(self)

if __name__ == '__main__':
    x = Set([1,3,5,7])
    y = Set([2,1,4,5,6])
    print(x, y, len(x))
    print(x.intersect(y), y.union(x))
    print(x &amp; y, x | y)
    x.reverse(); print(x)</pre>
<p>Here is the output of the self-test code at the end of this
          file. Because subclassing core types is an advanced feature, I’ll
          omit further details here, but I invite you to trace through these
          results in the code to study its behavior:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e76968"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python setsubclass.py</code></strong>
Set:[1, 3, 5, 7] Set:[2, 1, 4, 5, 6] 4
Set:[1, 5] Set:[2, 1, 4, 5, 6, 3, 7]
Set:[1, 5] Set:[1, 3, 5, 7, 2, 4, 6]
Set:[7, 5, 3, 1]</pre>
<p>There are more efficient ways to implement sets with
          dictionaries in Python, which replace the linear scans in the set
          implementations shown here with dictionary index operations
          (hashing) and so run much quicker. (For more details, see
          <em class="epub__citetitle">Programming
          Python</em>.) If you’re interested in sets, also take
          another look at the <code class="epub__literal">set</code> object
          type we explored in Chapter 5; this type
          provides extensive set operations as built-in tools. Set
          implementations are fun to experiment with, but they are no longer
          strictly required in Python today.</p>
<p>For another type subclassing example, see the implementation
          of the <code class="epub__literal">bool</code> type in Python 2.3
          and later. As mentioned earlier in the book, <code class="epub__literal">bool</code> is a subclass of <code class="epub__literal">int</code> with two instances (<code class="epub__literal">True</code> and <code class="epub__literal">False</code>) that behave like the integers
          <code class="epub__literal">1</code> and <code class="epub__literal">0</code> but inherit custom string-representation
          methods that display their <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e77008"></a><a id="I_indexterm7_d1e77010"></a>names.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="The “New-Style” Class Model"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
