<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>The “New-Style” Class Model</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="the_quotation_mark_new-style_quotation"></a>The “New-Style” Class Model</h1>
<p>In Release 2.2, <a id="ch31classesnewstyleclasses"></a>Python <a id="ch31.2newstyleclasses"></a>introduced a new flavor of classes, known as “new-style”
        classes; classes following the original model became known as “classic
        classes” when compared to the new kind. In 3.0 the class story has
        merged, but it remains split for Python 2.X users:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>As of <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e77032"></a>Python 3.0, all classes are automatically what we
            used to call “new-style,” whether they explicitly inherit from
            <code class="epub__literal">object</code> or not. All classes
            inherit from <code class="epub__literal">object</code>, whether
            implicitly or explicitly, and all objects are instances of
            <code class="epub__literal">object</code>.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e77050"></a>Python 2.6 and earlier, classes must explicitly
            inherit from <code class="epub__literal">object</code> (or another
            built-in type) to be considered “new-style” and obtain all
            new-style features.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Because all classes are automatically new-style in 3.0, the
        features of new-style classes are simply normal class features. I’ve
        opted to keep their descriptions in this section separate, however, in
        deference to users of Python 2.X code—classes in such code acquire
        new-style features only when they are derived from <code class="epub__literal">object</code>.</p>
<p>In other words, when Python 3.0 users see descriptions of
        “new-style” features in this section, they should take them to be
        descriptions of existing features of their classes. For 2.6 readers,
        these are a set of optional extensions.</p>
<p>In Python 2.6 and earlier, the only syntactic difference for
        new-style classes is that they are derived from either a built-in
        type, such as <code class="epub__literal">list</code>, or a special
        built-in class known as <code class="epub__literal">object</code>. The
        built-in name <code class="epub__literal">object</code> is provided to
        serve as a superclass for new-style classes if no other built-in type
        is appropriate to use:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e77077"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class newstyle(object):
    <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...normal code...</code></em></pre>
<p>Any class derived from <code class="epub__literal">object</code>, or any other built-in type, is
        automatically treated as a new-style class. As long as a built-in type
        is somewhere in the superclass tree, the new class is treated as a
        new-style class. <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e77086"></a>Classes not derived from built-ins such as <code class="epub__literal">object</code> are considered classic.</p>
<p>New-style classes are only slightly different from classic
        classes, and the ways in which they differ are irrelevant to the vast
        majority of Python users. Moreover, the classic class model still
        available in 2.6 works exactly as it has for almost two
        decades.</p>
<p>In fact, new-style classes are almost completely backward
        compatible with classic classes in syntax and behavior; they mostly
        just add a few advanced new features. However, because they modify a
        handful of class behaviors, they had to be introduced as a distinct
        tool so as to avoid impacting any existing code that depends on the
        prior behaviors. For example, some subtle differences, such as
        <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e79123"></a>diamond pattern inheritance search and the behavior of
        built-in operations with managed attribute methods such as <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code>, can cause some legacy code to
        fail if left unchanged.</p>
<p>The next two sections provide overviews of the ways the
        new-style classes differ and the new tools they provide. Again,
        because all classes are new-style today, these topics represent
        changes to Python 2.X readers but simply additional advanced class
        topics to Python 3.0 readers.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="New-Style Class Changes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
