<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>New-Style Class Extensions</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="new-style_class_extensions"></a>New-Style Class Extensions</h1>
<p>Beyond <a id="ch31newstyleclassesclassext"></a>the changes described in the prior section (which,
        frankly, may be too academic and obscure to matter to many readers of
        this book), new-style classes provide a handful of more advanced class
        tools that have more direct and practical application. The following
        sections provide an overview of each of these additional features,
        available for new-style class in Python 2.6 and all classes in Python
        3.0.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Instance Slots"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="instance_slots"></a>Instance Slots</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>By <a id="ch31newstyleclassclsextinstanceslots"></a>assigning a sequence of string attribute names to a
          special<a id="I_indexterm7_d1e78194"></a> <code class="epub__literal">__slots__</code> class
          attribute, it is possible for a new-style class to both limit the
          set of legal attributes that instances of the class will have and
          optimize memory and speed performance.</p>
<p>This special attribute is typically set by assigning a
          sequence of string names to the variable <code class="epub__literal">__slots__</code> at the top level of a <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement: only those names in the
          <code class="epub__literal">__slots__</code> list can be assigned as
          instance attributes. However, like all names in Python, instance
          attribute names must still be assigned before they can be
          referenced, even if they’re listed in <code class="epub__literal">__slots__</code>. For example:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e78215"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class limiter(object):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>__slots__ = ['age', 'name', 'job']</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = limiter()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.age</code></strong>                                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Must assign before use</span></em>
AttributeError: age

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.age = 40</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.age</code></strong>
40
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.ape = 1000</code></strong>                                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Illegal: not in __slots__</span></em>
AttributeError: 'limiter' object has no attribute 'ape'</pre>
<p>Slots are something of a break with Python’s dynamic nature,
          which dictates that any name may be created by assignment. However,
          this feature is envisioned as both a way to catch “typo” errors like
          this (assignments to illegal attribute names not in <code class="epub__literal">__slots__</code> are detected), as well as an
          optimization mechanism. Allocating a namespace dictionary for every
          instance object can become expensive in terms of memory if many
          instances are created and only a few attributes are required. To
          save space and speed execution (to a degree that can vary per
          program), instead of allocating a dictionary for each instance, slot
          attributes are stored sequentially for quicker lookup.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Slots and generic code"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="slots_and_generic_code"></a>Slots and generic code</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In fact, <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e78255"></a>some instances with slots may not have a <code class="epub__literal">__dict__</code> attribute dictionary at all,
            which can make some metaprograms more complex (including some
            coded in this book). Tools that generically list attributes or
            access attributes by string name, for example, must be careful to
            use more storage-neutral tools than <code class="epub__literal">__dict__</code>, such as the <code class="epub__literal">getattr</code>, <code class="epub__literal">setattr</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">dir</code> built-in functions, which apply to
            attributes based on either <code class="epub__literal">__dict__</code> or <code class="epub__literal">__slots__</code> storage. In some cases, both
            attribute sources may need to be queried for completeness.</p>
<p>For example, when slots are used, instances do not normally
            have an attribute dictionary—Python uses the class
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>descriptors</em></span> feature covered in Chapter 37 to allocate space for slot
            attributes in the instance instead. Only names in the slots list
            can be assigned to instances, but slot-based attributes can still
            be fetched and set by name using generic tools. In Python 3.0 (and
            in 2.6 for classes derived from <code class="epub__literal">object</code>):</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e78298"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class C:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>__slots__ = ['a', 'b']</code></strong>           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># __slots__ means no __dict__ by default</span></em>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = C()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.a = 1</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.a</code></strong>
1
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.__dict__</code></strong>
AttributeError: 'C' object has no attribute '__dict__'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>getattr(X, 'a')</code></strong>
1
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>setattr(X, 'b', 2)</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># But getattr() and setattr() still work</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; X.b
2
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'a' in dir(X)</code></strong>                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># And dir() finds slot attributes too</span></em>
True
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>'b' in dir(X)</code></strong>
True</pre>
<p>Without an attribute namespaces dictionary, it’s not
            possible to assign new names to instances that are not names in
            the slots list:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e78343"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class D:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>__slots__ = ['a', 'b']</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __init__(self): self.d = 4</code></strong>   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Cannot add new names if no __dict__</span></em>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = D()</code></strong>
AttributeError: 'D' object has no attribute 'd'</pre>
<p>However, extra attributes can still be accommodated by
            including <code class="epub__literal">__dict__</code> in <code class="epub__literal">__slots__</code>, in order to allow for an
            attribute namespace dictionary. In this case,
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>both</em></span> storage mechanisms are used, but generic
            tools such as <code class="epub__literal">getattr</code> allow us
            to treat them as a single set of attributes:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e78374"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class D:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>__slots__ = ['a', 'b', '__dict__']</code></strong>    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># List __dict__ to include one too</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c = 3</code></strong>                                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Class attrs work normally</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __init__(self): self.d = 4</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># d put in __dict__, a in __slots__</span></em>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = D()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.d</code></strong>
4
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.__dict__</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Some objects have both __dict__ and __slots__</span></em>
{'d': 4}                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># getattr() can fetch either type of attr</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.__slots__</code></strong>
['a', 'b', '__dict__']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.c</code></strong>
3
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.a</code></strong>                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># All instance attrs undefined until assigned</span></em>
AttributeError: a
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.a = 1</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>getattr(X, 'a',), getattr(X, 'c'), getattr(X, 'd'</code></strong>)
(1, 3, 4)</pre>
<p>Code that wishes to list just all instance attributes
            generically, though, may still need to allow for both storage
            forms, since <code class="epub__literal">dir</code> also returns
            inherited attributes (this relies on dictionary iterators to
            collect keys):</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e78438"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for attr in list(X.__dict__) + X.__slots__:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(attr, '=&gt;', getattr(X, attr))</code></strong>

d =&gt; 4
a =&gt; 1
b =&gt; 2
__dict__ =&gt; {'d': 4}</pre>
<p>Since either can be omitted, this is more correctly coded as
            follows (<code class="epub__literal">getattr</code> allows for
            defaults):</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e78452"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for attr in list(getattr(X, '__dict__', [])) + getattr(X, '__slots__', []):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(attr, '=&gt;', getattr(X, attr))</code></strong>


d =&gt; 4
a =&gt; 1
b =&gt; 2
__dict__ =&gt; {'d': 4}</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Multiple __slot__ lists in superclasses"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="multiple_underscore_underscore_slot_und"></a>Multiple __slot__ lists in superclasses</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Note, <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e78465"></a>however, that this code addresses only slot names in
            the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>lowest</em></span> <code class="epub__literal">__slots__</code> attribute inherited by an instance. If
            multiple classes in a class tree have their own <code class="epub__literal">__slots__</code> attributes, generic programs
            must develop other policies for listing attributes (e.g.,
            classifying slot names as attributes of classes, not
            instances).</p>
<p>Slot declarations can appear in multiple classes in a class
            tree, but they are subject to a number of constraints that are
            somewhat difficult to rationalize unless you understand the
            implementation of slots as class-level descriptors (a tool we’ll
            study in detail in the last part of this book):</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>If a subclass inherits from a superclass without a
                <code class="epub__literal">__slots__</code>, the <code class="epub__literal">__dict__</code> attribute of the superclass
                will always be accessible, making a <code class="epub__literal">__slots__</code> in the subclass
                meaningless.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>If a class defines the same slot name as a superclass,
                the version of the name defined by the superclass slot will be
                accessible only by fetching its descriptor directly from the
                superclass.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Because the meaning of a <code class="epub__literal">__slots__</code> declaration is limited to
                the class in which it appears, subclasses will have a <code class="epub__literal">__dict__</code> unless they also define a
                <code class="epub__literal">__slots__</code>.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>In terms of listing instance attributes generically, slots
            in multiple classes might require manual class tree climbs,
            <code class="epub__literal">dir</code> usage, or a policy that
            treats slot names as a different category of names
            altogether:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e78520"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class E:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>__slots__ = ['c', 'd']</code></strong>            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Superclass has slots</span></em>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class D(E):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>__slots__ = ['a', '__dict__']</code></strong>     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># So does its subclass</span></em>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = D()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.a = 1; X.b = 2; X.c = 3</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># The instance is the union</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.a, X.c</code></strong>
(1, 3)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>E.__slots__</code></strong>                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># But slots are not concatenated</span></em>
['c', 'd']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>D.__slots__</code></strong>
['a', '__dict__']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.__slots__</code></strong>                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Instance inherits *lowest* __slots__</span></em>
['a', '__dict__']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.__dict__</code></strong>                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># And has its own an attr dict</span></em>
{'b': 2}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for attr in list(getattr(X, '__dict__', [])) + getattr(X, '__slots__', []):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(attr, '=&gt;', getattr(X, attr))</code></strong>
...
b =&gt; 2                                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Superclass slots missed!</span></em>
a =&gt; 1
__dict__ =&gt; {'b': 2}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>dir(X)</code></strong>                                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># dir() includes all slot names</span></em>
[...<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>many names omitted</code></em>... 'a', 'b', 'c', 'd']</pre>
<p>When such generality is possible, slots are probably best
            treated as class attributes, rather than trying to mold them to
            appear the same as normal instance attributes. For more on slots
            in general, see the Python standard manual set. Also watch for an
            example that allows for attributes based on both <code class="epub__literal">__slots__</code> and <code class="epub__literal">__dict__</code> storage in the <code class="epub__literal">Private</code> decorator discussion of
            Chapter 38.</p>
<p>For a prime example of why generic programs may need to care
            about slots, see the <em class="epub__filename">lister.py</em><a name="section of"></a> display mix-in classes
            example in the multiple inheritance section of the prior chapter;
            a note there describes the example’s slot concerns. In such a tool
            that attempts to list attributes generically, slot usage requires
            either extra code or the implementation of policies regarding the
            handling of slot-based attributes in <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e78613"></a>general.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Class Properties"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="class_properties"></a>Class Properties</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>A <a id="ch31newstyleclsssclsextclsprop"></a>mechanism known as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>properties</em></span>
          provides another way for new-style classes to define automatically
          called methods for access or assignment to instance attributes. At
          least for specific attributes, this feature is an alternative to
          many current uses of the <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> and <code class="epub__literal">__setattr__</code> overloading methods we studied
          in Chapter 29. Properties have a
          similar effect to these two methods, but they incur an extra method
          call only for accesses to names that require dynamic computation.
          Properties (and slots) are based on a new notion of attribute
          descriptors, which is too advanced for us to cover here.</p>
<p><a id="I_indexterm7_d1e80673"></a>In short, a property is a type of object assigned to a
          class attribute name. A property is generated by calling the
          <code class="epub__literal">property</code> built-in with three
          methods (handlers for get, set, and delete operations), as well as a
          docstring; if any argument is passed as <code class="epub__literal">None</code> or omitted, that operation is not
          supported. Properties are typically assigned at the top level of a
          <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement [e.g., <code class="epub__literal">name = property(...)</code>]. When thus assigned,
          accesses to the class attribute itself (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">obj.name</code>) are automatically routed to one
          of the accessor methods passed into the property. For example, the
          <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> method allows classes
          to intercept undefined attribute references:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e78662"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class classic:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __getattr__(self, name):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if name == 'age':</code></strong>
...             <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return 40</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>else:</code></strong>
...             <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>raise AttributeError</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = classic()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.age</code></strong>                                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs __getattr__</span></em>
40
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.name</code></strong>                                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs __getattr__</span></em>
AttributeError</pre>
<p>Here is the same example, coded with properties instead (note
          that properties are available for all classes but require the
          new-style <code class="epub__literal">object</code> derivation in
          2.6 to work properly for intercepting attribute assignments):</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e78703"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class newprops(object):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def getage(self):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return 40</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>age = property(getage, None, None, None)</code></strong>  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># get, set, del, docs</span></em>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = newprops()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.age</code></strong>                                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs getage</span></em>
40
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.name</code></strong>                                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Normal fetch</span></em>
AttributeError: newprops instance has no attribute 'name'</pre>
<p>For some coding tasks, properties
          can be less complex and quicker to run than the traditional
          techniques. For example, when we add attribute
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>assignment</em></span> support, properties become more
          attractive—there’s less code to type, and no extra method calls are
          incurred for assignments to attributes we don’t wish to compute
          dynamically:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e78745"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class newprops(object):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def getage(self):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return 40</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def setage(self, value):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('set age:', value)</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>self._age = value</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>age = property(getage, setage, None, None)</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = newprops()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.age</code></strong>                                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs getage</span></em>
40
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.age = 42</code></strong>                                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs setage</span></em>
set age: 42
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x._age</code></strong>                                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Normal fetch; no getage call</span></em>
42
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.job = 'trainer'</code></strong>                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Normal assign; no setage call</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.job</code></strong>                                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Normal fetch; no getage call</span></em>
'trainer'</pre>
<p>The equivalent classic class incurs extra method calls for
          assignments to attributes not being managed and needs to route
          attribute assignments through the attribute dictionary (or, for
          new-style classes, to the <code class="epub__literal">object</code>
          superclass’s <code class="epub__literal">__setattr__</code>) to
          avoid loops:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e78812"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class classic:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __getattr__(self, name):</code></strong>              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On undefined reference</span></em>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if name == 'age':</code></strong>
...             <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return 40</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>else:</code></strong>
...             <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>raise AttributeError</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __setattr__(self, name, value):</code></strong>       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On all assignments</span></em>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('set:', name, value)</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>if name == 'age':</code></strong>
...             <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>self.__dict__['_age'] = value</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>else:</code></strong>
...             <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>self.__dict__[name] = value</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = classic()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.age</code></strong>                                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs __getattr__</span></em>
40
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.age = 41</code></strong>                                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs __setattr__</span></em>
set: age 41
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x._age</code></strong>                                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Defined: no __getattr__ call</span></em>
41
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.job = 'trainer'</code></strong>                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs __setattr__ again</span></em>
set: job trainer
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.job</code></strong>                                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Defined: no __getattr__ call</span></em>
'trainer'</pre>
<p>Properties seem like a win for this
          simple example. However, some applications of <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> and <code class="epub__literal">__setattr__</code> may still require more dynamic
          or generic interfaces than properties directly provide. For example,
          in many cases, the set of attributes to be supported cannot be
          determined when the class is coded, and may not even exist in any
          tangible form (e.g., when <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>delegating</em></span> arbitrary
          method references to a wrapped/embedded object generically). In such
          cases, a generic <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> or a
          <code class="epub__literal">__setattr__</code> attribute handler
          with a passed-in attribute name may be preferable. Because such
          generic handlers can also handle simpler cases, properties are often
          an optional extension.</p>
<p>For more details on both options, stay tuned for Chapter 37 in the final part of this book. As
          we’ll see there, it’s also possible to code properties using
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>function decorator syntax</em></span>, a topic introduced
          later in this <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e78918"></a><a id="I_indexterm7_d1e78920"></a>chapter.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="__getattribute__ and Descriptors"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="_underscore_underscore_getattribute_und"></a>__getattribute__ and Descriptors</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code>
          method, <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e78931"></a><a id="I_indexterm7_d1e78938"></a>available for new-style classes only, allows a class
          to intercept <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>all</em></span> attribute references, not just
          undefined references, like <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code>. It is also somewhat trickier
          to use than <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code>: it is
          prone to loops, much like <code class="epub__literal">__setattr__</code>, but in different ways.</p>
<p>In addition to properties and operator overloading methods,
          Python supports the notion of attribute
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>descriptors</em></span>—classes with <code class="epub__literal">__get__</code> and <code class="epub__literal">__set__</code> methods, assigned to class
          attributes and inherited by instances, that intercept read and write
          accesses to specific attributes. Descriptors are in a sense a more
          general form of properties; in fact, properties are a simplified way
          to define a specific type of descriptor, one that runs functions on
          access. Descriptors are also used to implement the slots feature we
          met earlier.</p>
<p>Because properties, <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code>, and descriptors are
          somewhat advanced topics, we’ll defer the rest of their coverage, as
          well as more on properties, to Chapter 37
          in the final part of this book.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Metaclasses"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="metaclasses"></a>Metaclasses</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Most <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e78978"></a>of <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e78986"></a>the <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e78990"></a>changes and feature additions of new-style classes
          integrate with the notion of subclassable types mentioned earlier in
          this chapter, because subclassable types and new-style classes were
          introduced in conjunction with a merging of the type/class dichotomy
          in Python 2.2 and beyond. As we’ve seen, in 3.0, this merging is
          complete: classes are now types, and types are classes.</p>
<p>Along with these changes, Python also grew a more coherent
          protocol for coding <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>metaclasses</em></span>,
          which are classes that subclass the <code class="epub__literal">type</code> object and intercept class creation
          calls. As such, they provide a well-defined hook for management and
          augmentation of class objects. They are also an advanced topic that
          is optional for most Python programmers, so we’ll postpone further
          details here. We’ll meet metaclasses briefly later in this chapter
          in conjunction with class decorators, and we’ll explore them in full
          detail in Chapter 39, in the final part of
          this <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e79007"></a><a id="I_indexterm7_d1e79009"></a>book.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Static and Class Methods"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
