<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Static and Class Methods</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="static_and_class_methods"></a>Static and Class Methods</h1>
<p>As <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e79017"></a>of Python 2.2, it is possible to define two kinds of
        methods within a class that can be called without an instance:
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="ch31staticmethods"></a>static</em></span> methods work <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e79029"></a>roughly like simple instance-less functions inside a
        class, and <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm7_d1e79038"></a>class</em></span> methods are passed a class instead of
        an instance. Although this <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e79043"></a>feature was added in conjunction with the new-style
        classes discussed in the prior sections, static and class methods work
        for classic classes too.</p>
<p>To enable these method modes, special built-in functions called
        <code class="epub__literal">staticmethod</code> and <code class="epub__literal">classmethod</code> must be called within the class,
        or invoked with the decoration syntax we’ll meet later in this
        chapter. In Python 3.0, instance-less methods called only through a
        class name do not require a <code class="epub__literal">staticmethod</code> declaration, but such methods
        called through instances do.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Why the Special Methods?"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="why_the_special_methods_question"></a>Why the Special Methods?</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As we’ve learned, a <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e79067"></a>class method is normally passed an instance object in
          its first argument, to serve as the implied subject of the method
          call. Today, though, there are two ways to modify this model. Before
          I explain what they are, I should explain why this might matter to
          you.</p>
<p>Sometimes, programs need to process data associated with
          classes instead of instances. Consider keeping track of the number
          of instances created from a class, or maintaining a list of all of a
          class’s instances that are currently in memory. This type of
          information and its processing are associated with the class rather
          than its instances. That is, the information is usually stored on
          the class itself and processed in the absence of any
          instance.</p>
<p>For such tasks, simple functions coded outside a class can
          often suffice—because they can access class attributes through the
          class name, they have access to class data and never require access
          to an instance. However, to better associate such code with a class,
          and to allow such processing to be customized with inheritance as
          usual, it would be better to code these types of functions inside
          the class itself. To make this work, we need methods in a class that
          are not passed, and do not expect, a <code class="epub__literal">self</code> instance argument.</p>
<p>Python supports such goals with the notion of <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>static
          methods</em></span>—simple functions with no <code class="epub__literal">self</code> argument that are nested in a class
          and are designed to work on class attributes instead of instance
          attributes. Static methods never receive an automatic <code class="epub__literal">self</code> argument, whether called through a
          class or an instance. They usually keep track of information that
          spans all instances, rather than providing behavior for
          instances.</p>
<p>Although less commonly used, Python also supports the notion
          of <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>class methods</em></span>—methods of a class that are
          passed a class object in their first argument instead of an
          instance, regardless of whether they are called through an instance
          or a class. Such methods can access class data through their
          <code class="epub__literal">self</code> class argument even if
          called through an instance. Normal methods (now known in formal
          circles as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>instance methods</em></span>) still receive a
          subject instance when called; static and class methods do
          not.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Static Methods in 2.6 and 3.0"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="static_methods_in_2.6_and_3.0"></a>Static Methods in 2.6 and 3.0</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e79110"></a>concept of static methods is the same in both Python
          2.6 and 3.0, but its implementation requirements have evolved
          somewhat in Python 3.0. Since this book covers both versions, I need
          to explain the differences in the two underlying models before we
          get to the code.</p>
<p>Really, we already began this story in the preceding chapter,
          when we explored the notion of unbound methods. Recall that both
          Python 2.6 and 3.0 always pass an instance to a method that is
          called through an instance. However, Python 3.0 treats methods
          fetched directly from a class differently than 2.6:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In Python 2.6, fetching a method from a class produces an
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm7_d1e79123a"></a>unbound method</em></span>, which cannot be called
              without manually passing an instance.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In Python 3.0, fetching a method from a class produces a
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm7_d1e79132"></a>simple function<a id="I_indexterm7_d1e79136"></a></em></span>, which can be called normally with no
              instance present.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>In other words, Python 2.6 class methods always require an
          instance to be passed in, whether they are called through an
          instance or a class. By contrast, in Python 3.0 we are required to
          pass an instance to a method only if the method expects one—methods
          without a <code class="epub__literal">self</code> instance argument
          can be called through the class without passing an instance. That
          is, 3.0 allows simple functions in a class, as long as they do not
          expect and are not passed an instance argument. The net effect is
          that:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In Python 2.6, we must always declare a method as static
              in order to call it without an instance, whether it is called
              through a class or an instance.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In Python 3.0, we need not declare such methods as static
              if they will be called through a class only, but we must do so
              in order to call them through an instance.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>To illustrate, suppose we want to use class attributes to
          count how many instances are generated from a class. The following
          file, <em class="epub__filename">spam.py</em>, makes a first
          attempt—its class has a counter stored as a class attribute, a
          constructor that bumps up the counter by one each time a new
          instance is created, and a method that displays the counter’s value.
          Remember, class attributes are shared by all instances. Therefore,
          storing the counter in the class object itself ensures that it
          effectively spans all instances:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e79159"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Spam:
    numInstances = 0
    def __init__(self):
        Spam.numInstances = Spam.numInstances + 1
    def printNumInstances():
        print("Number of instances created: ", Spam.numInstances)</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">printNumInstances</code>
          method is designed to process class data, not instance data—it’s
          about <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>all</em></span> the instances, not any one in
          particular. Because of that, we want to be able to call it without
          having to pass an instance. Indeed, we don’t want to make an
          instance to fetch the number of instances, because this would change
          the number of instances we’re trying to fetch! In other words, we
          want a self-less “static” method.</p>
<p>Whether this code works or not, though, depends on which
          Python you use, and which way you call the method—through the class
          or through an instance. In 2.6 (and 2.X in general), calls to a
          self-less method function through both the class and instances fail
          (I’ve omitted some error text here for space):</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e79171"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python26\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from spam import Spam</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a = Spam()</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Cannot call unbound class methods in 2.6</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>b = Spam()</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Methods expect a self object by default</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c = Spam()</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Spam.printNumInstances()</code></strong>
TypeError: unbound method printNumInstances() must be called with Spam instance
as first argument (got nothing instead)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a.printNumInstances()</code></strong>
TypeError: printNumInstances() takes no arguments (1 given)</pre>
<p>The problem here is that unbound instance methods aren’t
          exactly the same as simple functions in 2.6. Even though there are
          no arguments in the <code class="epub__literal">def</code> header,
          the method still expects an instance to be passed in when it’s
          called, because the function is associated with a class. In Python
          3.0 (and later 3.X releases), calls to self-less methods made
          through classes work, but calls from instances fail:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e79207"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python30\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from spam import Spam</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a = Spam()</code></strong>                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Can call functions in class in 3.0</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>b = Spam()</code></strong>                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Calls through instances still pass a self</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c = Spam()</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Spam.printNumInstances()</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Differs in 3.0</span></em>
Number of instances created:  3
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a.printNumInstances()</code></strong>
TypeError: printNumInstances() takes no arguments (1 given)</pre>
<p>That is, calls to instance-less methods like <code class="epub__literal">printNumInstances</code> made through the
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>class</em></span> fail in Python 2.6 but work in Python
          3.0. On the other hand, calls made through an
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>instance</em></span> fail in both Pythons, because an
          instance is automatically passed to a method that does not have an
          argument to receive it:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e79251"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">Spam.printNumInstances()             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Fails in 2.6, works in 3.0</span></em>
instance.printNumInstances()         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Fails in both 2.6 and 3.0</span></em></pre>
<p>If you’re able to use 3.0 and stick with calling self-less
          methods through classes only, you already have a static method
          feature. However, to allow self-less methods to be called through
          classes in 2.6 and through instances in both 2.6 and 3.0, you need
          to either adopt other designs or be able to somehow mark such
          methods as special. Let’s look at both options in turn.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Static Method Alternatives"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="static_method_alternatives"></a>Static Method Alternatives</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Short of <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e79265"></a>marking a self-less method as special, there are a few
          different coding structures that can be tried. If you want to call
          functions that access class members without an instance, perhaps the
          simplest idea is to just make them simple functions outside the
          class, not class methods. This way, an instance isn’t expected in
          the call. For example, the following mutation of <em class="epub__filename">spam.py</em> works the same in Python 3.0 and
          2.6 (albeit displaying extra parentheses in 2.6 for its <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statement):</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e79277"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def printNumInstances():
    print("Number of instances created: ", Spam.numInstances)

class Spam:
    numInstances = 0
    def __init__(self):
        Spam.numInstances = Spam.numInstances + 1

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import spam</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a = spam.Spam()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>b = spam.Spam()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c = spam.Spam()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>spam.printNumInstances()</code></strong>           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># But function may be too far removed</span></em>
Number of instances created:  3        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># And cannot be changed via inheritance</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>spam.Spam.numInstances</code></strong>
3</pre>
<p>Because the class name is accessible to the simple function as
          a global variable, this works fine. Also, note that the name of the
          function becomes global, but only to this single module; it will not
          clash with names in other files of the program.</p>
<p>Prior to static methods in Python, this structure was the
          general prescription. Because Python already provides modules as a
          namespace-partitioning tool, one could argue that there’s not
          typically any need to package functions in classes unless they
          implement object behavior. Simple functions within modules like the
          one here do much of what instance-less class methods could, and are
          already associated with the class because they live in the same
          module.</p>
<p>Unfortunately, this approach is still less than ideal. For one
          thing, it adds to this file’s scope an extra name that is used only
          for processing a single class. For another, the function is much
          less directly associated with the class; in fact, its definition
          could be hundreds of lines away. Perhaps worse, simple functions
          like this cannot be customized by inheritance, since they live
          outside a class’s namespace: subclasses cannot directly replace or
          extend such a function by redefining it.</p>
<p>We might try to make this example
          work in a version-neutral way by using a normal method and always
          calling it through (or with) an instance, as usual:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e79313"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Spam:
    numInstances = 0
    def __init__(self):
        Spam.numInstances = Spam.numInstances + 1
    def printNumInstances(self):
        print("Number of instances created: ", Spam.numInstances)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from spam import Spam</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, b, c = Spam(), Spam(), Spam()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a.printNumInstances()</code></strong>
Number of instances created:  3
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Spam.printNumInstances(a)</code></strong>
Number of instances created:  3
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Spam().printNumInstances()</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># But fetching counter changes counter!</span></em>
Number of instances created:  4</pre>
<p>Unfortunately, as mentioned earlier, such an approach is
          completely unworkable if we don’t have an instance available, and
          making an instance changes the class data, as illustrated in the
          last line here. A better solution would be to somehow mark a method
          inside a class as never requiring an instance. The next section
          shows how.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Using Static and Class Methods"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="using_static_and_class_methods"></a>Using Static and Class Methods</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Today, <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e79341"></a>there <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e79347"></a>is another option for coding simple functions
          associated with a class that may be called through either the class
          or its instances. As of Python 2.2, we can code classes with static
          and class methods, neither of which requires an instance argument to
          be passed in when invoked. To designate such methods, classes call
          the built-in functions <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e79353"></a><code class="epub__literal">staticmethod</code> and
          <code class="epub__literal">classmethod</code>,<a id="I_indexterm7_d1e79362"></a> as hinted in the earlier discussion of new-style
          classes. Both mark a function object as special—i.e., as requiring
          no instance if static and requiring a class argument if a class
          method. For example:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e79366"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Methods:
    def imeth(self, x):            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Normal instance method: passed a self</span></em>
        print(self, x)

    def smeth(x):                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Static: no instance passed</span></em>
        print(x)

    def cmeth(cls, x):             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Class: gets class, not instance</span></em>
        print(cls, x)

    smeth = staticmethod(smeth)    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Make smeth a static method</span></em>
    cmeth = classmethod(cmeth)     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Make cmeth a class method</span></em></pre>
<p>Notice how the last two assignments in this code simply
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>reassign</em></span> the method names <code class="epub__literal">smeth</code> and <code class="epub__literal">cmeth</code>. Attributes are created and changed
          by any assignment in a <code class="epub__literal">class</code>
          statement, so these final assignments simply overwrite the
          assignments made earlier by the <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s.</p>
<p>Technically, Python now supports three kinds of class-related
          methods: <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>instance</em></span>, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>static</em></span>,
          and <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>class</em></span>. Moreover, Python 3.0 extends this
          model by also allowing simple functions in a class to serve the role
          of static methods without extra protocol, when called through a
          class.</p>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Instance methods<a id="I_indexterm7_d1e79413"></a></em></span> are the normal (and default) case that
          we’ve seen in this book. An instance method must always be called
          with an instance object. When you call it through an instance,
          Python passes the instance to the first (leftmost) argument
          automatically; when you call it through a class, you must pass along
          the instance manually (for simplicity, I’ve omitted some class
          imports in interactive sessions like this one):</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e79417"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>obj = Methods()</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Make an instance</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>obj.imeth(1)</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Normal method, call through instance</span></em>
&lt;__main__.Methods object...&gt; 1     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Becomes imeth(obj, 1)</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Methods.imeth(obj, 2)</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Normal method, call through class</span></em>
&lt;__main__.Methods object...&gt; 2     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Instance passed explicitly</span></em></pre>
<p>By contrast, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>static methods</em></span> are called
          without an instance argument. Unlike simple functions outside a
          class, their names are local to the scopes of the classes in which
          they are defined, and they may be looked up by inheritance.
          Instance-less functions can be called through a class normally in
          Python 3.0, but never by default in 2.6. Using the <code class="epub__literal">staticmethod</code> built-in allows such methods
          to also be called through an instance in 3.0 and through both a
          class and an instance in Python 2.6 (the first of these works in 3.0
          without <code class="epub__literal">staticmethod</code>, but the
          second does not):</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e79454"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Methods.smeth(3)</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Static method, call through class</span></em>
3                                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># No instance passed or expected</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>obj.smeth(4)</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Static method, call through instance</span></em>
4                                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Instance not passed</span></em></pre>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Class methods</em></span> <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e79478"></a>are similar, but Python automatically passes the class
          (not an instance) in to a class method’s first (leftmost) argument,
          whether it is called through a class or an instance:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e79482"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Methods.cmeth(5)</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Class method, call through class</span></em>
&lt;class '__main__.Methods'&gt; 5       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Becomes cmeth(Methods, 5)</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>obj.cmeth(6)</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Class method, call through instance</span></em>
&lt;class '__main__.Methods'&gt; 6       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Becomes cmeth(Methods, 6)</span></em></pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Counting Instances with Static Methods"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="counting_instances_with_static_methods"></a>Counting Instances with Static Methods</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Now, <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e79507"></a>given these built-ins, here is the static method
          equivalent of this section’s instance-counting example—it marks the
          method as special, so it will never be passed an instance
          automatically:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e79517"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Spam:
    numInstances = 0                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Use static method for class data</span></em>
    def __init__(self):
        Spam.numInstances += 1
    def printNumInstances():
        print("Number of instances:", Spam.numInstances)
    printNumInstances = staticmethod(printNumInstances)</pre>
<p>Using the static method built-in, our code now allows the
          self-less method to be called through the class or any instance of
          it, in both Python 2.6 and 3.0:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e79524"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a = Spam()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>b = Spam()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c = Spam()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Spam.printNumInstances()</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Call as simple function</span></em>
Number of instances: 3
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a.printNumInstances()</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Instance argument not passed</span></em>
Number of instances: 3</pre>
<p>Compared to simply moving <code class="epub__literal">printNumInstances</code> outside the class, as
          prescribed earlier, this version requires an extra <code class="epub__literal">staticmethod</code> call; however, it localizes
          the function name in the class scope (so it won’t clash with other
          names in the module), moves the function code closer to where it is
          used (inside the <code class="epub__literal">class</code>
          statement), and allows subclasses to <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>customize</em></span>
          the static method with inheritance—a more convenient approach than
          importing functions from the files in which superclasses are coded.
          The following subclass and new testing session illustrate:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e79562"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Sub(Spam):
    def printNumInstances():                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Override a static method</span></em>
        print("Extra stuff...")              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># But call back to original</span></em>
        Spam.printNumInstances()
    printNumInstances = staticmethod(printNumInstances)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a = Sub()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>b = Sub()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a.printNumInstances()</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Call from subclass instance</span></em>
Extra stuff...
Number of instances: 2
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Sub.printNumInstances()</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Call from subclass itself</span></em>
Extra stuff...
Number of instances: 2
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Spam.printNumInstances()</code></strong>
Number of instances: 2</pre>
<p>Moreover, classes can inherit the static method without
          redefining it—it is run without an instance, regardless of where it
          is defined in a class <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e79594"></a>tree:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e79597"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class Other(Spam): pass</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Inherit static method verbatim</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c = Other()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c.printNumInstances()</code></strong>
Number of instances: 3</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Counting Instances with Class Methods"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="counting_instances_with_class_methods"></a>Counting Instances with Class Methods</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Interestingly, a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm7_d1e79617"></a>class method</em></span> can do similar work here—the
          following has the same behavior as the static method version listed
          earlier, but it uses a class method that receives the instance’s
          class in its first argument. Rather than hardcoding the class name,
          the class method uses the automatically passed class object
          generically:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e79624"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Spam:
    numInstances = 0                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Use class method instead of static</span></em>
    def __init__(self):
        Spam.numInstances += 1
    def printNumInstances(cls):
        print("Number of instances:", cls.numInstances)
    printNumInstances = classmethod(printNumInstances)</pre>
<p>This class is used in the same way as the prior versions, but
          its <code class="epub__literal">printNumInstances</code> method
          receives the class, not the instance, when called from both the
          class and an instance:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e79634"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a, b = Spam(), Spam()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a.printNumInstances()</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Passes class to first argument</span></em>
Number of instances: 2
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Spam.printNumInstances()</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Also passes class to first argument</span></em>
Number of instances: 2</pre>
<p>When using class methods, though, keep in mind that they
          receive the most specific (i.e., <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>lowest</em></span>) class
          of the call’s subject. This has some subtle implications when trying
          to update class data through the passed-in class. For example, if in
          module <em class="epub__filename">test.py</em> we subclass to
          customize as before, augment <code class="epub__literal">Spam.printNumInstances</code> to also display its
          <code class="epub__literal">cls</code> argument, and start a new
          testing session:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e79665"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Spam:
    numInstances = 0                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Trace class passed in</span></em>
    def __init__(self):
        Spam.numInstances += 1
    def printNumInstances(cls):
        print("Number of instances:", cls.numInstances, cls)
    printNumInstances = classmethod(printNumInstances)

class Sub(Spam):
    def printNumInstances(cls):              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Override a class method</span></em>
        print("Extra stuff...", cls)         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># But call back to original</span></em>
        Spam.printNumInstances()
    printNumInstances = classmethod(printNumInstances)

class Other(Spam): pass                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Inherit class method verbatim</span></em></pre>
<p>the lowest class is passed in whenever a class method is run,
          even for subclasses that have no class methods of their own:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e79680"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x, y = Sub(), Spam()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.printNumInstances()</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Call from subclass instance</span></em>
Extra stuff... &lt;class 'test.Sub'&gt;
Number of instances: 2 &lt;class 'test.Spam'&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Sub.printNumInstances()</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Call from subclass itself</span></em>
Extra stuff... &lt;class 'test.Sub'&gt;
Number of instances: 2 &lt;class 'test.Spam'&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y.printNumInstances()</code></strong>
Number of instances: 2 &lt;class 'test.Spam'&gt;</pre>
<p>In the first call here, a class method call is made through an
          instance of the <code class="epub__literal">Sub</code> subclass, and
          Python passes the lowest class, <code class="epub__literal">Sub</code>, to the class method. All is well in
          this case—since <code class="epub__literal">Sub</code>’s
          redefinition of the method calls the <code class="epub__literal">Spam</code> superclass’s version explicitly, the
          superclass method in <code class="epub__literal">Spam</code>
          receives itself in its first argument. But watch what happens for an
          object that simply inherits the class method:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e79718"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>z = Other()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>z.printNumInstances()</code></strong>
Number of instances: 3 &lt;class 'test.Other'&gt;</pre>
<p>This last call here passes <code class="epub__literal">Other</code> to <code class="epub__literal">Spam</code>’s class method. This works in this
          example because <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>fetching</em></span> the counter finds it
          in <code class="epub__literal">Spam</code> by inheritance. If this
          method tried to <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>assign</em></span> to the passed class’s
          data, though, it would update <code class="epub__literal">Other</code>, not <code class="epub__literal">Spam</code>! In this specific case, <code class="epub__literal">Spam</code> is probably better off hardcoding its
          own class name to update its data, rather than relying on the
          passed-in class argument.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Counting instances per class with class methods"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="counting_instances_per_class_with_class"></a>Counting instances per class with class methods</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In fact, <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e79759"></a>because class methods always receive the lowest
            class in an instance’s tree:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Static</em></span> methods and explicit class
                names may be a better solution for processing data local to a
                class.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Class</em></span> methods may be better suited
                to processing data that may differ for each class in a
                hierarchy.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Code that needs to manage <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>per-class</em></span>
            instance counters, for example, might be best off leveraging class
            methods. In the following, the top-level superclass uses a class
            method to manage state information that varies for and is stored
            on each class in the tree—similar in spirit to the way instance
            methods manage state information in class instances:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e79786"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Spam:
    numInstances = 0
    def count(cls):                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Per-class instance counters</span></em>
        cls.numInstances += 1          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># cls is lowest class above instance</span></em>
    def __init__(self):
        self.count()                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Passes self.__class__ to count</span></em>
    count = classmethod(count)

class Sub(Spam):
    numInstances = 0
    def __init__(self):                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Redefines __init__</span></em>
        Spam.__init__(self)

class Other(Spam):                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Inherits __init__</span></em>
    numInstances = 0

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = Spam()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y1, y2 = Sub(), Sub()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>z1, z2, z3 = Other(), Other(), Other()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.numInstances, y1.numInstances, z1.numInstances</code></strong>
(1, 2, 3)
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Spam.numInstances, Sub.numInstances, Other.numInstances</code></strong>
(1, 2, 3)</pre>
<p>Static and class methods have additional advanced roles,
            which we will finesse here; see other resources for more use
            cases. In recent Python versions, though, the static and class
            method designations have become even simpler with the advent of
            function decoration syntax—a way to apply one function to another
            that has roles well beyond the static method use case that was its
            motivation. This syntax also allows us to augment classes in
            Python 2.6 and 3.0—to initialize data like the <code class="epub__literal">numInstances</code> counter in the last
            example, for instance. The next section explains how.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Decorators and Metaclasses: Part 1"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
