<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Decorators and Metaclasses: Part 1</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="decorators_and_metaclasses_colon_part_1"></a>Decorators and Metaclasses: Part 1</h1>
<p>Because <a id="ch31clsssfuncdec"></a>the <code class="epub__literal">staticmethod</code> call
        technique described in the prior section initially seemed obscure to
        some users, a feature was eventually added to make the operation
        simpler. <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Function decorators</em></span> provide a way to
        specify special operation modes for functions, by wrapping them in an
        extra layer of logic implemented as another function<a id="ch31funcdec"></a>.</p>
<p>Function decorators turn out to be general tools: they are
        useful for adding many types of logic to functions besides the static
        method use case. For instance, they may be used to augment functions
        with code that logs calls made to them, checks the types of passed
        arguments during debugging, and so on. In some ways, function
        decorators are similar to the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>delegation</em></span> design
        pattern we explored in Chapter 30, but
        they are designed to augment a specific function or method call, not
        an entire object interface.</p>
<p>Python provides some built-in function decorators for operations
        such as marking static methods, but programmers can also code
        arbitrary decorators of their own. Although they are not strictly tied
        to classes, user-defined function decorators often are coded as
        classes to save the original functions, along with other data, as
        state information. There’s also a more recent related extension
        available in Python 2.6 and 3.0: <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>class decorators</em></span>
        are directly tied to the class model, and their roles overlap with
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>metaclasses</em></span>.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Function Decorator Basics"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="function_decorator_basics"></a>Function Decorator Basics</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Syntactically, a <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e79865"></a>function decorator is a sort of runtime declaration
          about the function that follows. A function decorator is coded on a
          line by itself just before the <code class="epub__literal">def</code> statement that defines a function or
          method. It consists of the <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e79874"></a><code class="epub__literal">@</code> symbol, followed
          by what we call a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm7_d1e79881"></a>metafunction</em></span>—a function (or other callable
          object) that manages another function. <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e79886"></a>Static methods today, for example, may be coded with
          decorator syntax like this:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e79892"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class C:
   @staticmethod                                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Decoration syntax</span></em>
   def meth():
       ...</pre>
<p>Internally, this syntax has the same effect as the following
          (passing the function through the decorator and assigning the result
          back to the original name):</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e79899"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class C:
   def meth():
       ...
   meth = staticmethod(meth)                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Rebind name</span></em></pre>
<p>Decoration rebinds the method name to the decorator’s result.
          The net effect is that calling the method function’s name later
          actually triggers the result of its <code class="epub__literal">static</code><code class="epub__literal">method</code> decorator first. Because a
          decorator can return any sort of object, this allows the decorator
          to insert a layer of logic to be run on every call. The decorator
          function is free to return either the original function itself, or a
          new object that saves the original function passed to the decorator
          to be invoked indirectly after the extra logic layer runs.</p>
<p>With this addition, here’s a better way to code our static
          method example from the prior section in either Python 2.6 or 3.0
          (the <code class="epub__literal">classmethod</code> decorator is
          used the same way):</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e79916"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Spam:
    numInstances = 0
    def __init__(self):
        Spam.numInstances = Spam.numInstances + 1

    @staticmethod
    def printNumInstances():
        print("Number of instances created: ", Spam.numInstances)

a = Spam()
b = Spam()
c = Spam()
Spam.printNumInstances()      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Calls from both classes and instances work now!</span></em>
a.printNumInstances()         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Both print "Number of instances created:  3"</span></em></pre>
<p>Keep in mind that <code class="epub__literal">staticmethod</code> is still a built-in function;
          it may be used in decoration syntax, just because it takes a
          function as argument and returns a callable. In fact, any such
          function can be used in this way—even user-defined functions we code
          ourselves, as the next section explains.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="A First Function Decorator Example"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="a_first_function_decorator_example"></a>A First Function Decorator Example</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Although <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e79933"></a>Python provides a handful of built-in functions that
          can be used as decorators, we can also write custom decorators of
          our own. Because of their wide utility, we’re going to devote an
          entire chapter to coding decorators in the final part of this book.
          As a quick example, though, let’s look at a simple user-defined
          decorator at work.</p>
<p>Recall from Chapter 29 that the
          <code class="epub__literal">__call__</code> operator overloading
          method implements a function-call interface for class instances. The
          following code uses this to define a class that saves the decorated
          function in the instance and catches calls to the original name.
          Because this is a class, it also has state information (a counter of
          calls made):</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e79946"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class tracer:
    def __init__(self, func):
        self.calls = 0
        self.func  = func
    def __call__(self, *args):
        self.calls += 1
        print('call %s to %s' % (self.calls, self.func.__name__))
        self.func(*args)

@tracer                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same as spam = tracer(spam)</span></em>
def spam(a, b, c):            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Wrap spam in a decorator object</span></em>
    print(a, b, c)

spam(1, 2, 3)                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Really calls the tracer wrapper object</span></em>
spam('a', 'b', 'c')           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Invokes __call__ in class</span></em>
spam(4, 5, 6)                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># __call__ adds logic and runs original object</span></em></pre>
<p>Because the <code class="epub__literal">spam</code> function
          is run through the <code class="epub__literal">tracer</code>
          decorator, when the original <code class="epub__literal">spam</code>
          name is called it actually triggers the <code class="epub__literal">__call__</code> method in the class. This method
          counts and logs the call, and then dispatches it to the original
          wrapped function. Note how the <code class="epub__literal">*name</code> argument syntax is used to pack and
          unpack the passed-in arguments; because of this, this decorator can
          be used to wrap any function with any number of positional
          arguments.</p>
<p>The net effect, again, is to add a layer of logic to the
          original <code class="epub__literal">spam</code> function. Here is
          the script’s output—the first line comes from the <code class="epub__literal">tracer</code><a name="second comes"></a> class, and the second comes from
          the <code class="epub__literal">spam</code> function:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e79990"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">call 1 to spam
1 2 3
call 2 to spam
a b c
call 3 to spam
4 5 6</pre>
<p>Trace through this example’s code for more insight. As it is,
          this decorator works for any function that takes positional
          arguments, but it does not return the decorated function’s
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>result</em></span>, doesn’t handle
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>keyword</em></span> arguments, and cannot decorate class
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>method</em></span> functions (in short, for methods its
          <code class="epub__literal">__call__</code> would be passed a
          <code class="epub__literal">tracer</code> instance only). As we’ll
          see in Part VIII, there are a variety of
          ways to code function decorators, including nested <code class="epub__literal">def</code> statements; some of the alternatives
          are better suited to methods than the version shown here.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Class Decorators and Metaclasses"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="class_decorators_and_metaclasses"></a>Class Decorators and Metaclasses</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Function <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e80020"></a>decorators turned out to be so useful that Python 2.6
          and 3.0 expanded the model, allowing decorators to be applied to
          classes as well as functions. In short, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>class
          decorators</em></span> are similar to function decorators, but they
          are run at the end of a <code class="epub__literal">class</code>
          statement to rebind a class name to a callable. As such, they can be
          used to either manage classes just after they are created, or insert
          a layer of wrapper logic to manage instances when they are later
          created. Symbolically, the code structure:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e80032"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def decorator(aClass): ...

@decorator
class C: ...</pre>
<p>is mapped to the following equivalent:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e80036"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def decorator(aClass): ...

class C: ...
C = decorator(C)</pre>
<p>The class decorator is free to augment the class itself, or
          return an object that intercepts later instance construction calls.
          For instance, in the example in the section Counting instances per class with class methods, we could use
          this hook to automatically augment the classes with instance
          counters and any other data required:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e80042"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def count(aClass):
    aClass.numInstances = 0
    return aClass                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Return class itself, instead of a wrapper</span></em>

@count
class Spam: ...                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same as Spam = count(Spam)</span></em>

@count
class Sub(Spam): ...               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># numInstances = 0 not needed here</span></em>

@count
class Other(Spam): ...</pre>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Metaclasses</em></span> <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e80057"></a>are <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e80061"></a>a similarly advanced class-based tool whose roles
          often intersect with those of class decorators. They provide an
          alternate model, which routes the creation of a class object to a
          subclass of the top-level <code class="epub__literal">type</code>
          class, at the conclusion of a <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e80073"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Meta(type):
    def __new__(meta, classname, supers, classdict): ...

class C(metaclass=Meta): ...</pre>
<p>In Python 2.6, the effect is the
          same, but the coding differs—use a class attribute instead of a
          keyword argument in the <code class="epub__literal">class</code>
          header:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e80081"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class C:
    __metaclass__ = Meta
    ...</pre>
<p>The metaclass generally redefines the <code class="epub__literal">__new__</code> or <code class="epub__literal">__init__</code> method of the <code class="epub__literal">type</code> class, in order to assume control of
          the creation or initialization of a new class object. The net
          effect, as with class decorators, is to define code to be run
          automatically at class creation time. Both schemes are free to
          augment a class or return an arbitrary object to replace it—a
          protocol with almost limitless class-based possibilities.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="For More Details"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="for_more_details"></a>For More Details</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Naturally, there’s much more to the decorator and metaclass
          stories than I’ve shown here. Although they are a general mechanism,
          decorators and metaclasses are advanced features of interest
          primarily to tool writers, not application programmers, so we’ll
          defer additional coverage until the final part of this book:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Chapter 37 shows how to code
              properties using function decorator syntax.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Chapter 38 has much more on decorators,
              including more comprehensive examples.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Chapter 39 covers metaclasses, and
              more on the class and instance management story.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Although these chapters cover advanced topics, they’ll also
          provide us with a chance to see Python at work in more substantial
          examples than much of the rest of the book was able to <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e80118"></a><a id="I_indexterm7_d1e80120"></a>provide.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Class Gotchas"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
