<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Class Gotchas</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="class_gotchas"></a>Class Gotchas</h1>
<p>Most <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e80129"></a>class issues can be boiled down to namespace issues
        (which makes sense, given that classes are just namespaces with a few
        extra tricks). Some of the topics we’ll cover in this section are more
        like case studies of advanced class usage than real problems, and one
        or two of these gotchas have been eased by recent Python
        releases.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Changing Class Attributes Can Have Side Effects"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="changing_class_attributes_can_have_side"></a>Changing Class Attributes Can Have Side Effects</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Theoretically <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e80140"></a>speaking, classes (and class instances) are
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>mutable</em></span> objects. Like built-in lists and
          dictionaries, they can be changed in-place by assigning to their
          attributes—and as with lists and dictionaries, this means that
          changing a class or instance object may impact multiple references
          to it.</p>
<p>That’s usually what we want (and is
          how objects change their state in general), but awareness of this
          issue becomes especially critical when changing class attributes.
          Because all instances generated from a class share the class’s
          namespace, any changes at the class level are reflected in all
          instances, unless they have their own versions of the changed class
          attributes.</p>
<p>Because classes, modules, and instances are all just objects
          with attribute namespaces, you can normally change their attributes
          at runtime by assignments. Consider the following class. Inside the
          class body, the assignment to the name <code class="epub__literal">a</code> generates an attribute <code class="epub__literal">X.a</code>, which lives in the class object at
          runtime and will be inherited by all of <code class="epub__literal">X</code>’s instances:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e80165"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class X:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a = 1</code></strong>       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Class attribute</span></em>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>I = X()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>I.a</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Inherited by instance</span></em>
1
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.a</code></strong>
1</pre>
<p>So far, so good—this is the normal case. But notice what
          happens when we change the class attribute dynamically outside the
          <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement: it also changes
          the attribute in every object that inherits from the class.
          Moreover, new instances created from the class during this session
          or program run also get the dynamically set value, regardless of
          what the class’s source code says:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e80194"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.a = 2</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># May change more than X</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>I.a</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># I changes too</span></em>
2
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>J = X()</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># J inherits from X's runtime values</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>J.a</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># (but assigning to J.a changes a in J, not X or I)</span></em>
2</pre>
<p>Is this a useful feature or a dangerous trap? You be the
          judge. As we learned in Chapter 26, you
          can actually get work done by changing class attributes without ever
          making a single instance; this technique can simulate the use of
          “records” or “structs” in other languages. As a refresher, consider
          the following unusual but legal Python program:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e80225"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class X: pass                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Make a few attribute namespaces</span></em>
class Y: pass

X.a = 1                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Use class attributes as variables</span></em>
X.b = 2                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># No instances anywhere to be found</span></em>
X.c = 3
Y.a = X.a + X.b + X.c

for X.i in range(Y.a): print(X.i)   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Prints 0..5</span></em></pre>
<p>Here, the classes <code class="epub__literal">X</code> and
          <code class="epub__literal">Y</code> work like “fileless”
          modules—namespaces for storing variables we don’t want to clash.
          This is a perfectly legal Python programming trick, but it’s less
          appropriate when applied to classes written by others; you can’t
          always be sure that class attributes you change aren’t critical to
          the class’s internal behavior. If you’re out to simulate a C struct,
          you may be better off changing instances than classes, as that way
          only one object is affected:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e80246"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Record: pass
X = Record()
X.name = 'bob'
X.job  = 'Pizza maker'</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Changing Mutable Class Attributes Can Have Side Effects, Too"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="changing_mutable_class_attributes_can_h"></a>Changing Mutable Class Attributes Can Have Side Effects,
          Too</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>This <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e80253"></a>gotcha is really an extension of the prior. Because
          class attributes are shared by all instances, if a class attribute
          references a mutable object, changing that object in-place from any
          instance impacts all instances at once:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e80261"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class C:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>shared = []</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Class attribute</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __init__(self):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>self.perobj = []</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Instance attribute</span></em>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = C()</code></strong>                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Two instances</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y = C()</code></strong>                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Implicitly share class attrs</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y.shared, y.perobj</code></strong>
([], [])

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.shared.append('spam')</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Impacts y's view too!</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.perobj.append('spam')</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Impacts x's data only</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.shared, x.perobj</code></strong>
(['spam'], ['spam'])

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y.shared, y.perobj</code></strong>              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># y sees change made through x</span></em>
(['spam'], [])
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>C.shared</code></strong>                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Stored on class and shared</span></em>
['spam']</pre>
<p>This effect is no different than many we’ve seen in this book
          already: mutable objects are shared by simple variables, globals are
          shared by functions, module-level objects are shared by multiple
          importers, and mutable function arguments are shared by the caller
          and the callee. All of these are cases of general behavior—multiple
          references to a mutable object—and all are impacted if the shared
          object is changed in-place from any reference. Here, this occurs in
          class attributes shared by all instances via inheritance, but it’s
          the same phenomenon at work. It may be made more subtle by the
          different behavior of assignments to instance attributes
          themselves:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e80328"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">x.shared.append('spam')    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Changes shared object attached to class in-place</span></em>
x.shared = 'spam'          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Changed or creates instance attribute attached to x</span></em></pre>
<p>but again, this is not a problem, it’s just something to be
          aware of; shared mutable class attributes can have many valid uses
          in Python programs.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Multiple Inheritance: Order Matters"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="multiple_inheritance_colon_order_matter"></a>Multiple Inheritance: Order Matters</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>This <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e80342"></a>may be obvious by now, but it’s worth underscoring: if
          you use multiple inheritance, the order in which superclasses are
          listed in the <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement
          header can be critical. Python always searches superclasses from
          left to right, according to their order in the header line.</p>
<p>For instance, in the multiple inheritance example we studied
          in Chapter 30, suppose that the
          <code class="epub__literal">Super</code> class implemented a
          <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> method, too:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e80363"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class ListTree:
    def __str__(self): ...

class Super:
    def __str__(self): ...

class Sub(ListTree, Super):    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Get ListTree's __str__ by listing it first</span></em>

x = Sub()                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Inheritance searches ListTree before Super</span></em></pre>
<p>Which class would we inherit it from—<code class="epub__literal">ListTree</code> or <code class="epub__literal">Super</code>? As inheritance searches proceed
          from left to right, we would get the method from whichever class is
          listed first (leftmost) in <code class="epub__literal">Sub</code>’s
          <code class="epub__literal">class</code> header. Presumably, we
          would list <code class="epub__literal">ListTree</code> first because
          its whole purpose is its custom <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> (indeed, we had to do this in
          Chapter 30 when mixing this class
          with a <code class="epub__literal">tkinter.Button</code> that had a
          <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> of its own).</p>
<p>But now suppose <code class="epub__literal">Super</code> and
          <code class="epub__literal">ListTree</code> have their own versions
          of other same-named attributes, too. If we want one name from
          <code class="epub__literal">Super</code> and another from <code class="epub__literal">ListTree</code>, the order in which we list them
          in the <code class="epub__literal">class</code> header won’t help—we
          will have to override inheritance by manually assigning to the
          attribute name in the <code class="epub__literal">Sub</code>
          class:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e80420"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class ListTree:
    def __str__(self): ...
    def other(self): ...

class Super:
    def __str__(self): ...
    def other(self): ...

class Sub(ListTree, Super):    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Get ListTree's __str__ by listing it first</span></em>
    other = Super.other        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># But explicitly pick Super's version of other</span></em>
    def __init__(self):
        ...

x = Sub()                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Inheritance searches Sub before ListTree/Super</span></em></pre>
<p>Here, the assignment to <code class="epub__literal">other</code> within the <code class="epub__literal">Sub</code> class creates <code class="epub__literal">Sub.other</code>—a reference back to the <code class="epub__literal">Super.other</code> object. Because it is lower in
          the tree, <code class="epub__literal">Sub.other</code> effectively
          hides <code class="epub__literal">ListTree.other</code>, the
          attribute that the inheritance search would normally find.
          Similarly, if we listed <code class="epub__literal">Super</code>
          first in the <code class="epub__literal">class</code> header to pick
          up its <code class="epub__literal">other</code>, we would need to
          select <code class="epub__literal">ListTree</code>’s method
          explicitly:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e80463"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Sub(Super, ListTree):               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Get Super's other by order</span></em>
    __str__ = Lister.__str__              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Explicitly pick Lister.__str__</span></em></pre>
<p>Multiple inheritance is an advanced tool. Even if you
          understood the last paragraph, it’s still a good idea to use it
          sparingly and carefully. Otherwise, the meaning of a name may come
          to depend on the order in which classes are mixed in an arbitrarily
          far-removed subclass. (For
          another example of the technique shown here in action, see the discussion of explicit conflict
          resolution in The “New-Style” Class Model.)</p>
<p>As a rule of thumb, multiple inheritance works best when your
          mix-in classes are as self-contained as possible—because they may be
          used in a variety of contexts, they should not make assumptions
          about names related to other classes in a tree. The pseudoprivate <code class="epub__literal">__</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>X</code></em> attributes
          feature we studied in Chapter 30 can
          help by localizing names that a class relies on owning and limiting
          the names that your mix-in classes add to the mix. In this example,
          for instance, if <code class="epub__literal">ListTree</code> only
          means to export its custom <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code>, it can name its <code class="epub__literal">other</code> method <code class="epub__literal">__other</code> to avoid clashing with like-named
          classes in the tree.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Methods, Classes, and Nested Scopes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="methods_comma_classes_comma_and_nested"></a>Methods, Classes, and Nested Scopes</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>This <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e80510"></a>gotcha went away in Python 2.2 with the introduction
          of nested function scopes, but I’ve retained it here for historical
          perspective, for readers working with older Python releases, and
          because it demonstrates what happens to the new nested function
          scope rules when one layer of the nesting is a class.</p>
<p>Classes introduce local scopes, just as functions do, so the
          same sorts of scope behavior can happen in a <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement body. Moreover, methods
          are further nested functions, so the same issues apply. Confusion
          seems to be especially common when classes are nested.</p>
<p>In the following example <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e80525"></a>(the file <em class="epub__filename">nester.py</em>), the <code class="epub__literal">generate</code> function returns an instance of
          the nested <code class="epub__literal">Spam</code> class. Within its
          code, the class name <code class="epub__literal">Spam</code> is
          assigned in the <code class="epub__literal">generate</code> function’s local scope.
          However, in versions of Python prior to 2.2, within the class’s
          <code class="epub__literal">method</code> function the class name
          <code class="epub__literal">Spam</code> is not visible—<code class="epub__literal">method</code> has access only to its own local
          scope, the module surrounding <code class="epub__literal">generate</code>, and built-in names:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e80558"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def generate():                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Fails prior to Python 2.2, works later</span></em>
    class Spam:
        count = 1
        def method(self):        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Name Spam not visible:</span></em>
            print(Spam.count)    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># not local (def), global (module), built-in</span></em>
    return Spam()

generate().method()

C:\python\examples&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python nester.py</code></strong>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...error text omitted...</code></em>
    print(Spam.count)            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Not local (def), global (module), built-in</span></em>
NameError: Spam</pre>
<p>This example works in Python 2.2 and later because the local
          scopes of all enclosing function <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s are automatically visible to nested
          <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s (including nested method
          <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s, as in this example).
          However, it doesn’t work before 2.2 (we’ll look at some possible
          solutions momentarily).</p>
<p>Note that even in 2.2 and later, method <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s cannot see the local scope of the
          enclosing <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>class</em></span>; they can only see the local
          scopes of enclosing <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s. That’s
          why methods must go through the <code class="epub__literal">self</code> instance or the class name to
          reference methods and other attributes defined in the enclosing
          <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement. For example,
          code in the method must use <code class="epub__literal">self.count</code> or <code class="epub__literal">Spam.count</code>, not just <code class="epub__literal">count</code>.</p>
<p>If you’re using a release prior to 2.2, there are a variety of
          ways to get the preceding example to work. One of the simplest is to
          move the name <code class="epub__literal">Spam</code> out to the
          enclosing module’s scope with a <code class="epub__literal">global</code> declaration. Because <code class="epub__literal">method</code> sees global names in the enclosing
          module, references to <code class="epub__literal">Spam</code> will
          work:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e80631"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def generate():
    global Spam                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Force Spam to module scope</span></em>
    class Spam:
        count = 1
        def method(self):
            print(Spam.count)   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Works: in global (enclosing module)</span></em>
    return Spam()

generate().method()             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Prints 1</span></em></pre>
<p>A better alternative would be to restructure the code such
          that the class <code class="epub__literal">Spam</code> is defined at
          the top level of the module by virtue of its nesting level, rather
          than using <code class="epub__literal">global</code> declarations.
          The nested <code class="epub__literal">method</code> function and
          the top-level <code class="epub__literal">generate</code> will then
          find <code class="epub__literal">Spam</code> in their global
          scopes:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e80658"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def generate():
    return Spam()

class Spam:                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Define at top level of module</span></em>
    count = 1
    def method(self):
        print(Spam.count)      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Works: in global (enclosing module)</span></em>

generate().method()</pre>
<p>In fact, this approach is recommended for all Python
          releases—code tends to be simpler in general if you avoid nesting
          classes and functions.</p>
<p>If you want to get complicated and tricky, you can also get
          rid of the <code class="epub__literal">Spam</code> reference in
          <code class="epub__literal">method</code> altogether by using the
          special <code class="epub__literal">__class__</code> attribute,
          which returns an instance’s class object:</p><a id="I_programlisting7_d1e80680"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def generate():
    class Spam:
        count = 1
        def method(self):
            print(self.__class__.count)      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Works: qualify to get class</span></em>
    return Spam()

generate().method()</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Delegation-Based Classes in 3.0: __getattr__ and built-ins"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="delegation-based_classes_in_3.0_colon_u"></a>Delegation-Based Classes in 3.0: __getattr__ and
          built-ins</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>We <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e80690"></a>met this issue briefly in our class tutorial in Chapter 27 and our delegation coverage in
          Chapter 30: classes that use
          the<a id="I_indexterm7_d1e80702"></a> <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code>
          operator overloading method to delegate attribute fetches to wrapped
          objects will fail in Python 3.0 unless operator overloading methods
          are redefined in the wrapper class. In Python 3.0 (and 2.6, when
          new-style classes are used), the names of operator overloading
          methods implicitly fetched by built-in operations are not routed
          through generic attribute-interception methods. The <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> method used by printing, for
          example, never invokes <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code>. Instead, Python 3.0 looks up
          such names in classes and skips the normal runtime instance lookup
          mechanism entirely. To work around this, such methods must be
          redefined in wrapper classes, either by hand, with tools, or by
          definition in superclasses. We’ll revisit this gotcha in Chapters
          37 and 38.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="“Overwrapping-itis”"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="quotation_mark_overwrapping-itis"></a>“Overwrapping-itis”</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>When used well, the <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e80725"></a>code reuse features of OOP make it excel at cutting
          development time. Sometimes, though, OOP’s abstraction potential can
          be abused to the point of making code difficult to understand. If
          classes are layered too deeply, code can become obscure; you may
          have to search through many classes to discover what an operation
          does.</p>
<p>For example, I once worked in a C++ shop with thousands of
          classes (some machine-generated), and up to 15 levels of
          inheritance. Deciphering method calls in such a complex system was
          often a monumental task: multiple classes had to be consulted for
          even the most basic of operations. In fact, the logic of the system
          was so deeply wrapped that understanding a piece of code in some
          cases required days of wading through related files.</p>
<p>The most general rule of thumb of Python programming applies
          here, too: don’t make things complicated unless they truly must be.
          Wrapping your code in multiple layers of classes to the point of
          incomprehensibility is always a bad idea. Abstraction is the basis
          of polymorphism and encapsulation, and it can be a very effective
          tool when used well. However, you’ll simplify debugging and aid
          maintainability if you make your class interfaces intuitive, avoid
          making your code overly abstract, and keep your class hierarchies
          short and flat unless there is a good reason to do <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e80737"></a>otherwise.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Chapter Summary"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
