<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="chapter_summary-id30"></a>Chapter Summary</h1>
<p>This chapter presented a handful of advanced class-related
        topics, including subclassing built-in types, new-style classes,
        static methods, and decorators. Most of these are optional extensions
        to the OOP model in Python, but they may become more useful as you
        start writing larger object-oriented programs. As mentioned earlier,
        our discussion of some of the more advanced class tools continues in
        the final part of this book; be sure to look ahead if you need more
        details on properties, descriptors, decorators, and
        metaclasses.</p>
<p>This is the end of the class part of this book, so you’ll find
        the usual lab exercises at the end of the chapter—be sure to work
        through them to get some practice coding real classes. In the next
        chapter, we’ll begin our look at our last core language topic,
        exceptions. Exceptions are Python’s mechanism for communicating errors
        and other conditions to your code. This is a relatively lightweight
        topic, but I’ve saved it for last because exceptions are supposed to
        be coded as classes today. Before we tackle that final core subject,
        though, take a look at this chapter’s quiz and the lab <a id="I_indexterm7_d1e80747"></a>exercises.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Test Your Knowledge: Quiz"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
