<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_answers-id30"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</h1>
<div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>You can embed a built-in object in a wrapper class, or
            subclass the built-in type directly. The latter approach tends to
            be simpler, as most original behavior is automatically
            inherited.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Function decorators are generally used to add to an existing
            function a layer of logic that is run each time the function is
            called. They can be used to log or count calls to a function,
            check its argument types, and so on. They are also used to
            “declare” static methods—simple functions in a class that are not
            passed an instance when called.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>New-style classes are coded by inheriting from the <code class="epub__literal">object</code> built-in class (or any other
            built-in type). In Python 3.0, all classes are new-style
            automatically, so this derivation is not required; in 2.6, classes
            with this derivation are new-style and those without it are
            “classic.”</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>New-style classes search the diamond pattern of multiple
            inheritance trees differently—they essentially search
            breadth-first (across), instead of depth-first (up). New-style
            classes also change the result of the <code class="epub__literal">type</code> built-in for instances and classes,
            do not run generic attribute fetch methods such as <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> for built-in operation
            methods, and support a set of advanced extra tools including
            properties, descriptors, and <code class="epub__literal">__slots__</code> instance attribute
            lists.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Normal (instance) methods receive a <code class="epub__literal">self</code> argument (the implied instance),
            but static methods do not. Static methods are simple functions
            nested in class objects. To make a method static, it must either
            be run through a special built-in function or be decorated with
            decorator syntax. Python 3.0 allows simple functions in a class to
            be called through the class without this step, but calls through
            instances still require static method declaration.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Three seconds. (Or, more accurately: “And the Lord spake,
            saying, ‘First shalt thou take out the Holy Pin. Then, shalt thou
            count to three, no more, no less. Three shalt be the number thou
            shalt count, and the number of the counting shall be three. Four
            shalt thou not count, nor either count thou two, excepting that
            thou then proceed to three. Five is right out. Once the number
            three, being the third number, be reached, then lobbest thou thy
            Holy Hand Grenade of Antioch towards thy foe, who, being naughty
            in my sight, shall snuff it.’”)<sup>[72]</sup></p></li></ol>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Test Your Knowledge: Part VI Exercises"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
