<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 32. Exception Basics</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 32. Exception Basics"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h1 class="epub__title"><a id="exception_basics"></a>Chapter 32. Exception Basics</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>This part of the book deals with <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e81485"></a>exceptions</em></span>, which are events that can modify
      the flow of control through a program. In Python, exceptions are
      triggered automatically on errors, and they can be triggered and
      intercepted by your code. They are processed by four statements we’ll
      study in this part, the first of which has two variations (listed
      separately here) and the last of which was an optional extension until
      Python 2.6 and 3.0:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">except</code></span>
</dt><dd>
<p>Catch and recover from exceptions raised by Python, or by
            you.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">finally</code></span>
</dt><dd>
<p>Perform cleanup actions, whether exceptions occur or
            not.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">raise</code></span>
</dt><dd>
<p>Trigger an exception manually in your code.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">assert</code></span>
</dt><dd>
<p>Conditionally trigger an exception in your code.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">with</code>/<code class="epub__literal">as</code></span>
</dt><dd>
<p>Implement context managers in Python 2.6 and 3.0 (optional
            in 2.5).</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>This topic was saved until nearly the end of the book because you
      need to know about classes to code exceptions of your own. With a few
      exceptions (pun intended), though, you’ll find that exception handling
      is simple in Python because it’s integrated into the language itself as
      another high-level tool.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Why Use Exceptions?"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
