<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Why Use Exceptions?</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="why_use_exceptions_question"></a>Why Use Exceptions?</h1>
<p>In a nutshell, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e81542"></a>exceptions let us jump out of arbitrarily large chunks
        of a program. Consider the hypothetical pizza-making robot we
        discussed earlier in the book. Suppose we took the idea seriously and
        actually built such a machine. To make a pizza, our culinary automaton
        would need to execute a plan, which we would implement as a Python
        program: it would take an order, prepare the dough, add toppings, bake
        the pie, and so on.</p>
<p>Now, suppose that something goes very wrong during the “bake the
        pie” step. Perhaps the oven is broken, or perhaps our robot
        miscalculates its reach and spontaneously combusts. Clearly, we want
        to be able to jump to code that handles such states quickly. As we
        have no hope of finishing the pizza task in such unusual cases, we
        might as well abandon the entire plan.</p>
<p>That’s exactly what exceptions let you do: you can jump to an
        exception handler in a single step, abandoning all function calls
        begun since the exception handler was entered. Code in the exception
        handler can then respond to the raised exception as appropriate (by
        calling the fire department, for instance!).</p>
<p>One way to think of an exception is as a sort of structured
        “super go to.” An <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e81554"></a><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>exception handler</em></span> (<code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement) <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e81565"></a>leaves a marker and executes some code. Somewhere
        further ahead in the program, an exception is raised that makes Python
        jump back to that marker, abandoning any active functions that were
        called after the marker was left. This protocol provides a coherent
        way to respond to unusual events. Moreover, because Python jumps to
        the handler statement immediately, your code is simpler—there is
        usually no need to check status codes after every call to a function
        that could possibly fail.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Exception Roles"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="exception_roles"></a>Exception Roles</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In Python programs, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e81574"></a>exceptions are typically used for a variety of
          purposes. Here are some of their most common roles:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Error handling</span></dt><dd>
<p>Python raises <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e81587"></a>exceptions whenever it detects errors in
                programs at runtime. You can catch and respond to the errors
                in your code, or ignore the exceptions that are raised. If an
                error is ignored, Python’s default exception-handling behavior
                kicks in: it stops the program and prints an error message. If
                you don’t want this default behavior, code a <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement to catch and recover
                from the exception—Python will jump to your <code class="epub__literal">try</code> handler when the error is
                detected, and your program will resume execution after the
                <code class="epub__literal">try</code>.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Event notification</span></dt><dd>
<p>Exceptions <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e81606"></a>can also be used to signal valid conditions
                without you having to pass result flags around a program or
                test them explicitly. For instance, a search routine might
                raise an exception on failure, rather than returning an
                integer result code (and hoping that the code will never be a
                valid result).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Special-case handling</span></dt><dd>
<p>Sometimes a condition may occur so rarely that it’s hard
                to justify convoluting your code to handle it. You can often
                eliminate special-case code by handling unusual cases in
                exception handlers in higher levels of your program.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Termination actions</span></dt><dd>
<p>As you’ll see, the <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e81623"></a>try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">finally</code> statement allows you to
                guarantee that required closing-time operations will be
                performed, regardless of the presence or absence of exceptions
                in your programs.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Unusual control flows</span></dt><dd>
<p>Finally, because exceptions are a sort of high-level “go
                to,” you can use them as the basis for implementing exotic
                control flows. For instance, although the language does not
                explicitly support backtracking, it can be implemented in
                Python by using exceptions and a bit of support logic to
                unwind assignments.<sup>[73]</sup> There is no “go to” statement in Python
                (thankfully!), but exceptions can sometimes serve similar
                roles.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>We’ll see such typical use cases in action later in this part
          of the book. For now, let’s get started with a look at Python’s
          exception-processing tools.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Exceptions: The Short Story"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
