<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Exceptions: The Short Story</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="exceptions_colon_the_short_story"></a>Exceptions: The Short Story</h1>
<p>Compared to some other core language topics we’ve met in this
        book, exceptions are a fairly lightweight tool in Python. Because they
        are so simple, let’s jump right into some code.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Default Exception Handler"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="default_exception_handler"></a>Default Exception Handler</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Suppose <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e81664"></a>we <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e81670"></a>write the following function:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e81674"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def fetcher(obj, index):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return obj[index]</code></strong>
...</pre>
<p>There’s not much to this function—it simply indexes an object
          on a passed-in index. In normal operation, it returns the result of
          a legal index:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e81684"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = 'spam'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>fetcher(x, 3)</code></strong>                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Like x[3]</span></em>
'm'</pre>
<p>However, if we ask this function to index off the end of the
          string, an exception will be triggered when the function tries to
          run <code class="epub__literal">obj[index]</code>. Python detects
          out-of-bounds indexing for sequences and reports it by
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>raising</em></span> (triggering) the built-in <code class="epub__literal">IndexError</code> exception:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e81709"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>fetcher(x, 4)</code></strong>                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Default handler - shell interface</span></em>
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "&lt;stdin&gt;", line 1, in &lt;module&gt;
  File "&lt;stdin&gt;", line 2, in fetcher
IndexError: string index out of range</pre>
<p>Because our code does not explicitly catch this exception, it
          filters back up to the top level of the program and invokes the
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>default exception handler</em></span>, which simply prints
          the standard error message. By this point in the book, you’ve
          probably seen your share of standard error messages. They include
          the exception that was raised, along with a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e81723"></a>stack trace</em></span>—a list of all the lines and
          functions that were active when the exception occurred.</p>
<p>The error message text here was printed by Python 3.0; it can
          vary slightly per release, and even per interactive shell. When
          coding interactively in the basic shell interface, the filename is
          just “&lt;stdin&gt;,” meaning the standard input stream. When
          working in the IDLE GUI’s interactive shell, the filename is
          “&lt;pyshell&gt;”, and source lines are displayed, too. Either way,
          file line numbers are not very meaningful when there is no file
          (we’ll see more interesting error messages later in this part of the
          book):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e81730"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>fetcher(x, 4)</code></strong>                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Default handler - IDLE GUI interface</span></em>
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "&lt;pyshell#6&gt;", line 1, in &lt;module&gt;
    fetcher(x, 4)
  File "&lt;pyshell#3&gt;", line 2, in fetcher
    return obj[index]
IndexError: string index out of range</pre>
<p>In a more realistic program launched outside the interactive
          prompt, after printing an error message the default handler at the
          top also <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>terminates</em></span> the program immediately.
          That course of action makes sense for simple scripts; errors often
          should be fatal, and the best you can do when they occur is inspect
          the standard error message.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Catching Exceptions"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="catching_exceptions"></a>Catching Exceptions</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Sometimes, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e81748"></a>this isn’t what you want, though. Server programs, for
          instance, typically need to remain active even after internal
          errors. If you don’t want the default exception behavior, wrap the
          call in a <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement to catch
          exceptions yourself:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e81757"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>try:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>fetcher(x, 4)</code></strong>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>except IndexError:</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Catch and recover</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('got exception')</code></strong>
...
got exception
&gt;&gt;&gt;</pre>
<p>Now, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e81776"></a>Python jumps to your <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e81783"></a>handler</em></span> (the block under the <code class="epub__literal">except</code> clause that names the exception
          raised) automatically when an exception is triggered while the
          <code class="epub__literal">try</code> block is running. When
          working interactively like this, after the <code class="epub__literal">except</code> clause runs, we wind up back at the
          Python prompt. In a more realistic program, <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statements not only catch exceptions,
          but also <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>recover</em></span> from them:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e81804"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def catcher():</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>try:</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>fetcher(x, 4)</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>except IndexError:</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('got exception')</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('continuing')</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>catcher()</code></strong>
got exception
continuing
&gt;&gt;&gt;</pre>
<p>This time, after the exception is caught and handled, the
          program resumes execution after the entire <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement that caught it—which is why
          we get the “continuing” message here. We don’t see the standard
          error message, and the program continues on its way normally.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Raising Exceptions"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="raising_exceptions"></a>Raising Exceptions</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>So far, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e81838"></a>we’ve been letting Python raise exceptions for us by
          making mistakes (on purpose this time!), but our scripts can raise
          exceptions too—that is, exceptions can be raised by Python or by
          your program, and can be caught or not. To trigger an exception
          manually, simply run a <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e81844"></a><code class="epub__literal">raise</code> statement.
          User-triggered exceptions are caught the same way as those Python
          raises. The following may not be the most useful Python code ever
          penned, but it makes the point:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e81850"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>try:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>raise IndexError</code></strong>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Trigger exception manually</span></em>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>except IndexError:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('got exception')</code></strong>
...
got exception</pre>
<p>As usual, if they’re not caught, user-triggered exceptions are
          propagated up to the top-level default exception handler and
          terminate the program with a standard error message:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e81872"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>raise IndexError</code></strong>
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "&lt;stdin&gt;", line 1, in &lt;module&gt;
IndexError</pre>
<p>As we’ll see in the next chapter, the <code class="epub__literal">assert</code> statement can be used to trigger
          exceptions, too—it’s a conditional <code class="epub__literal">raise</code>, used mostly for debugging purposes
          during development:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e81885"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>assert False, 'Nobody expects the Spanish Inquisition!'</code></strong>
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "&lt;stdin&gt;", line 1, in &lt;module&gt;
AssertionError: Nobody expects the Spanish Inquisition!</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="User-Defined Exceptions"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="user-defined_exceptions"></a>User-Defined Exceptions</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">raise</code> <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e81898"></a>statement introduced <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e81904"></a>in the prior section raises a built-in exception
          defined in Python’s built-in scope. As you’ll learn later in this
          part of the book, you can also define new exceptions of your own
          that are specific to your programs. User-defined exceptions are
          coded with <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>classes</em></span>, which inherit from a
          built-in exception class: usually the class named <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e83946"></a>Exception</code>. Class-based exceptions allow
          scripts to build exception categories, inherit behavior, and have
          attached state information:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e81914"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class Bad(Exception):</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># User-defined exception</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>pass</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def doomed():</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>raise Bad()</code></strong>                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Raise an instance</span></em>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>try:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>doomed()</code></strong>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>except Bad:</code></strong>                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Catch class name</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('got Bad')</code></strong>
...
got Bad
&gt;&gt;&gt;</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Termination Actions"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="termination_actions"></a>Termination Actions</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Finally, <code class="epub__literal">try</code> <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e81958"></a>statements <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e81964"></a>can say “finally”—that is, they may include <code class="epub__literal">finally</code> blocks. These look like <code class="epub__literal">except</code> handlers for exceptions, but the
          <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e81975"></a><code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">finally</code> combination specifies termination
          actions that always execute “on the way out,” regardless of whether
          an exception occurs in the <code class="epub__literal">try</code>
          block:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e81987"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>try:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>fetcher(x, 3)</code></strong>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>finally:</code></strong>                              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Termination actions</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('after fetch')</code></strong>
...
'm'
after fetch
&gt;&gt;&gt;</pre>
<p>Here, if the <code class="epub__literal">try</code> block
          finishes without an exception, the <code class="epub__literal">finally</code> block will run, and the program
          will resume after the entire <code class="epub__literal">try</code>.
          In this case, this statement seems a bit silly—we might as well have simply
          typed the <code class="epub__literal">print</code> right after a
          call to the function, and skipped the <code class="epub__literal">try</code> altogether:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e82025"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">fetcher(x, 3)
print('after fetch')</pre>
<p>There is a problem with coding this way, though: if the
          function call raises an exception, the <code class="epub__literal">print</code> will never be reached. The <code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">finally</code> combination avoids this
          pitfall—when an exception does occur in a <code class="epub__literal">try</code> block, <code class="epub__literal">finally</code> blocks are executed while the
          program is being unwound:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e82044"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def after():</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>try:</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>fetcher(x, 4)</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>finally:</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('after fetch')</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('after try?')</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>after()</code></strong>
after fetch
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "&lt;stdin&gt;", line 1, in &lt;module&gt;
  File "&lt;stdin&gt;", line 3, in after
  File "&lt;stdin&gt;", line 2, in fetcher
IndexError: string index out of range
&gt;&gt;&gt;</pre>
<p>Here, we don’t get the “after try?” message because control
          does not resume after the <code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">finally</code> block when an exception occurs.
          Instead, Python jumps back to run the <code class="epub__literal">finally</code> action, and then propagates the
          exception up to a prior handler (in this case, to the default
          handler at the top). If we change the call inside this function so
          as not to trigger an exception, the <code class="epub__literal">finally</code> code still runs, but the program
          continues after the <code class="epub__literal">try</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e82085"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def after():</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>try:</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>fetcher(x, 3)</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>finally:</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('after fetch')</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('after try?')</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>after()</code></strong>
after fetch
after try?
&gt;&gt;&gt;</pre>
<p>In practice, <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e82112"></a>try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">except</code> combinations are useful for
          catching and recovering from exceptions, and <code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">finally</code> combinations come in handy to
          guarantee that termination actions will fire regardless of any
          exceptions that may occur in the <code class="epub__literal">try</code> block’s code. For instance, you might
          use <code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">except</code> to catch errors raised by code that
          you import from a third-party library, and <code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">finally</code> to ensure that calls to close
          files or terminate server connections are always run. We’ll see some
          such practical examples later in this part of the book.</p>
<p>Although they serve conceptually distinct purposes, as of
          Python 2.5, we can now mix <code class="epub__literal">except</code>
          and <code class="epub__literal">finally</code> clauses in the same
          <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement—the <code class="epub__literal">finally</code> is run on the way out regardless
          of whether an exception was raised, and regardless of whether the
          exception was caught by an <code class="epub__literal">except</code>
          clause.</p>
<p>As we’ll learn in the next chapter, Python 2.6 and 3.0 provide
          an alternative to <code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">finally</code> when using some types of objects.
          The <code class="epub__literal">with</code>/<code class="epub__literal">as</code> statement runs an object’s context
          management logic to guarantee that termination actions
          occur:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e82177"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>with open('lumberjack.txt', 'w') as file:</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Always close file on exit</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.write('The larch!\n')</code></strong></pre>
<p>Although this option requires fewer lines of code, it’s only
          applicable when processing certain object types, so <code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">finally</code> is a more general termination
          structure. On the other hand, <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e82196"></a>with</code>/<code class="epub__literal">as</code>
          may also run startup actions and supports user-defined context
          management code.</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="why_you_will_care_colon_error_checks"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Why You Will Care: Error Checks</p>
<p>One <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e82209"></a>way to see how exceptions are useful is to compare
            coding styles in Python and languages without exceptions. For
            instance, if you want to write robust programs in the C language,
            you generally have to test return values or status codes after
            every operation that could possibly go astray, and propagate the
            results of the tests as your programs run:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e82215"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">doStuff()
{                                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># C program</span></em>
    if (doFirstThing() == ERROR)  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Detect errors everywhere</span></em>
        return ERROR;             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># even if not handled here</span></em>
    if (doNextThing() == ERROR)
        return ERROR;
    ...
    return doLastThing();
}

main()
{
    if (doStuff() == ERROR)
        badEnding();
    else
        goodEnding();
}</pre>
<p>In fact, realistic C programs often have as much code
            devoted to error detection as to doing actual work. But in Python,
            you don’t have to be so methodical (and neurotic!). You can
            instead wrap arbitrarily vast pieces of a program in exception
            handlers and simply write the parts that do the actual work,
            assuming all is well:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e82228"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def doStuff():        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Python code</span></em>
    doFirstThing()    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># We don't care about exceptions here,</span></em>
    doNextThing()     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># so we don't need to detect them</span></em>
    ...
    doLastThing()

if __name__ == '__main__':
    try:
        doStuff()     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># This is where we care about results,</span></em>
    except:           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># so it's the only place we must check</span></em>
        badEnding()
    else:
        goodEnding()</pre>
<p>Because control jumps immediately
            to a handler when an exception occurs, there’s no need to
            instrument all your code to guard for errors. Moreover, because
            Python detects errors automatically, your code usually doesn’t
            need to check for errors in the first place. The upshot is that
            exceptions let you largely ignore the unusual cases and avoid
            error-checking code.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Chapter Summary"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
