<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="chapter_summary-id31"></a>Chapter Summary</h1>
<p>And that is the majority of the exception story; exceptions
        really are a simple tool.</p>
<p>To summarize, Python exceptions are a high-level control flow
        device. They may be raised by Python, or by your own programs. In both
        cases, they may be ignored (to trigger the default error message), or
        caught by <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statements (to be
        processed by your code). The <code class="epub__literal">try</code>
        statement comes in two logical formats that, as of Python 2.5, can be
        combined—one that handles exceptions, and one that executes
        finalization code regardless of whether exceptions occur or not.
        Python’s <code class="epub__literal">raise</code> and <code class="epub__literal">assert</code> statements trigger exceptions on
        demand (both built-ins and new exceptions we define with classes); the
        <code class="epub__literal">with</code>/<code class="epub__literal">as</code> statement is an alternative way to ensure
        that termination actions are carried out for objects that support
        it.</p>
<p>In the rest of this part of the book, we’ll fill in some of the
        details about the statements involved, examine the other sorts of
        clauses that can appear under a <code class="epub__literal">try</code>, and discuss class-based exception
        objects. The next chapter begins our tour by taking a closer look at
        the statements we introduced here. Before you turn the page, though,
        here are a few quiz questions to <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e82279"></a>review.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Test Your Knowledge: Quiz"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
