<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_answers-id31"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</h1>
<div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Exception processing is useful for error handling,
            termination actions, and event notification. It can also simplify
            the handling of special cases and can be used to implement
            alternative control flows. In general, exception processing also
            cuts down on the amount of error-checking code your program may
            require—because all errors filter up to handlers, you may not need
            to test the outcome of every operation.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Any uncaught exception eventually filters up to the default
            exception handler Python provides at the top of your program. This
            handler prints the familiar error message and shuts down your
            program.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>If you don’t want the default message and shutdown, you can
            code <code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">except</code> statements to catch and recover
            from exceptions that are raised. Once an exception is caught, the
            exception is terminated and your program continues.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">raise</code> and <code class="epub__literal">assert</code> statements can be used to trigger
            an exception, exactly as if it had been raised by Python itself.
            In principle, you can also raise an exception by making a
            programming mistake, but that’s not usually an explicit
            goal!</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">finally</code> statement can be used to ensure
            actions are run after a block of code exits, regardless of whether
            it raises an exception or not. The <code class="epub__literal">with</code>/<code class="epub__literal">as</code> statement can also be used to ensure
            termination actions are run, but only when processing object types
            that support it.</p></li></ol>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[73] </sup>True backtracking is an advanced topic that is not
                    part of the Python language, so I won’t say much more
                    about it here (even the generator functions and
                    expressions we met in Chapter 20 are
                    not true backtracking—they simply
                    respond to <code class="epub__literal">next(G)</code>
                    requests). Roughly, backtracking undoes all computations
                    before it jumps; Python exceptions do not (i.e., variables
                    assigned between the time a <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement is entered and the
                    time an exception is raised are not reset to their prior
                    values). See a book on artificial intelligence or the
                    Prolog or Icon programming languages if you’re
                    curious.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
