<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 33. Exception Coding Details</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 33. Exception Coding Details"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h1 class="epub__title"><a id="exception_coding_details"></a>Chapter 33. Exception Coding Details</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In the prior chapter we took a quick look at <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e82352"></a>exception-related statements in action. Here, we’re going
      to dig a bit deeper—this chapter provides a more formal introduction to
      exception processing syntax in Python. Specifically, we’ll explore the
      details behind the <code class="epub__literal">try</code>, <code class="epub__literal">raise</code>, <code class="epub__literal">assert</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">with</code> statements. As we’ll see, although these
      statements are mostly straightforward, they offer powerful tools for
      dealing with exceptions in Python code.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p>One procedural note up front: The exception story has changed in
        major ways in recent years. As of Python 2.5, the <code class="epub__literal">finally</code> clause can appear in the same
        <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e82379"></a>try</code> statement as <code class="epub__literal">except</code> and <code class="epub__literal">else</code> clauses (previously, they could not be
        combined). Also, as of Python 3.0 and 2.6, the new <code class="epub__literal">with</code> context manager statement has become
        official, and user-defined exceptions must now be coded as class
        instances, which should inherit from a built-in exception superclass.
        Moreover, 3.0 sports slightly modified syntax for the <code class="epub__literal">raise</code> statement and <code class="epub__literal">except</code> clauses. I will focus on the state of
        exceptions in Python 2.6 and 3.0 in this edition, but because you are
        still very likely to see the original techniques in code for some time
        to come, along the way I’ll point out how things have evolved in this
        domain.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="The try/except/else Statement"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
