<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>The try/except/else Statement</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="the_try_solidus_except_solidus_else_sta"></a>The try/except/else Statement</h1>
<p>Now <a id="ch33trystatementtryexceptelse"></a>that we’ve seen the basics, it’s time for the details.
        In the following discussion, I’ll first present <code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">except</code>/<code class="epub__literal">else</code> and <code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">finally</code> as separate statements, because in
        versions of Python prior to 2.5 they serve distinct roles and cannot
        be combined. As mentioned in the preceding note, in Python 2.5 and
        later <code class="epub__literal">except</code> and <code class="epub__literal">finally</code> can be mixed in a single <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement; I’ll explain the implications
        of this change after we’ve explored the two original forms in
        isolation.</p>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">try</code> is a compound
        statement; its most complete form is sketched below. It starts with a
        <code class="epub__literal">try</code> header line, followed by a
        block of (usually) indented statements, then one or more <code class="epub__literal">except</code> clauses that identify exceptions to
        be caught, and an optional <code class="epub__literal">else</code>
        clause at the end. The words <code class="epub__literal">try</code>,
        <code class="epub__literal">except</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">else</code> are associated by indenting them to the
        same level (i.e., lining them up vertically). For reference, here’s
        the general format in Python 3.0:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e82464"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">try:
    &lt;<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>statements</code></em>&gt;            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Run this main action first</span></em>
except &lt;<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>name1</code></em>&gt;:
    &lt;<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>statements</code></em>&gt;            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Run if</span></em> <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>name1</code></em> <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">is raised during try block</span></em>
except (<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>name2</code></em>, <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>name3</code></em>):
    &lt;<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>statements</code></em>&gt;            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Run if any of these exceptions occur</span></em>
except &lt;<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>name4</code></em>&gt; as &lt;<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>data</code></em>&gt;:
    &lt;<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>statements</code></em>&gt;            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Run if</span></em> <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>name4</code></em> <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">is raised, and get instance raised</span></em>
except:
    &lt;<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>statements</code></em>&gt;            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Run for all (other) exceptions raised</span></em>
else:
    &lt;<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>statements</code></em>&gt;            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Run if no exception was raised during try block</span></em></pre>
<p>In this statement, the block under the <code class="epub__literal">try</code> header represents the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>main
        action</em></span> of the statement—the code you’re trying to run. The
        <code class="epub__literal">except</code> clauses define
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>handlers</em></span> for exceptions raised during the
        <code class="epub__literal">try</code> block, and the <code class="epub__literal">else</code> clause (if coded) provides a handler to
        be run if <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>no</em></span> exceptions occur. The <code class="epub__literal">&lt;</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>data</code></em><code class="epub__literal">&gt;</code> entry here has to do with a feature of
        <code class="epub__literal">raise</code> statements and exception
        classes, which we will discuss later in this chapter.</p>
<p>Here’s how <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statements
        work. When a <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement is
        entered, Python marks the current program context so it can return to
        it if an exception occurs. The statements nested under the <code class="epub__literal">try</code> header are run first. What happens next
        depends on whether exceptions are raised while the <code class="epub__literal">try</code> block’s statements are running:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>If an exception <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>does</em></span> occur while the
            <code class="epub__literal">try</code> block’s statements are
            running, Python jumps back to the <code class="epub__literal">try</code> and runs the statements under the
            first <code class="epub__literal">except</code> clause that
            matches the raised exception. Control resumes below the entire
            <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement after the
            <code class="epub__literal">except</code> block runs (unless the
            <code class="epub__literal">except</code> block raises another
            exception).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>If an exception happens in the <code class="epub__literal">try</code> block and <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>no</em></span>
<code class="epub__literal">except</code> clause matches, the
            exception is propagated up to the last matching <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement that was entered in the
            program or, if it’s the first such statement, to the top level of
            the process (in which case Python kills the program and prints a
            default error message).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>If no exception occurs while the statements under the
            <code class="epub__literal">try</code> header run, Python runs the
            statements under the <code class="epub__literal">else</code> line
            (if present), and control then resumes below the entire <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>In other words, <code class="epub__literal">except</code>
        clauses catch any exceptions that happen while the <code class="epub__literal">try</code> block is running, and the <code class="epub__literal">else</code> clause runs only if no exceptions
        happen while the <code class="epub__literal">try</code> block
        runs.</p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">except</code> clauses are
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>focused</em></span> exception handlers—they catch exceptions
        that occur only within the statements in the associated <code class="epub__literal">try</code> block. However, as the <code class="epub__literal">try</code> block’s statements can call functions
        coded elsewhere in a program, the source of an exception may be
        outside the <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement itself.
        I’ll have more to say about this when we explore <code class="epub__literal">try</code> nesting in Chapter 35.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="try Statement Clauses"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="try_statement_clauses"></a>try Statement Clauses</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>When you write a <code class="epub__literal">try</code>
          statement, a variety of clauses can appear after the <code class="epub__literal">try</code> header. Table 33-1 summarizes all the possible
          forms—you must use at least one. We’ve already met some of these: as
          you know, <code class="epub__literal">except</code> clauses catch
          exceptions, <code class="epub__literal">finally</code> clauses run
          on the way out, and <code class="epub__literal">else</code> clauses
          run if no exceptions are encountered.</p>
<p>Syntactically, <a id="ch33trystatementtrystateclsfrms"></a>there may be any number of <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e82699"></a><code class="epub__literal">except</code> clauses, but
          you can code <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e82706"></a>else</code> only if there is at least one <code class="epub__literal">except</code>, and there can be only one <code class="epub__literal">else</code> and one <code class="epub__literal">finally</code>. Through Python 2.4, the <code class="epub__literal">finally</code> clause must appear alone (without
          <code class="epub__literal">else</code> or <code class="epub__literal">except</code>); the <code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">finally</code> is really a different statement.
          As of Python 2.5, however, a <code class="epub__literal">finally</code> <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e82740"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e82743"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e82748"></a>can appear in the same statement as <code class="epub__literal">except</code> and <code class="epub__literal">else</code> (more on the ordering rules later in
          this chapter when we meet the unified <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement).</p><div class="epub__table"><a id="try_statement_clause_forms"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Table 33-1. try statement clause forms</p><div class="epub__table-contents">
<table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; " summary="try statement clause forms">
<colgroup><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Clause
                  form</p></th><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Interpretation</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">except:</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Catch all (or all
                  other) exception types.</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">except</code>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>name</code></em><code class="epub__literal">:</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Catch a specific
                  exception only.</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">except</code>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>name</code></em> as
                  <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>value</code></em><code class="epub__literal">:</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Catch the listed
                  exception and its instance.</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">except</code>
                  (<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>name1</code></em>,
                  <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>name2</code></em>)<code class="epub__literal">:</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Catch any of the
                  listed exceptions.</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">except</code>
                  (<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>name1</code></em>,
                  <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>name2</code></em>) as
                  <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>value</code></em><code class="epub__literal">:</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Catch any listed
                  exception and its instance.</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">else:</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Run if no exceptions
                  are raised.</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">finally:</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Always perform this
                  block.</p></td></tr></tbody>
</table>
</div>
</div>
<p>We’ll explore the entries with the extra <code class="epub__literal">as</code> <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>value</code></em> part
          when we meet the <code class="epub__literal">raise</code> statement.
          They provide access to the objects that are raised as
          exceptions.</p>
<p>The first and fourth entries in Table 33-1 are new here:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">except</code> clauses that
              list no exception name (<code class="epub__literal">except:</code>) catch
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>all</em></span> exceptions not previously listed in the
              <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">except</code> clauses that
              list a set of exceptions in parentheses (<code class="epub__literal">except (e1, e2, e3):</code>) catch
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>any</em></span> of the listed exceptions.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Because Python looks for a match within a given <code class="epub__literal">try</code> by inspecting the <code class="epub__literal">except</code> clauses from top to bottom, the
          parenthesized version has the same effect as listing each exception
          in its own <code class="epub__literal">except</code> clause, but you
          have to code the statement body only once. Here’s an example of
          multiple <code class="epub__literal">except</code> clauses at work,
          which demonstrates just how specific your handlers can be:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e82922"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">try:
    action()
except NameError:
    ...
except IndexError:
    ...
except KeyError:
    ...
except (AttributeError, TypeError, SyntaxError):
    ...
else:
    ...</pre>
<p>In this example, if an exception is raised while the call to
          the <code class="epub__literal">action</code> function is running,
          Python returns to the <code class="epub__literal">try</code> and
          searches for the first <code class="epub__literal">except</code>
          that names the exception raised. It inspects the <code class="epub__literal">except</code> clauses from top to bottom and left
          to right, and runs the statements under the first one that matches.
          If none match, the exception is propagated past this <code class="epub__literal">try</code>. Note that the <code class="epub__literal">else</code> runs only when
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>no</em></span> exception occurs in <code class="epub__literal">action</code>—it does not run when an exception
          without a matching <code class="epub__literal">except</code> is
          raised.</p>
<p>If you really want a general “catch-all” clause, an empty
          <code class="epub__literal">except</code> does the trick:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e82960"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">try:
    action()
except NameError:
    ...                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Handle NameError</span></em>
except IndexError:
    ...                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Handle IndexError</span></em>
except:
    ...                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Handle all other exceptions</span></em>
else:
    ...                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Handle the no-exception case</span></em></pre>
<p>The empty <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e82976"></a>except</code> clause is a sort of
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>wildcard</em></span> feature—because it catches everything,
          it allows your handlers to be as general or specific as you like. In
          some scenarios, this form may be more convenient than listing all
          possible exceptions in a <code class="epub__literal">try</code>. For
          example, the following catches everything without listing
          anything:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e82989"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">try:
    action()
except:
    ...                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Catch all possible exceptions</span></em></pre>
<p>Empty <code class="epub__literal">except</code>s also raise
          some design issues, though. Although convenient, they may catch
          unexpected system exceptions unrelated to your code, and they may
          inadvertently intercept exceptions meant for another handler. For
          example, even system exit calls in Python trigger exceptions, and
          you usually want these to pass. That said, this structure may also
          catch genuine programming mistakes for you which you probably want
          to see an error message. We’ll revisit this as a gotcha at the end
          of this part of the book. For now, I’ll just say “use with
          care.”</p>
<p>Python 3.0 introduced an alternative that solves one of these
          problems—catching an exception named <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e85070"></a>Exception</code> has almost the same effect as an
          empty <code class="epub__literal">except</code>, but ignores
          exceptions related to system exits:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e83006"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">try:
    action()
except Exception:
    ...                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Catch all possible exceptions, except exits</span></em></pre>
<p>This has most of the same convenience of the <code class="epub__literal">empty</code> except, but also most of the same
          dangers. We’ll explore how this form works its voodoo in the next
          chapter, when we study exception classes.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Version skew note</em></span>: Python 3.0 requires
            the <code class="epub__literal">except E as V:</code> handler
            clause form listed in Table 33-1 and used in this book,
            rather than the older <code class="epub__literal">except E,
            V:</code> form. The latter form is still available (but not
            recommended) in Python 2.6:
            if used, it’s converted to the former. The change was made to
            eliminate errors that occur when confusing the older form with two
            alternate exceptions, properly coded in 2.6 as <code class="epub__literal">except (E1, E2):</code>. Because 3.0 supports
            the <code class="epub__literal">as</code> form only, commas in a
            handler clause are always taken to mean a tuple, regardless of
            whether parentheses are used or not, and the values are
            interpreted as alternative exceptions to be caught. This change
            also modifies the scoping rules: with the new <code class="epub__literal">as</code> syntax, the variable <code class="epub__literal">V</code> is deleted at the end of the <code class="epub__literal">except</code> block<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e83047"></a>.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The try else Clause"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_try_else_clause"></a>The try else Clause</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e83055"></a>purpose of the <code class="epub__literal">else</code>
          clause is not always immediately obvious to Python newcomers.
          Without it, though, there is no way to tell (without setting and
          checking Boolean flags) whether the flow of control has proceeded
          past a <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement because no
          exception was raised, or because an exception occurred and was
          handled:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e83067"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">try:
    <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...run code...</code></em>
except IndexError:
    <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...handle exception...</code></em>
<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Did we get here because the try failed or not?</span></em></pre>
<p>Much like the way <code class="epub__literal">else</code>
          clauses in loops make the exit cause more apparent, the <code class="epub__literal">else</code> clause provides syntax in a <code class="epub__literal">try</code> that makes what has happened obvious
          and unambiguous:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e83091"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">try:
    <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...run code...</code></em>
except IndexError:
    <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...handle exception...</code></em>
else:
    <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...no exception occurred...</code></em></pre>
<p>You can <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>almost</em></span> emulate an <code class="epub__literal">else</code> clause by moving its code into the
          <code class="epub__literal">try</code> block:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e83112"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">try:
    <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...run code...</code></em>
    <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...no exception occurred...</code></em>
except IndexError:
    <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...handle exception...</code></em></pre>
<p>This can lead to incorrect exception classifications, though.
          If the “no exception occurred” action triggers an <code class="epub__literal">IndexError</code>, it will register as a failure
          of the <code class="epub__literal">try</code> block and erroneously
          trigger the exception handler below the <code class="epub__literal">try</code> (subtle, but true!). By using an
          explicit <code class="epub__literal">else</code> clause instead, you
          make the logic more obvious and guarantee that <code class="epub__literal">except</code> handlers will run only for real
          failures in the code you’re wrapping in a <code class="epub__literal">try</code>, not for failures in the <code class="epub__literal">else</code> case’s action.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Example: Default Behavior"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="example_colon_default_behavior"></a>Example: Default Behavior</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Because <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e83152"></a>the <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e83158"></a>control flow through a program is easier to capture in
          Python than in English, let’s run some examples that further
          illustrate exception basics. I’ve mentioned that exceptions not
          caught by <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statements
          percolate up to the top level of the Python process and run Python’s
          default exception-handling logic (i.e., Python terminates the
          running program and prints a standard error message). Let’s look at
          an example. Running the following module file, <em class="epub__filename">bad.py</em>, generates a divide-by-zero
          exception:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e83170"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def gobad(x, y):
    return x / y

def gosouth(x):
    print(gobad(x, 0))

gosouth(1)</pre>
<p>Because the program ignores the exception it triggers, Python
          kills the program and prints a message:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e83174"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python bad.py</code></strong>
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "bad.py", line 7, in &lt;module&gt;
    gosouth(1)
  File "bad.py", line 5, in gosouth
    print(gobad(x, 0))
  File "bad.py", line 2, in gobad
    return x / y
ZeroDivisionError: int division or modulo by zero</pre>
<p>I ran this in a shell window with Python 3.0. The message
          consists of a <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e83181"></a>stack trace (“Traceback”) and the name of and details
          about the exception that was raised. The stack trace lists all lines
          active when the exception occurred, from oldest to newest. Note that
          because we’re not working at the interactive prompt, in this case
          the file and line number information is more useful. For example,
          here we can see that the bad divide happens at the last entry in the
          trace—line 2 of the file <em class="epub__filename">bad.py</em>, a <code class="epub__literal">return</code> statement.<sup>[74]</sup></p>
<p>Because Python detects and reports all errors at runtime by
          raising exceptions, exceptions are intimately bound up with the
          ideas of error handling and debugging in general. If you’ve worked
          through this book’s examples, you’ve undoubtedly seen an exception
          or two along the way—even typos usually generate a <code class="epub__literal">SyntaxError</code> or other exception when a file
          is imported or executed (that’s when the compiler is run). By
          default, you get a useful error display like the one just shown,
          which helps you track down the problem.</p>
<p>Often, this standard error message is all you need to resolve
          problems in your code. For more heavy-duty debugging jobs, you can
          catch exceptions with <code class="epub__literal">try</code>
          statements, or use one of the debugging tools that I introduced in
          Chapter 3 and will summarize again in
          Chapter 35 (such as the <code class="epub__literal">pdb</code> standard library module).</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Example: Catching Built-in Exceptions"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="example_colon_catching_built-in_excepti"></a>Example: Catching Built-in Exceptions</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Python’s <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e83219"></a>default exception handling is often exactly what you
          want—especially for code in a top-level script file, an error
          generally should terminate your program immediately. For many
          programs, there is no need to be more specific about errors in your
          code.</p>
<p>Sometimes, though, you’ll want to catch errors and recover
          from them instead. If you don’t want your program terminated when
          Python raises an exception, simply catch it by wrapping the program
          logic in a <code class="epub__literal">try</code>. This is an
          important capability for programs such as network servers, which
          must keep running persistently. For example, the following code
          catches and recovers from the <code class="epub__literal">TypeError</code> Python raises immediately when
          you try to concatenate a list and a string (the <code class="epub__literal">+</code> operator expects the same sequence type
          on both sides):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e83236"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def kaboom(x, y):
    print(x + y)               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Trigger TypeError</span></em>

try:
    kaboom([0,1,2], "spam")
except TypeError:              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Catch and recover here</span></em>
    print('Hello world!')
print('resuming here')         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Continue here if exception or not</span></em></pre>
<p>When the exception occurs in the function <code class="epub__literal">kaboom</code>, control jumps to the <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement’s <code class="epub__literal">except</code> clause, which prints a message.
          Since an exception is “dead” after it’s been caught like this, the
          program continues executing below the <code class="epub__literal">try</code> rather than being terminated by
          Python. In effect, the code processes and clears the error, and your
          script recovers:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e83260"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python kaboom.py</code></strong>
Hello world!
resuming here</pre>
<p>Notice that once you’ve caught an error, control resumes at
          the place where you caught it (i.e., after the <code class="epub__literal">try</code>); there is no direct way to go back to
          the place where the exception occurred (here, in the function
          <code class="epub__literal">kaboom</code>). In a sense, this makes
          exceptions more like simple jumps than function calls—there is no
          way to return to the code that triggered the <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e83273"></a>error.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="The try/finally Statement"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
