<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>The try/finally Statement</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="the_try_solidus_finally_statement"></a>The try/finally Statement</h1>
<p>The <a id="ch33trystatementtryfinallystmnt"></a>other flavor of the <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement is a specialization that has
        to do with finalization actions. If a <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e83291"></a>finally<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e83295"></a></code> clause is included in a <code class="epub__literal">try</code>, Python will always run its block of
        statements “on the way out” of the <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement, whether an exception occurred
        while the <code class="epub__literal">try</code> block was running or
        not. Its general form is:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e83311"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">try:
    &lt;<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>statements</code></em>&gt;               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Run this action first</span></em>
finally:
    &lt;<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>statements</code></em>&gt;               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Always run this code on the way out</span></em></pre>
<p>With this variant, Python begins by running the statement block
        associated with the <code class="epub__literal">try</code> header
        line. What happens next depends on whether an exception occurs during
        the <code class="epub__literal">try</code> block:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>If no exception occurs while the <code class="epub__literal">try</code> block is running, Python jumps back
            to run the <code class="epub__literal">finally</code> block and
            then continues execution past below the <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>If an exception <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>does</em></span> occur during the
            <code class="epub__literal">try</code> block’s run, Python still
            comes back and runs the <code class="epub__literal">finally</code>
            block, but it then propagates the exception up to a higher
            <code class="epub__literal">try</code> or the top-level default
            handler; the program does not resume execution below the <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement. That is, the <code class="epub__literal">finally</code> block is run even if an
            exception is raised, but unlike an <code class="epub__literal">except</code>, the <code class="epub__literal">finally</code> does not terminate the
            exception—it continues being raised after the <code class="epub__literal">finally</code> block runs.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">finally</code> form is useful when you want to be
        completely sure that an action will happen after some code runs,
        regardless of the exception behavior of the program. In practice, it
        allows you to specify cleanup actions that always must occur, such as
        file closes and server disconnects.</p>
<p>Note that the <code class="epub__literal">finally</code> clause
        cannot be used in the same <code class="epub__literal">try</code>
        statement as <code class="epub__literal">except</code> and <code class="epub__literal">else</code> in Python 2.4 and earlier, so the
        <code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">finally</code> is best thought of as a distinct
        statement form if you are using an older release. In Python 2.5, and
        later, however, <code class="epub__literal">finally</code> can appear
        in the same statement as <code class="epub__literal">except</code> and
        <code class="epub__literal">else</code>, so today there is really a
        single <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement with many
        optional clauses (more about this shortly). Whichever version you use,
        though, the <code class="epub__literal">finally</code> clause still
        serves the same purpose—to specify “cleanup” actions that must always
        be run, regardless of any exceptions.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p>As we’ll also see later in this chapter, in Python 2.6 and
          3.0, the new <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e83424"></a>with</code> statement and its context managers
          provide an object-based way to do similar work for exit actions.
          Unlike <code class="epub__literal">finally</code>, this new
          statement also supports entry actions, but it is limited in scope to
          objects that implement the context manager protocol.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Example: Coding Termination Actions with try/finally"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="example_colon_coding_termination_action"></a>Example: Coding Termination Actions with try/finally</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>We <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e83437"></a>saw some simple <code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">finally</code> examples in the prior chapter.
          Here’s a more realistic example that illustrates a typical role for
          this statement:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e83451"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class MyError(Exception): pass

def stuff(file):
    raise MyError()

file = open('data', 'w')     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Open an output file</span></em>
try:
    stuff(file)              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Raises exception</span></em>
finally:
    file.close()             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Always close file to flush output buffers</span></em>
print('not reached')         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Continue here only if no exception</span></em></pre>
<p>In this code, we’ve wrapped a call to a file-processing
          function in a <code class="epub__literal">try</code> with a <code class="epub__literal">finally</code> clause to make sure that the file
          is always closed, and thus finalized, whether the function triggers
          an exception or not. This way, later code can be sure that the
          file’s output buffer’s content has been flushed from memory to disk.
          A similar code structure can guarantee that server connections are
          closed, and so on.</p>
<p>As we learned in Chapter 9, file objects
          are automatically closed on garbage collection; this is especially
          useful for temporary files that we don’t assign to variables.
          However, it’s not always easy to predict when garbage collection
          will occur, especially in larger programs. The <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement makes file closes more
          explicit and predictable and pertains to a specific block of code.
          It ensures that the file will be closed on block exit, regardless of
          whether an exception occurs or not.</p>
<p>This particular example’s function isn’t all that useful (it
          just raises an exception), but wrapping calls in <code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">finally</code> statements is a good way to ensure
          that your closing-time (i.e., termination) activities always run.
          Again, Python always runs the code in your <code class="epub__literal">finally</code> blocks, regardless of whether an
          exception happens in the <code class="epub__literal">try</code>
          block.<sup>[75]</sup></p>
<p>When the function here raises its exception, the control flow
          jumps back and runs the <code class="epub__literal">finally</code>
          block to close the file. The exception is then propagated on to
          either another <code class="epub__literal">try</code> or the default
          top-level handler, which prints the standard error message and shuts
          down the program; the statement after this <code class="epub__literal">try</code> is never reached. If the function here
          did <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>not</em></span> raise an exception, the program would
          still execute the <code class="epub__literal">finally</code> block
          to close the file, but it would then continue below the entire
          <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement.</p>
<p>Notice that the user-defined exception here is again defined
          with a class—as we’ll see in the next chapter, exceptions today must
          all be class instances in both 2.6 and <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e83519"></a>3.0.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Unified try/except/finally"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
