<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Unified try/except/finally</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="unified_try_solidus_except_solidus_fina"></a>Unified try/except/finally</h1>
<p>In all <a id="ch33trystatementuniftryexcptfinlly"></a>versions of Python prior to Release 2.5 (for its first
        15 years of life, more or less), the <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement came in two flavors and was
        really two separate statements—we could either use a <code class="epub__literal">finally</code> to ensure that cleanup code was
        always run, or write <code class="epub__literal">except</code> blocks
        to catch and recover from specific exceptions and optionally specify
        an <code class="epub__literal">else</code> clause to be run if no
        exceptions occurred.</p>
<p>That is, the <code class="epub__literal">finally</code> clause
        could not be mixed with <code class="epub__literal">except</code> and
        <code class="epub__literal">else</code>. This was partly because of
        implementation issues, and partly because the meaning of mixing the
        two seemed obscure—catching and recovering from exceptions seemed a
        disjoint concept from performing cleanup actions.</p>
<p>In Python 2.5 and later, though (including 2.6 and 3.0, the
        versions used in this book), the two statements have merged. Today, we
        can mix <code class="epub__literal">finally</code>, <code class="epub__literal">except</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">else</code> clauses in the same statement. That is,
        we can now write a statement of this form:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e83567"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">try:                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Merged form</span></em>
    <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>main-action</code></em>
except Exception1:
    <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>handler1</code></em>
except Exception2:
    <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>handler2</code></em>
...
else:
    <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>else-block</code></em>
finally:
    <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>finally-block</code></em></pre>
<p>The code in this statement’s
        <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>main-action</code></em> block is executed first, as
        usual. If that code raises an exception, all the <code class="epub__literal">except</code> blocks are tested, one after another,
        looking for a match to the exception raised. If the exception raised
        is <code class="epub__literal">Exception1</code>, the
        <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>handler1</code></em> block is executed; if it’s
        <code class="epub__literal">Exception2</code>,
        <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>handler2</code></em> is run, and so on. If no exception
        is raised, the <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>else-block</code></em> is
        executed.</p>
<p>No matter what’s happened previously, the
        <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>finally-block</code></em> is executed once the main
        action block is complete and any raised exceptions have been handled.
        In fact, the code in the <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>finally-block</code></em> will
        be run even if there is an error in an exception handler or the
        <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>else-block</code></em> and a new exception is
        raised.</p>
<p>As always, the <code class="epub__literal">finally</code> clause
        does not end the exception—if an exception is active when the
        <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>finally-block</code></em> is executed, it continues to
        be propagated after the <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>finally-block</code></em> runs,
        and control jumps somewhere else in the program (to another <code class="epub__literal">try</code>, or to the default top-level handler).
        If no exception is active when the <code class="epub__literal">finally</code> is run, control resumes after the
        entire <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement.</p>
<p>The net effect is that the <code class="epub__literal">finally</code> is always run, regardless of
        whether:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>An exception occurred in the main action and was
            handled.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>An exception occurred in the main action and was not
            handled.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>No exceptions occurred in the main action.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>A new exception was triggered in one of the handlers.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Again, the <code class="epub__literal">finally</code> serves to
        specify cleanup actions that must always occur on the way out of the
        <code class="epub__literal">try</code>, regardless of what exceptions
        have been raised or handled.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Unified try Statement Syntax"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="unified_try_statement_syntax"></a>Unified try Statement Syntax</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>When <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e83675"></a>combined like this, the <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement must have either an <code class="epub__literal">except</code> or a <code class="epub__literal">finally</code>, and the order of its parts must
          be like this:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e83692"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">try -&gt; except -&gt; else -&gt; finally</pre>
<p>where the <code class="epub__literal">else</code> and <code class="epub__literal">finally</code> are optional, and there may be
          zero or more <code class="epub__literal">except</code>, but there
          must be at least one <code class="epub__literal">except</code> if an
          <code class="epub__literal">else</code> appears. Really, the
          <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement consists of two
          parts: <code class="epub__literal">except</code>s with an optional
          <code class="epub__literal">else</code>, and/or the <code class="epub__literal">finally</code>.</p>
<p>In fact, it’s more accurate to describe the merged statement’s
          syntactic form this way (square brackets mean optional and star
          means zero-or-more here):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e83726"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">try:                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Format 1</span></em>
    <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>statements</code></em>
except [<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>type</code></em> [as <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>value</code></em>]]:          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># [type [, value]] in Python 2</span></em>
    <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>statements</code></em>
[except [<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>type</code></em> [as <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>value</code></em>]]:
    <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>statements</code></em>]*
[else:
    <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>statements</code></em>]
[finally:
    <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>statements</code></em>]

try:                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Format 2</span></em>
    <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>statements</code></em>
finally:
    <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>statements</code></em></pre>
<p>Because of these rules, the <code class="epub__literal">else</code> can appear only if there is at least
          one <code class="epub__literal">except</code>, and it’s always
          possible to mix <code class="epub__literal">except</code> and
          <code class="epub__literal">finally</code>, regardless of whether an
          <code class="epub__literal">else</code> appears or not. It’s also
          possible to mix <code class="epub__literal">finally</code> and
          <code class="epub__literal">else</code>, but only if an <code class="epub__literal">except</code> appears too (though the <code class="epub__literal">except</code> can omit an exception name to catch
          everything and run a <code class="epub__literal">raise</code>
          statement, described later, to reraise the current exception). If
          you violate any of these ordering rules, Python will raise a syntax
          error exception before your code runs.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Combining finally and except by Nesting"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="combining_finally_and_except_by_nesting"></a>Combining finally and except by Nesting</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Prior to Python 2.5, <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e83809"></a>it is actually possible to combine <code class="epub__literal">finally</code> and <code class="epub__literal">except</code> clauses in a <code class="epub__literal">try</code> by syntactically nesting a <code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">except</code> in the <code class="epub__literal">try</code> block of a <code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">finally</code> statement (we’ll explore this
          technique more fully in Chapter 35). In fact, the following has
          the same effect as the new merged form shown at the start of this
          section:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e83844"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">try:                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Nested equivalent to merged form</span></em>
    try:
        <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>main-action</code></em>
    except Exception1:
        <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>handler1</code></em>
    except Exception2:
        <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>handler2</code></em>
    ...
    else:
        <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>no-error</code></em>
finally:
    <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>cleanup</code></em></pre>
<p>Again, the <code class="epub__literal">finally</code> block is
          always run on the way out, regardless of what happened in the main
          action and regardless of any exception handlers run in the nested
          <code class="epub__literal">try</code> (trace through the four cases
          listed previously to see how this works the same). Since an <code class="epub__literal">else</code> always requires an <code class="epub__literal">except</code>, this nested form even sports the
          same mixing constraints of the unified statement form outlined in
          the preceding section.</p>
<p>However, this nested equivalent is more obscure and requires
          more code than the new merged form (one four-character line, at
          least). Mixing <code class="epub__literal">finally</code> into the
          same statement makes your code easier to write and read, so this is
          the generally preferred technique today.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Unified try Example"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="unified_try_example"></a>Unified try Example</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Here’s a <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e83888"></a>demonstration of the merged <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement form at work. The following
          file, <em class="epub__filename"><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e83900"></a>mergedexc.py</em>, codes four common scenarios,
          with <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statements that
          describe the meaning of each:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e83908"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">sep = '-' * 32 + '\n'
print(sep + 'EXCEPTION RAISED AND CAUGHT')
try:
    x = 'spam'[99]
except IndexError:
    print('except run')
finally:
    print('finally run')
print('after run')


print(sep + 'NO EXCEPTION RAISED')
try:
    x = 'spam'[3]
except IndexError:
    print('except run')
finally:
    print('finally run')
print('after run')


print(sep + 'NO EXCEPTION RAISED, WITH ELSE')
try:
    x = 'spam'[3]
except IndexError:
    print('except run')
else:
    print('else run')
finally:
    print('finally run')
print('after run')


print(sep + 'EXCEPTION RAISED BUT NOT CAUGHT')
try:
    x = 1 / 0
except IndexError:
    print('except run')
finally:
    print('finally run')
print('after run')</pre>
<p>When this code is run, the following output is produced in
          Python 3.0 (actually, its behavior and output are the same in 2.6,
          because the <code class="epub__literal">print</code> calls each
          print a single item). Trace through the code to see how exception
          handling produces the output of each of the four tests here:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e83915"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">c:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>C:\Python30\python mergedexc.py</code></strong>
--------------------------------
EXCEPTION RAISED AND CAUGHT
except run
finally run
after run
--------------------------------
NO EXCEPTION RAISED
finally run
after run
--------------------------------
NO EXCEPTION RAISED, WITH ELSE
else run
finally run
after run
--------------------------------
EXCEPTION RAISED BUT NOT CAUGHT
finally run
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "mergedexc.py", line 36, in &lt;module&gt;
    x = 1 / 0
ZeroDivisionError: int division or modulo by zero</pre>
<p>This example uses built-in operations in the main action to
          trigger exceptions (or not), and it relies on the fact that Python
          always checks for errors as code is running. The next section shows
          how to raise exceptions manually <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e83922"></a>instead.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="The raise Statement"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
