<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>The raise Statement</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="the_raise_statement"></a>The raise Statement</h1>
<p>To trigger <a id="ch33exceptionsraisestmnt"></a>exceptions <a id="ch33raisestmnt"></a>explicitly, you can code <code class="epub__literal">raise</code> statements. Their general form is
        simple—a <code class="epub__literal">raise</code> statement consists
        of the word <code class="epub__literal">raise</code>, optionally
        followed by the class to be raised or an instance of it:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e83949"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">raise &lt;<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>instance</code></em>&gt;             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Raise instance of class</span></em>
raise &lt;<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>class</code></em>&gt;                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Make and raise instance of class</span></em>
raise                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Reraise the most recent exception</span></em></pre>
<p>As mentioned earlier, exceptions are always instances of classes
        in Python 2.6 and 3.0. Hence, the first <code class="epub__literal">raise</code> form here is the most common—we
        provide an <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>instance</em></span> directly, either created
        before the <code class="epub__literal">raise</code> or within the
        <code class="epub__literal">raise</code> statement itself. If we pass
        a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>class</em></span> instead, Python calls the class with no
        constructor arguments, to create an instance to be raised; this form
        is equivalent to adding parentheses after the class reference. The
        last form reraises the most recently raised exception; it’s commonly
        used in exception handlers to propagate exceptions that have been
        caught.</p>
<p>To make this clearer, let’s look at some examples. With built-in
        exceptions, the following two forms are equivalent—both raise an
        instance of the exception class named, but the first creates the
        instance implicitly:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e83984"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">raise IndexError             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Class (instance created)</span></em>
raise IndexError()           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Instance (created in statement)</span></em></pre>
<p>We can also create the instance ahead of time—because the
        <code class="epub__literal">raise</code> statement accepts any kind of
        object reference, the following two examples raise <code class="epub__literal">IndexError</code> just like the prior two:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e83999"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">exc = IndexError()           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Create instance ahead of time</span></em>
raise exc

excs = [IndexError, TypeError]
raise excs[0]</pre>
<p>When an exception is raised, Python sends the raised instance
        along with the exception. If a <code class="epub__literal">try</code>
        includes an <code class="epub__literal">except name as X:</code>
        clause, the variable <code class="epub__literal">X</code> will be
        assigned the instance provided in the <code class="epub__literal">raise</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e84018"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">try:
    ...
except IndexError as X:      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># X assigned the raised instance object</span></em>
   ...</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">as</code> is optional in a
        <code class="epub__literal">try</code> handler (if it’s omitted, the
        instance is simply not assigned to a name), but including it allows
        the handler to access both data in the instance and methods in the
        exception class.</p>
<p>This model works the same for user-defined exceptions we code
        with classes—the following, for example, passes to the exception class
        constructor arguments that become available in the handler through the
        assigned instance:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e84034"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class MyExc(Exception): pass
...
raise MyExc('spam')          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Exception class with constructor args</span></em>
...
try:
    ...
except MyExc as X:           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Instance attributes available in handler</span></em>
    print(X.args)</pre>
<p>Because this encroaches on the next chapter’s topic, though,
        I’ll defer further details until then.</p>
<p>Regardless of how you name them, exceptions are always
        identified by instance objects, and at most one is active at any given
        time. Once caught by an <code class="epub__literal">except</code>
        clause anywhere in the program, an exception dies (i.e., won’t
        propagate to another <code class="epub__literal">try</code>), unless
        it’s reraised by another <code class="epub__literal">raise</code>
        statement or error.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Propagating Exceptions with raise"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="propagating_exceptions_with_raise"></a>Propagating Exceptions with raise</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>A <code class="epub__literal">raise</code> statement that does
          not include an exception name or extra data value simply reraises
          the current exception. This form is typically used if you need to
          catch and handle an exception but don’t want the exception to die in
          your code:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e84063"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>try:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>raise IndexError('spam')</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Exceptions remember arguments</span></em>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>except IndexError:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('propagating')</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>raise</code></strong>                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Reraise most recent exception</span></em>
...
propagating
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "&lt;stdin&gt;", line 2, in &lt;module&gt;
IndexError: spam</pre>
<p>Running a <code class="epub__literal">raise</code> this way
          reraises the exception and propagates it to a higher handler (or the
          default handler at the top, which stops the program with a standard
          error message). Notice how the argument we passed to the exception
          class shows up in the error messages; you’ll learn why this happens
          in the next chapter.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Python 3.0 Exception Chaining: raise from"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="python_3.0_exception_chaining_colon_rai"></a>Python 3.0 Exception Chaining: raise from</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Python 3.0 (but not 2.6) also allows <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e84098"></a>raise</code> statements to have an optional
          <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e84106"></a>from</code> clause:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e84111"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">raise exception from otherexception</pre>
<p>When the <code class="epub__literal">from</code><a name="second expression"></a> is used, the
          second expression specifies another exception class or instance to
          attach to the raised exception’s <code class="epub__literal">__cause__</code> attribute. If the raised
          exception is not caught, Python prints both exceptions as part of
          the standard error message:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e84121"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>try:</code></strong>
...    <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>1 / 0</code></strong>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>except Exception as E:</code></strong>
...    <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>raise TypeError('Bad!') from E</code></strong>
...
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "&lt;stdin&gt;", line 2, in &lt;module&gt;
ZeroDivisionError: int division or modulo by zero

The above exception was the direct cause of the following exception:

Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "&lt;stdin&gt;", line 4, in &lt;module&gt;
TypeError: Bad!</pre>
<p>When an exception is raised inside an exception handler, a
          similar procedure is followed implicitly: the previous exception is
          attached to the new exception’s <code class="epub__literal">__context__</code> attribute and is
          again displayed in the standard error message if the exception goes
          uncaught. This is an advanced and still somewhat obscure extension,
          so see Python’s manuals for more details.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Version skew note</em></span>: <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e84146"></a>Python 3.0 no longer supports the <code class="epub__literal">raise</code>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>Exc</code></em><code class="epub__literal">,</code>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>Args</code></em> form that is still available in
            Python 2.6. In 3.0, use the <code class="epub__literal">raise</code>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>Exc</code></em><code class="epub__literal">(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>Args</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code> instance-creation call form described
            in this book instead. The equivalent comma form in 2.6 is legacy
            syntax provided for compatibility with the now defunct
            string-based exceptions model, and it’s deprecated in 2.6. If
            used, it is converted to the 3.0 call form. As in earlier
            releases, a <code class="epub__literal">raise</code>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>Exc</code></em> form is also allowed—it is
            converted to <code class="epub__literal">raise</code>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>Exc</code></em><code class="epub__literal">()</code> in both versions, calling the class
            constructor with <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e84191"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e84193"></a>no arguments.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="The assert Statement"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
