<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>The assert Statement</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="the_assert_statement"></a>The assert Statement</h1>
<p>As a <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e84201"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e84206"></a>somewhat <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e84210"></a>special case for debugging purposes, Python includes the
        <code class="epub__literal">assert</code> statement. It is mostly just
        syntactic shorthand for a common <code class="epub__literal">raise</code> usage pattern, and an <code class="epub__literal">assert</code> can be thought of as a
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>conditional</em></span> <code class="epub__literal">raise</code> statement. A statement of the
        form:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e84232"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">assert &lt;<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>test</code></em>&gt;, &lt;<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>data</code></em>&gt;          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># The &lt;</span></em><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>data</code></em><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">&gt; part is optional</span></em></pre>
<p>works like the following code:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e84248"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">if __debug__:
    if not &lt;<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>test</code></em>&gt;:
        raise AssertionError(&lt;<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>data</code></em>&gt;)</pre>
<p>In other words, if the test evaluates to false, Python raises an
        exception: the data item (if it’s provided) is used as the exception’s
        constructor argument. Like all exceptions, the <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e84259"></a>AssertionError</code> exception will kill your
        program if it’s not caught with a <code class="epub__literal">try</code>, in which case the data item shows up as
        part of the error message.</p>
<p>As an added feature, <code class="epub__literal">assert</code>
        statements may be removed from a compiled program’s byte code if the
        <code class="epub__literal">-O</code> Python command-line flag is
        used, thereby optimizing the program. <code class="epub__literal">AssertionError</code> is a built-in exception, and
        the <code class="epub__literal">__debug__</code> flag is a built-in
        name that is automatically set to <code class="epub__literal">True</code> unless the <code class="epub__literal">-O</code> flag is used. Use a command line like
        <code class="epub__literal">python –O main.py</code> to run in
        optimized mode and disable asserts.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Example: Trapping Constraints (but Not Errors!)"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="example_colon_trapping_constraints_open"></a>Example: Trapping Constraints (but Not Errors!)</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Assertions <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e84296"></a>are <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e84304"></a>typically <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e84310"></a>used to verify program conditions during development.
          When displayed, their error message text automatically includes
          source code line information and the value listed in the <code class="epub__literal">assert</code> statement. Consider the file
          <em class="epub__filename">asserter.py</em>:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e84324"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def f(x):
    assert x &lt; 0, 'x must be negative'
    return x ** 2

% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import asserter</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>asserter.f(1)</code></strong>
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "&lt;stdin&gt;", line 1, in &lt;module&gt;
  File "asserter.py", line 2, in f
    assert x &lt; 0, 'x must be negative'
AssertionError: x must be negative</pre>
<p>It’s important to keep in mind that <code class="epub__literal">assert</code> is mostly intended for trapping
          user-defined constraints, not for catching genuine programming
          errors. Because Python traps programming errors itself, there is
          usually no need to code <code class="epub__literal">assert</code>s
          to catch things like out-of-bounds indexes, type mismatches, and
          zero divides:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e84343"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def reciprocal(x):
    assert x != 0              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># A useless assert!</span></em>
    return 1 / x               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Python checks for zero automatically</span></em></pre>
<p>Such <code class="epub__literal">assert</code>s are generally
          superfluous—because Python raises exceptions on errors
          automatically, you might as well let it do the job for you.<sup>[76]</sup> For another example of common <code class="epub__literal">assert</code> usage, see the abstract superclass
          example in Chapter 28; there, we used
          <code class="epub__literal">assert</code> to make calls to undefined
          methods fail with a message.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="with/as Context Managers"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
