<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>with/as Context Managers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="with_solidus_as_context_managers"></a>with/as Context Managers</h1>
<p>Python 2.6 and 3.0 <a id="ch33excptnswithasstmnt"></a>introduced a new <a id="ch33withasstmnt"></a>exception-related statement—the <code class="epub__literal">with</code>, and its optional <code class="epub__literal">as</code> clause. This statement is designed to
        work with context manager objects, which support a new method-based
        protocol. This feature is also available as an option in 2.5, enabled
        with an <code class="epub__literal">import</code> of this form:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e84391"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from __future__ import with_statement</pre>
<p>In short, the <code class="epub__literal">with</code>/<code class="epub__literal">as</code> statement is designed to be an
        alternative to a common <code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">finally</code> usage idiom; like that statement, it
        is intended for specifying termination-time or “cleanup” activities
        that must run regardless of whether an exception occurs in a
        processing step. Unlike <code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">finally</code>, though, the <code class="epub__literal">with</code> statement supports a richer object-based protocol for specifying
        both entry and exit actions around a block of code.</p>
<p>Python enhances some built-in tools with context managers, such
        as files that automatically close themselves and thread locks that
        automatically lock and unlock, but programmers can code context
        managers of their own with classes, too.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Basic Usage"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="basic_usage-id1"></a>Basic Usage</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The basic <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e84427"></a>format of the <code class="epub__literal">with</code>
<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e84438"></a>statement looks like this:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e84444"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">with <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>expression</code></em> [as <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>variable</code></em>]:
    <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>with-block</code></em></pre>
<p>The <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>expression</code></em> here is assumed to
          return an object that supports the context management protocol (more
          on this protocol in a moment). This object may also return a value
          that will be assigned to the name
          <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>variable</code></em> if the optional <code class="epub__literal">as</code> clause is present.</p>
<p>Note that the <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>variable</code></em> is not
          necessarily assigned the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>result</em></span> of the
          <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>expression</code></em>; the result of the
          <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>expression</code></em> is the object that supports
          the context protocol, and the <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>variable</code></em>
          may be assigned something else intended to be used inside the
          statement. The object returned by the
          <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>expression</code></em> may then run startup code
          before the <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>with-block</code></em> is started, as well
          as termination code after the block is done, regardless of whether
          the block raised an exception or not.</p>
<p>Some built-in Python objects have been augmented to support
          the context management protocol, and so can be used with the
          <code class="epub__literal">with</code> statement. For example, file
          objects (covered in Chapter 9) have a context
          manager that automatically closes the file after the <code class="epub__literal">with</code> block regardless of whether an
          exception is raised:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e84499"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">with open(r'C:\misc\data') as myfile:
    for line in myfile:
        print(line)
        <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...more code here...</code></em></pre>
<p>Here, the call to <code class="epub__literal">open</code>
          returns a simple file object that is assigned to the name <code class="epub__literal">myfile</code>. We can use <code class="epub__literal">myfile</code> with the usual file tools—in this
          case, the file iterator reads line by line in the <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop.</p>
<p>However, this object also supports the context management
          protocol used by the <code class="epub__literal">with</code>
          statement. After this <code class="epub__literal">with</code>
          statement has run, the context management machinery guarantees that
          the file object referenced by <code class="epub__literal">myfile</code> is automatically closed, even if
          the <code class="epub__literal">for</code> loop raised an exception
          while processing the file.</p>
<p>Although file objects are automatically closed on garbage
          collection, it’s not always straightforward to know when that will
          occur. The <code class="epub__literal">with</code> statement in this
          role is an alternative that allows us to be sure that the close will
          occur after execution of a specific block of code. As we saw
          earlier, we can achieve a similar effect with the more general and
          explicit <code class="epub__literal">try/finally</code> statement,
          but it requires four lines of administrative code instead of one in
          this case:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e84539"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">myfile = open(r'C:\misc\data')
try:
    for line in myfile:
        print(line)
        <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...more code here...</code></em>
finally:
    myfile.close()</pre>
<p><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e86618"></a>We won’t cover Python’s multithreading modules in this
          book (for more on that topic, see follow-up application-level texts
          such as <em class="epub__citetitle">Programming
          Python</em>), but the <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e86626"></a>lock and condition synchronization objects they define
          may also be used with the <code class="epub__literal">with</code>
          statement, because they support the context management
          protocol:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e84554"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">lock = threading.Lock()
with lock:
    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># critical section of code</span></em>
    <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...access shared resources...</code></em></pre>
<p>Here, the context management machinery guarantees that the
          lock is automatically acquired before the block is executed and
          released once the block is complete, regardless of exception
          outcomes.</p>
<p>As introduced in Chapter 5, the
          <code class="epub__literal">decimal</code> module also uses context
          managers to simplify saving and restoring the current decimal
          context, which specifies the precision and rounding characteristics
          for calculations:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e84570"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">with decimal.localcontext() as ctx:
    ctx.prec = 2
    x = decimal.Decimal('1.00') / decimal.Decimal('3.00')</pre>
<p>After this statement runs, the current thread’s context
          manager state is automatically restored to what it was before the
          statement began. To do the same with a <code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">finally</code>, we would need to save the context
          before and restore it manually.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The Context Management Protocol"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_context_management_protocol"></a>The Context Management Protocol</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Although <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e84585"></a>some <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e84593"></a>built-in types come with context managers, we can also
          write new ones of our own. To implement context managers, classes
          use special methods that fall into the operator overloading category
          to tap into the <code class="epub__literal">with</code> statement.
          The interface expected of objects used in <code class="epub__literal">with</code> statements is somewhat complex, and
          most programmers only need to know how to use existing context
          managers. For tool builders who might want to write new
          application-specific context managers, though, let’s take a quick
          look at what’s involved.</p>
<p>Here’s how the <code class="epub__literal">with</code>
          statement actually works:</p><div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The expression is evaluated, resulting in an object known
              as a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e84615"></a>context manager</em></span> that must have
              <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e84620"></a><code class="epub__literal">__enter__</code> and
              <code class="epub__literal">__exit__</code> methods.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The context manager’s <code class="epub__literal">__enter__</code> method is called. The value
              it returns is assigned to the variable in the <code class="epub__literal">as</code> clause if present, or simply
              discarded otherwise.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The code in the nested <code class="epub__literal">with</code> block is executed.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>If the <code class="epub__literal">with</code> block
              raises an exception, the <code class="epub__literal">__exit__(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>type</code></em><code class="epub__literal">,</code>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>value</code></em><code class="epub__literal">,</code>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>traceback</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code> method is called with the exception
              details. Note that these are the same values returned by
              <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e86748"></a>sys.exc_info</code>, described in the Python
              manuals and later in this part of the book. If this method
              returns a false value, the exception is reraised; otherwise, the
              exception is terminated. The exception should normally be
              reraised so that it is propagated outside the <code class="epub__literal">with</code> statement.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>If the <code class="epub__literal">with</code> block does
              not raise an exception, the<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e84680"></a> <code class="epub__literal">__exit__</code>
              method is still called, but its <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>type</code></em>,
              <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>value</code></em>, and
              <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>traceback</code></em> arguments are all passed in
              as <code class="epub__literal">None</code>.</p></li></ol>
</div>
<p>Let’s look at a quick demo of the protocol in action. The
          following defines a context manager object that traces the entry and
          exit of the <code class="epub__literal">with</code> block in any
          <code class="epub__literal">with</code> statement it is used
          for:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e84708"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class TraceBlock:
    def message(self, arg):
        print('running', arg)
    def __enter__(self):
        print('starting with block')
        return self
    def __exit__(self, exc_type, exc_value, exc_tb):
        if exc_type is None:
            print('exited normally\n')
        else:
            print('raise an exception!', exc_type)
            return False                                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Propagate</span></em>

with TraceBlock() as action:
    action.message('test 1')
    print('reached')

with TraceBlock() as action:
    action.message('test 2')
    raise TypeError
    print('not reached')</pre>
<p>Notice that this class’s <code class="epub__literal">__exit__</code> method returns <code class="epub__literal">False</code> to propagate the exception; deleting
          the <code class="epub__literal">return</code> statement would have
          the same effect, as the default <code class="epub__literal">None</code> return value of functions is <code class="epub__literal">False</code> by definition. Also notice that the
          <code class="epub__literal">__enter__</code> method returns <code class="epub__literal">self</code> as the object to assign to the
          <code class="epub__literal">as</code> variable; in other use cases,
          this might return a completely different object instead.</p>
<p>When run, the context manager traces the entry and exit of the
          <code class="epub__literal">with</code> statement block with its
          <code class="epub__literal">__enter__</code> and <code class="epub__literal">__exit__</code> methods. Here’s the script in
          action being run under Python 3.0 (it runs in 2.6, too, but prints
          some extra tuple parentheses):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e84751"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python withas.py</code></strong>
starting with block
running test 1
reached
exited normally

starting with block
running test 2
raise an exception! &lt;class 'TypeError'&gt;
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "withas.py", line 20, in &lt;module&gt;
    raise TypeError
TypeError</pre>
<p>Context managers are somewhat advanced devices for tool
          builders, so we’ll skip additional details here (see Python’s
          standard manuals for the full story—for example, there’s a new
          <code class="epub__literal">contextlib</code> standard module that
          provides additional tools for coding context managers). For simpler
          purposes, the <code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">finally</code> statement provides sufficient
          support for termination-time activities.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p>In the upcoming Python 3.1 release, the <code class="epub__literal">with</code> statement may also specify multiple
            (sometimes referred to as “nested”) context managers with new
            comma syntax. In the following, for example, both files’ exit
            actions are automatically run when the statement block exits,
            regardless of exception outcomes:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e84773"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">with open('data') as fin, open('res', 'w') as fout:
    for line in fin:
        if 'some key' in line:
            fout.write(line)</pre>
<p>Any number of context manager items may be listed, and
            multiple items work the same as nested <code class="epub__literal">with</code> statements. In general, the 3.1
            (and later) code:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e84780"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">with A() as a, B() as b:
    <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...statements...</code></em></pre>
<p>is equivalent to the following, which works in 3.1, 3.0, and
            2.6:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e84786"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">with A() as a:
    with B() as b:
        <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...statements...</code></em></pre>
<p>See Python 3.1 release notes for additional <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e84792"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e84794"></a>details.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Chapter Summary"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
