<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_answers-id32"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</h1>
<div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement catches
            and recovers from exceptions—it specifies a block of code to run,
            and one or more handlers for exceptions that may be raised during
            the block’s execution.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The two common variations on the <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement are <code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">except</code>/<code class="epub__literal">else</code> (for catching exceptions) and
            <code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">finally</code> (for specifying cleanup actions
            that must occur whether an exception is raised or not). In Python
            2.4, these were separate statements that could be combined by
            syntactic nesting; in 2.5 and later, <code class="epub__literal">except</code> and <code class="epub__literal">finally</code> blocks may be mixed in the same
            statement, so the two statement forms are merged. In the merged
            form, the <code class="epub__literal">finally</code> is still run
            on the way out of the <code class="epub__literal">try</code>,
            regardless of what exceptions may have been raised or
            handled.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">raise</code> statement
            raises (triggers) an exception. Python raises built-in exceptions
            on errors internally, but your scripts can trigger built-in or
            user-defined exceptions with <code class="epub__literal">raise</code>, too.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">assert</code> statement
            raises an <code class="epub__literal">AssertionError</code>
            exception if a condition is false. It works like a conditional
            <code class="epub__literal">raise</code> statement wrapped up in
            an <code class="epub__literal">if</code> statement.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">with</code>/<code class="epub__literal">as</code> statement is designed to automate
            startup and termination activities that must occur around a block
            of code. It is roughly like a <code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">finally</code> statement in that its exit
            actions run whether an exception occurred or not, but it allows a
            richer object-based protocol for specifying entry
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>and</em></span> exit actions.</p></li></ol>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[74] </sup>As mentioned in the prior chapter, the text of error
              messages and stack traces tends to vary slightly over time and
              shells. Don’t be alarmed if your error messages don’t exactly
              match mine. When I ran this example in Python 3.0’s IDLE GUI,
              for instance, its error message text showed filenames with full
              absolute directory paths.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[75] </sup>Unless Python crashes completely, of course. It does a
              good job of avoiding this, though, by checking all possible
              errors as a program runs. When a program does crash hard, it is
              usually due to a bug in linked-in C extension code, outside of
              Python’s scope.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[76] </sup>In most cases, at least. As suggested earlier in the book,
              if a function has to perform long-running or unrecoverable
              actions before it reaches the place where an exception will be
              triggered, you still might want to test for errors. Even in this
              case, though, be careful not to make your tests overly specific
              or restrictive, or you will limit your code’s utility.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
