<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 34. Exception Objects</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 34. Exception Objects"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h1 class="epub__title"><a id="exception_objects"></a>Chapter 34. Exception Objects</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>So <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e84951"></a><a id="ch34excptnclsss"></a>far, I’ve been deliberately vague about what an exception
      actually <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>is</em></span>. As suggested in the prior chapter, in
      Python 2.6 and 3.0 both built-in and user-defined exceptions are
      identified by <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>class instance</em></span> objects. Although this
      means you must use object-oriented
      programming to define new exceptions in your programs, classes and OOP
      in general offer a number of benefits.</p>
<p>Here are some of the <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e84973"></a>advantages of class-based exceptions:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>They can be organized into
          categories</strong></span>. Exception classes support future changes by
          providing categories—adding new exceptions in the future won’t
          generally require changes in <code class="epub__literal">try</code>
          statements.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>They have attached state
          information</strong></span>. Exception classes provide a natural place
          for us to store context information for use in the <code class="epub__literal">try</code> handler—they may have both attached
          state information and callable methods, accessible through
          instances.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__strong"><strong>They support inheritance</strong></span>.
          Class-based exceptions can participate in inheritance hierarchies to
          obtain and customize common behavior—inherited display methods, for
          example, can provide a common look and feel for error
          messages.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Because of these advantages, class-based exceptions support
      program evolution and larger systems well. In fact, all built-in
      exceptions are identified by classes and are organized into an
      inheritance tree, for the reasons just listed. You can do the same with
      user-defined exceptions of your own.</p>
<p>In Python 3.0, user-defined exceptions inherit from built-in
      exception superclasses. As we’ll see here, because these superclasses
      provide useful defaults for printing and state retention, the task of
      coding user-defined exceptions also involves understanding the roles of
      these built-ins.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Version skew note</em></span>: Python 2.6 and 3.0 both
        require exceptions to be defined by classes. In addition, 3.0 requires
        exception classes to be derived from the <code class="epub__literal">BaseException</code> built-in exception superclass,
        either directly or indirectly. As we’ll see, most programs inherit
        from this class’s <code class="epub__literal">Exception</code>
        subclass, to support catchall handlers for normal exception
        types—naming it in a handler will catch everything most programs
        should. Python 2.6 allows standalone classic classes to serve as
        exceptions, too, but it requires new-style classes to be derived from
        built-in exception classes, the same as 3.0.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Exceptions: Back to the Future"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
