<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Exceptions: Back to the Future</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="exceptions_colon_back_to_the_future"></a>Exceptions: Back to the Future</h1>
<p><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e87102"></a>Once upon a time (well, prior to Python 2.6 and 3.0), it
        was possible to define exceptions in two different ways. This
        complicated <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statements,
        <code class="epub__literal">raise</code> statements, and Python in
        general. Today, there is only one way to do it. This is a good thing:
        it removes from the language substantial cruft accumulated for the
        sake of backward compatibility. Because the old way helps explain why
        exceptions are as they are today, though, and because it’s not really
        possible to completely erase the history of something that has been
        used by a million people over the course of nearly two decades, let’s
        begin our exploration of the present with a brief look at the
        past.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="String Exceptions Are Right Out!"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="string_exceptions_are_right_out_exclama"></a>String Exceptions Are Right Out!</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Prior to <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e85032"></a>Python 2.6 and 3.0, it was <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e85038"></a>possible to define exceptions with both class
          instances and string objects. String-based exceptions began issuing
          deprecation warnings in 2.5 and were removed in 2.6 and 3.0, so
          today you should use class-based exceptions, as shown in this book.
          If you work with legacy code, though, you might still come across
          string exceptions. They might also appear in tutorials and web
          resources written a few years ago (which qualifies as an eternity in
          Python years!).</p>
<p>String exceptions were straightforward to use—any string would
          do, and they matched by object identity, not value (that is, using
          <code class="epub__literal">is</code>, not <code class="epub__literal">==</code>):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e85052"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>C:\Python25\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>myexc = "My exception string"</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Were we ever this young?</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>try:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>raise myexc</code></strong>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>except myexc:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('caught')</code></strong>
...
caught</pre>
<p>This form of exception was removed because it was not as good
          as classes for larger programs and code maintenance. Although you
          can’t use string exceptions today, they actually provide a natural
          vehicle for introducing the class-based exceptions model.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Class-Based Exceptions"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="class-based_exceptions"></a>Class-Based Exceptions</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Strings <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e85083"></a>were<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e85089"></a> a simple way to define exceptions. As described
          earlier, however, classes have some added advantages that merit a
          quick look. Most prominently, they allow us to identify exception
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>categories</em></span> that are more flexible to use and
          maintain than simple strings. Moreover, classes naturally allow for
          attached exception details and support inheritance. Because they are
          the better approach, they are now required.</p>
<p>Coding details aside, the chief difference between string and
          class exceptions has to do with the way that exceptions raised are
          matched against <code class="epub__literal">except</code> clauses in
          <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statements:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>String <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e85115"></a>exceptions were matched by simple <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>object
              identity</em></span>: the raised exception was matched to
              <code class="epub__literal">except</code> clauses by Python’s
              <code class="epub__literal">is</code> test.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Class exceptions are matched by <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>superclass
              relationships</em></span>: the raised exception matches an
              <code class="epub__literal">except</code> clause if that
              <code class="epub__literal">except</code> clause names the
              exception’s class or any superclass of it.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>That is, when a <code class="epub__literal">try</code>
          statement’s <code class="epub__literal">except</code> clause lists a
          superclass, it catches instances of that superclass, as well as
          instances of all its subclasses lower in the class tree. <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e85148"></a>The net effect is that class exceptions support the
          construction of exception <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>hierarchies</em></span>:
          superclasses become category names, and subclasses become specific
          kinds of exceptions within a category. By naming a general exception
          superclass, an <code class="epub__literal">except</code> clause can
          catch an entire category of exceptions—any more specific subclass
          will match.</p>
<p>String exceptions had no such concept: because they were
          matched by simple object identity, there was no direct way to
          organize exceptions into more flexible categories or groups. The net
          result was that exception handlers were coupled with exception sets
          in a way that made changes difficult.</p>
<p>In addition to this category idea, class-based exceptions
          better support exception <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>state information</em></span>
          (attached to instances) and allow exceptions to participate in
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>inheritance hierarchies</em></span> (to obtain common
          behaviors). Because they offer all the benefits of classes and OOP
          in general, they provide a more powerful alternative to the now
          defunct string-based exceptions model in exchange for a small amount
          of additional code.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Coding Exceptions Classes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="coding_exceptions_classes"></a>Coding Exceptions Classes</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Let’s <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e85175"></a>look at an example to see how class exceptions
          translate to code. In the following file, <em class="epub__filename">classexc.py</em>, we define a superclass
          called <code class="epub__literal">General</code> and two subclasses
          called <code class="epub__literal">Specific1</code> and <code class="epub__literal">Specific2</code>. This example illustrates the
          notion of exception categories—<code class="epub__literal">General</code> is a category name, and its two
          subclasses are specific types of exceptions within the category.
          Handlers that catch <code class="epub__literal">General</code> will
          also catch any subclasses of it, including <code class="epub__literal">Specific1</code> and <code class="epub__literal">Specific2</code><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e87293"></a>:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e85209"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class General(Exception): pass
class Specific1(General): pass
class Specific2(General): pass

def raiser0():
    X = General()          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Raise superclass instance</span></em>
    raise X

def raiser1():
    X = Specific1()        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Raise subclass instance</span></em>
    raise X

def raiser2():
    X = Specific2()        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Raise different subclass instance</span></em>
    raise X

for func in (raiser0, raiser1, raiser2):
    try:
        func()
    except General:        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Match General or any subclass of it</span></em>
        import sys
        print('caught:', sys.exc_info()[0])

C:\python30&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python classexc.py</code></strong>
caught: &lt;class '__main__.General'&gt;
caught: &lt;class '__main__.Specific1'&gt;
caught: &lt;class '__main__.Specific2'&gt;</pre>
<p>This code is mostly straightforward, but here are a few
          implementation notes:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Exception superclass</span></dt><dd>
<p>Classes used to build exception category trees have very
                few requirements—in fact, in this example they are mostly
                empty, with bodies that do nothing but <code class="epub__literal">pass</code>. Notice, though, how the
                top-level class here inherits from the built-in <code class="epub__literal">Exception</code> class. This is required in
                Python 3.0; Python 2.6 allows standalone classic classes to
                serve as exceptions too, but it requires new-style classes to
                be derived from built-in exception classes just like in 3.0.
                Although we don’t employ it here, because <code class="epub__literal">Exception</code> provides some
                useful behavior we’ll meet later, it’s a good idea to inherit
                from it in either Python.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Raising instances</span></dt><dd>
<p>In this code, we call classes to make
                <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>instances</em></span> for the <code class="epub__literal">raise</code> statements. In the class
                exception model, we always raise and catch a class instance
                object. If we list a class name without parentheses in a
                <code class="epub__literal">raise</code>, Python calls the
                class with no constructor argument to make an instance for us.
                Exception instances can be created before the <code class="epub__literal">raise</code>, as done here, or within the
                <code class="epub__literal">raise</code> statement
                itself.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Catching categories</span></dt><dd>
<p>This code includes functions that raise instances of all
                three of our classes as exceptions, as well as a top-level
                <code class="epub__literal">try</code> that calls the
                functions and catches <code class="epub__literal">General</code> exceptions. The same
                <code class="epub__literal">try</code> also catches the two
                specific exceptions, because they are subclasses of <code class="epub__literal">General</code>.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Exception details</span></dt><dd>
<p>The exception handler here uses the <code class="epub__literal">sys.exc_info</code> call—as we’ll see in
                more detail in the next chapter, it’s how we can grab hold of
                the most recently raised exception in a generic fashion.
                Briefly, the first item in its result is the class of the
                exception raised, and the second is the actual instance
                raised. In a general <code class="epub__literal">except</code>
                clause like the one here that catches all classes in a
                category, <code class="epub__literal">sys.exc_info</code> is
                one way to determine exactly what’s occurred. In this
                particular case, it’s equivalent to fetching the instance’s
                <code class="epub__literal">__class__</code> attribute. As
                we’ll see in the next chapter, the <code class="epub__literal">sys.exc_info</code> scheme is also commonly
                used with empty <code class="epub__literal">except</code>
                clauses that catch everything.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>The last point merits further explanation. When an exception
          is caught, we can be sure that the instance raised is an instance of
          the class listed in the <code class="epub__literal">except</code>,
          or one of its more specific subclasses. Because of this, the
          <code class="epub__literal">__class__</code> attribute of the
          instance also gives the exception type. The following variant, for
          example, works the same as the prior example:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e85317"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class General(Exception): pass
class Specific1(General): pass
class Specific2(General): pass

def raiser0(): raise General()
def raiser1(): raise Specific1()
def raiser2(): raise Specific2()

for func in (raiser0, raiser1, raiser2):
    try:
        func()
    except General as X:                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># X is the raised instance</span></em>
        print('caught:', X.__class__)        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same as sys.exc_info()[0]</span></em></pre>
<p>Because <code class="epub__literal">__class__</code> can be
          used like this to determine the specific type of exception raised,
          <code class="epub__literal">sys.exc_info</code> is more useful for
          empty <code class="epub__literal">except</code> clauses that do not
          otherwise have a way to access the instance or its class.
          Furthermore, more realistic programs usually should <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>not
          have to care</em></span> about which specific exception was raised at
          all—by calling methods of the instance generically, we automatically
          dispatch to behavior tailored for the exception raised. More on this
          and <code class="epub__literal">sys.exc_info</code> in the next
          chapter; also see Chapter 28 and Part VI at large if you’ve forgotten what
          <code class="epub__literal">__class__</code> means in an
          instance.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Why Exception Hierarchies?"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
