<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Why Exception Hierarchies?</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="why_exception_hierarchies_question"></a>Why Exception Hierarchies?</h1>
<p>Because <a id="ch34excptclsssexcpthrchriesjustify"></a>there are only three possible exceptions in the prior
        section’s example, it doesn’t really do justice to the utility of
        class exceptions. In fact, we could achieve the same effects by coding
        a list of exception names in parentheses within the <code class="epub__literal">except</code> clause:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e85365"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">try:
    func()
except (General, Specific1, Specific2):     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Catch any of these</span></em>
    ...</pre>
<p>This approach worked for the defunct string exception model too.
        For large or high exception hierarchies, however, it may be easier to
        catch categories using class-based categories than to list every
        member of a category in a single <code class="epub__literal">except</code> clause. Perhaps more importantly, you
        can extend exception hierarchies by adding new subclasses without
        breaking existing code.</p>
<p>Suppose, for example, you code a numeric programming library in
        Python, to be used by a large number of people. While you are writing
        your library, you identify two things that can go wrong with numbers
        in your code—division by zero, and numeric overflow. You document
        these as the two exceptions that your library may raise:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e85377"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># mathlib.py</span></em>

class Divzero(Exception): pass
class Oflow(Exception): pass

def func():
    ...
    raise Divzero()</pre>
<p>Now, when people use your library, they typically wrap calls to
        your functions or classes in <code class="epub__literal">try</code>
        statements that catch your two exceptions (if they do not catch your
        exceptions, exceptions from the library will kill their code):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e85386"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># client.py</span></em>

import mathlib

try:
    mathlib.func(...)
except (mathlib.Divzero, mathlib.Oflow):
    <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...handle and recover...</code></em></pre>
<p>This works fine, and lots of people start using your library.
        Six months down the road, though, you revise it (as programmers are
        prone to do). Along the way, you identify a new thing that can go
        wrong—underflow—and add that as a new exception:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e85394"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># mathlib.py</span></em>

class Divzero(Exception): pass
class Oflow(Exception): pass
class Uflow(Exception): pass</pre>
<p>Unfortunately, when you re-release your code, you create a
        maintenance problem for your users. If they’ve listed your exceptions
        explicitly, they now have to go back and change every place they call
        your library to include the newly added exception name:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e85401"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># client.py</span></em>

try:
    mathlib.func(...)
except (mathlib.Divzero, mathlib.Oflow, <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>mathlib.Uflow</code></strong>):
    <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...handle and recover...</code></em></pre>
<p>This may not be the end of the world. If your library is used
        only in-house, you can make the changes yourself. You might also ship
        a Python script that tries to fix such code automatically (it would
        probably be only a few dozen lines, and it would guess right at least
        some of the time). If many people have to change all their <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statements each time you alter your
        exception set, though, this is not exactly the most polite of upgrade
        policies.</p>
<p>Your users might try to avoid this pitfall by coding empty
        <code class="epub__literal">except</code> clauses to catch
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>all</em></span> possible exceptions:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e85423"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># client.py</span></em>

try:
    mathlib.func(...)
except:                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Catch everything here</span></em>
    <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...handle and recover...</code></em></pre>
<p>But this workaround might catch more than they bargained
        for—things like running out of memory, keyboard interrupts (Ctrl-C),
        system exits, and even typos in their own <code class="epub__literal">try</code> block’s code will all trigger
        exceptions, and such things should pass, not be caught and erroneously
        classified as library errors.</p>
<p>And really, in this scenario users want to catch and recover
        from <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>only</em></span> the specific exceptions the library is
        defined and documented to raise; if any other exception occurs during
        a library call, it’s likely a genuine bug in the library (and probably
        time to contact the vendor!). As a rule of thumb, it’s usually better
        to be specific than general in exception handlers—an idea we’ll
        revisit as a “gotcha” in the next chapter.<sup>[77]</sup></p>
<p>So what to do, then? Class exception hierarchies fix this
        dilemma completely. Rather than defining your library’s exceptions as
        a set of autonomous classes, arrange them into a class tree with a
        common superclass to encompass the entire category:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e85456"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># mathlib.py</span></em>

class NumErr(Exception): pass
class Divzero(NumErr): pass
class Oflow(NumErr): pass
...
def func():
    ...
    raise DivZero()</pre>
<p>This way, users of your library simply need to list the common
        superclass (i.e., category) to catch all of your library’s exceptions,
        both now and in the future:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e85462"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># client.py</span></em>

import mathlib
...
try:
    mathlib.func(...)
except mathlib.NumErr:
    <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...report and recover...</code></em></pre>
<p>When you go back and hack your code again, you can add new
        exceptions as new subclasses of the common superclass:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e85471"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># mathlib.py</span></em>

...
class Uflow(NumErr): pass</pre>
<p>The end result is that user code that catches your library’s
        exceptions will keep working, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>unchanged</em></span>. In fact,
        you are free to add, delete, and change exceptions arbitrarily in the
        future—as long as clients name the superclass, they are insulated from
        changes in your exceptions set. In other words, class exceptions
        provide a better answer to maintenance issues than strings do.</p>
<p>Class-based exception hierarchies also support state retention
        and inheritance in ways that make them ideal in larger programs. To
        understand these roles, though, we first need to see how user-defined
        exception classes relate to the built-in exceptions from which they
        <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e85482"></a>inherit.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Built-in Exception Classes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
