<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Built-in Exception Classes</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="built-in_exception_classes"></a>Built-in Exception Classes</h1>
<p>I didn’t <a id="ch34excptclssbuiltinecptnclsss"></a>really pull the <a id="ch34builtinexcptnclsss"></a>prior section’s examples out of thin air. All built-in
        exceptions that Python itself may raise are predefined class objects.
        Moreover, they are organized into a shallow hierarchy with general
        superclass categories and specific subclass types, much like the
        exceptions class tree we developed earlier.</p>
<p>In Python 3.0, all the familiar exceptions you’ve seen (e.g.,
        <code class="epub__literal">SyntaxError</code>) are really just
        predefined classes, available as built-in names in the module named
        <code class="epub__literal">builtins</code> (in Python 2.6, they
        instead live in <code class="epub__literal">__builtin__</code> and are
        also attributes of the standard library module <code class="epub__literal">exceptions</code>). In addition, <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e85514"></a>Python <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e85521"></a>organizes the built-in exceptions into a hierarchy, to
        support a variety of catching modes. For example:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">BaseException</code></span>
</dt><dd>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e85537"></a>top-level root superclass of exceptions. This
              class is not supposed to be directly inherited by user-defined
              classes (use <code class="epub__literal">Exception</code>
              instead). It provides default printing and state retention
              behavior inherited by subclasses. If the <code class="epub__literal">str</code> built-in is called on an instance
              of this class (e.g., by <code class="epub__literal">print</code>), the class returns the display
              strings of the constructor arguments passed when the instance
              was created (or an empty string if there were no arguments). In
              addition, unless subclasses replace this class’s constructor,
              all of the arguments passed to this class at instance
              construction time are stored in its <code class="epub__literal">args</code> attribute as a tuple.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">Exception</code></span>
</dt><dd>
<p>The<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e85560"></a> top-level root superclass of application-related
              exceptions. This is an immediate subclass of <code class="epub__literal">BaseException</code> and is superclass to
              every other built-in exception, except the system exit event
              classes (<code class="epub__literal">SystemExit</code>, <code class="epub__literal">KeyboardInterrupt</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">GeneratorExit</code>). Almost all
              user-defined classes should inherit from this class, not
              <code class="epub__literal">BaseException</code>. When this
              convention is followed, naming <code class="epub__literal">Exception</code> in a <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement’s handler ensures that
              your program will catch everything but system exit events, which
              should normally be allowed to pass. In effect, <code class="epub__literal">Exception</code> becomes a catchall in
              <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statements and is more
              accurate than an empty <code class="epub__literal">except</code>.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">ArithmeticError</code></span>
</dt><dd>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e85603"></a>superclass of all numeric errors (and a subclass
              of <code class="epub__literal">Exception</code>).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">OverflowError</code></span>
</dt><dd>
<p>A subclass <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e85617"></a>of <code class="epub__literal">ArithmeticError</code> that identifies a
              specific numeric error.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>And so on—you can read further about this structure in reference
        texts such as <em class="epub__citetitle">Python Pocket
        Reference</em> or the Python library manual. Note that
        the exceptions class tree differs slightly between Python 3.0 and 2.6.
        Also note that you can see the class tree in the help text of the
        <code class="epub__literal">exceptions</code> module in Python 2.6
        only (this module is removed in 3.0). See Chapters 4 and 15 for help on <code class="epub__literal">help</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e85640"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>import exceptions</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>help(exceptions)</code></strong>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...lots of text omitted...</code></em></pre>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Built-in Exception Categories"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="built-in_exception_categories"></a>Built-in Exception Categories</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e85655"></a>built-in class tree allows <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e85661"></a>you to choose how specific or general your handlers
          will be. For example, the built-in exception <code class="epub__literal">ArithmeticError</code> is a superclass for more
          specific exceptions such as <code class="epub__literal">OverflowError</code> and <code class="epub__literal">ZeroDivisionError</code>. By listing <code class="epub__literal">ArithmeticError</code> in a <code class="epub__literal">try</code>, you will catch any kind of numeric
          error raised; by listing just <code class="epub__literal">OverflowError</code>, you will intercept
          just that specific type of error, and no others.</p>
<p>Similarly, because <code class="epub__literal">Exception</code> is the superclass of all
          application-level exceptions in Python 3.0, you can generally use it
          as a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>catchall</em></span>—the effect is much like an empty
          <code class="epub__literal">except</code>, but it allows system exit
          exceptions to pass as they usually should:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e85699"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">try:
    action()
except Exception:
    <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...handle all application exceptions...</code></em>
else:
    <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...handle no-exception case...</code></em></pre>
<p>This doesn’t quite work universally
          in Python 2.6, however, because standalone user-defined exceptions
          coded as classic classes are not required to be subclasses of the
          <code class="epub__literal">Exception</code> root class. This
          technique is more reliable in Python 3.0, since it requires all
          classes to derive from built-in exceptions. Even in Python 3.0,
          though, this scheme suffers most of the same potential pitfalls as
          the empty <code class="epub__literal">except</code>, as described in
          the prior chapter—it might intercept exceptions intended for
          elsewhere, and it might mask genuine programming errors. Since this
          is such a common issue, we’ll revisit it as a “gotcha” in the next
          chapter.</p>
<p>Whether or not you will leverage the categories in the
          built-in class tree, it serves as a good example; by using similar
          techniques for class exceptions in your own code, you can provide
          exception sets that are flexible and easily modified.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Default Printing and State"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="default_printing_and_state"></a>Default Printing and State</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Built-in <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e85722"></a>exceptions <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e85730"></a>also provide default print displays and state
          retention, which is often as much logic as user-defined classes
          require. Unless you redefine the constructors your classes inherit
          from them, any constructor arguments you pass to these classes are
          saved in the instance’s <code class="epub__literal">args</code>
          tuple attribute and are automatically displayed when the instance is
          printed (an empty tuple and display string are used if no
          constructor arguments are passed).</p>
<p>This explains why arguments passed to built-in exception
          classes show up in error messages—any constructor arguments are
          attached to the instance and displayed when the instance is
          printed:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e85741"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>raise IndexError</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same as IndexError(): no arguments</span></em>
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "&lt;stdin&gt;", line 1, in &lt;module&gt;
IndexError

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>raise IndexError('spam')</code></strong>            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Constructor argument attached, printed</span></em>
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "&lt;stdin&gt;", line 1, in &lt;module&gt;
IndexError: spam

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>I = IndexError('spam')</code></strong>              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Available in object attribute</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>I.args</code></strong>
('spam',)</pre>
<p>The same holds true for user-defined exceptions, because they
          inherit the constructor and display methods present in their
          built-in superclasses:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e85767"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class E(Exception): pass</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>try:</code></strong>
...    <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>raise E('spam')</code></strong>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>except E as X:</code></strong>
...    <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(X, X.args)</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Displays and saves constructor arguments</span></em>
...
spam ('spam',)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>try:</code></strong>
...    <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>raise E('spam', 'eggs', 'ham')</code></strong>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>except E as X:</code></strong>
...    <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(X, X.args)</code></strong>
...
('spam', 'eggs', 'ham') ('spam', 'eggs', 'ham')</pre>
<p>Note that exception instance objects are not strings
          themselves, but use the <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code>
          operator overloading protocol we studied in Chapter 29 to provide display strings when
          printed; to concatenate with real strings, perform manual
          conversions: <code class="epub__literal">str(X) +
          "string"</code>.</p>
<p>Although this automatic state and display support is useful by
          itself, for more specific display and state retention needs you can
          always redefine inherited methods such as <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> and <code class="epub__literal">__init__</code> in <code class="epub__literal">Exception</code> subclasses—the next section
          shows <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e85821"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e85823"></a>how.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Custom Print Displays"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
