<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Custom Print Displays</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="custom_print_displays"></a>Custom Print Displays</h1>
<p>As <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e85831"></a>we saw in the preceding section, by default, instances
        of class-based exceptions display whatever you passed to the class
        constructor when they are caught and printed:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e85837"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class MyBad(Exception): pass</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>try:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>raise MyBad('Sorry--my mistake!')</code></strong>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>except MyBad as X:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(X)</code></strong>
...
Sorry--my mistake!</pre>
<p>This inherited default display model is also used if the
        exception is displayed as part of an error message when the exception
        is not caught:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e85856"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>raise MyBad('Sorry--my mistake!')</code></strong>
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "&lt;stdin&gt;", line 1, in &lt;module&gt;
__main__.MyBad: Sorry--my mistake!</pre>
<p>For many roles, this is sufficient. To provide a more custom
        display, though, you can define one of two string-representation
        overloading methods in your class (<code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e85864"></a>__repr__</code> or <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e85872"></a>__str__</code>) to return the string you want to
        display for your exception. The string the method returns will be
        displayed if the exception either is caught and printed or reaches the
        default handler:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e85879"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class MyBad(Exception):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __str__(self):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return 'Always look on the bright side of life...'</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>try:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>raise MyBad()</code></strong>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>except MyBad as X:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(X)</code></strong>
...
Always look on the bright side of life...

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>raise MyBad()</code></strong>
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "&lt;stdin&gt;", line 1, in &lt;module&gt;
__main__.MyBad: Always look on the bright side of life...</pre>
<p>A subtle point to note here is that you generally must redefine
        <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> for this purpose, because
        the built-in superclasses already have a <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> method, and <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> is preferred to <code class="epub__literal">__repr__</code> in most contexts (including
        printing). If you define a <code class="epub__literal">__repr__</code>, printing will happily call the
        superclass’s <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> instead! See
        Chapter 29 for more details on these
        special methods.</p>
<p>Whatever your method returns is included in error messages for
        uncaught exceptions and used when exceptions are printed explicitly.
        The method returns a hardcoded string here to illustrate, but it can
        also perform arbitrary text processing, possibly using state
        information attached to the instance object. The next section looks at
        state information options.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Custom Data and Behavior"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
