<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Custom Data and Behavior</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="custom_data_and_behavior"></a>Custom Data and Behavior</h1>
<p>Besides <a id="ch34excptclssscustdatbeh"></a>supporting flexible hierarchies, exception classes also
        provide storage for extra state information as instance attributes. As
        we saw earlier, built-in exception superclasses provide a default
        constructor that automatically saves constructor arguments in an
        instance tuple attribute named <code class="epub__literal">args</code>. Although the default constructor is
        adequate for many cases, for more custom needs we can provide a
        constructor of our own. In addition, classes may define methods for
        use in handlers that provide precoded exception processing
        logic.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Providing Exception Details"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="providing_exception_details"></a>Providing Exception Details</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>When an <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e85951"></a>exception is raised, it may cross arbitrary file
          boundaries—the <code class="epub__literal">raise</code> statement
          that triggers an exception and the <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement that catches it may be in
          completely different module files. It is not generally feasible to
          store extra details in global variables because the <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement might not know which file
          the globals reside in. Passing extra state information along in the
          exception itself allows the <code class="epub__literal">try</code>
          statement to access it more reliably.</p>
<p>With classes, this is nearly automatic. As we’ve seen, when an
          exception is raised, Python passes the class instance object along
          with the exception. Code in <code class="epub__literal">try</code>
          statements can access the raised instance by listing an extra
          variable after the <code class="epub__literal">as</code> keyword in
          an <code class="epub__literal">except</code> handler. This provides
          a natural hook for supplying data and behavior to the
          handler.</p>
<p>For example, a program that parses
          data files might signal a formatting error by raising an exception
          instance that is filled out with extra details about the
          error:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e85985"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class FormatError(Exception):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __init__(self, line, file):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>self.line = line</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>self.file = file</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def parser():</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>raise FormatError(42, file='spam.txt')</code></strong>     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># When error  found</span></em>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>try:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>parser()</code></strong>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>except FormatError as X:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('Error at', X.file, X.line)</code></strong>
...
Error at spam.txt 42</pre>
<p>In the <code class="epub__literal">except</code> clause here,
          the variable <code class="epub__literal">X</code> is assigned a
          reference to the instance that was generated when the exception was
          raised.<sup>[78]</sup> This gives access to the attributes attached to the
          instance by the custom constructor. Although we could rely on the
          default state retention of built-in superclasses, it’s less relevant
          to our application:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e86042"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class FormatError(Exception): pass</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Inherited constructor</span></em>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def parser():</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>raise FormatError(42, 'spam.txt')</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># No keywords allowed!</span></em>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>try:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>parser()</code></strong>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>except FormatError as X:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('Error at:', X.args[0], X.args[1])</code></strong>   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Not specific to this app</span></em>
...
Error at: 42 spam.txt</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Providing Exception Methods"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="providing_exception_methods"></a>Providing Exception Methods</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Besides <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e86080"></a>enabling application-specific state information,
          custom constructors also better support extra behavior for exception
          objects. That is, the <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e86088"></a>exception class can also define
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>methods</em></span> to be called in the handler. The
          following, for example, adds a method that uses exception state
          information to log errors to a file:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e86097"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class FormatError(Exception):
    logfile = 'formaterror.txt'
    def __init__(self, line, file):
        self.line = line
        self.file = file
    def logerror(self):
        log = open(self.logfile, 'a')
        print('Error at', self.file, self.line, file=log)

def parser():
    raise FormatError(40, 'spam.txt')

try:
    parser()
except FormatError as exc:
    exc.logerror()</pre>
<p>When run, this script writes its error message to a file in
          response to method calls in the exception handler:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e86101"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>C:\Python30\python parse.py</code></strong>
C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type formaterror.txt</code></strong>
Error at spam.txt 40</pre>
<p>In such a class, methods (like <code class="epub__literal">logerror</code>) may also be inherited from
          superclasses, and instance attributes (like <code class="epub__literal">line</code> and <code class="epub__literal">file</code>) provide a place to save state
          information that provides extra context for use in later method
          calls. Moreover, exception classes are free to customize and extend
          inherited behavior. In other words, because they are defined with
          classes, all the benefits of OOP that we studied in Part VI are available for use with exceptions
          in <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e86122"></a>Python.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Chapter Summary"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
