<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_answers-id33"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</h1>
<div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In 3.0, exceptions must be defined by classes (that is, a
            class instance object is raised and caught). In addition,
            exception classes must be derived from the built-in class <code class="epub__literal">BaseException</code> (most programs inherit
            from its <code class="epub__literal">Exception</code> subclass, to
            support catchall handlers for normal kinds of exceptions).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Class-based exceptions match by superclass relationships:
            naming a superclass in an exception handler will catch instances
            of that class, as well as instances of any of its subclasses lower
            in the class tree. Because of this, you can think of superclasses
            as general exception categories and subclasses as more specific
            types of exceptions within those categories.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>You can attach context information to class-based exceptions
            by filling out instance attributes in the instance object raised,
            usually in a custom class constructor. For simpler needs, built-in
            exception superclasses provide a constructor that stores its
            arguments on the instance automatically (in the attribute <code class="epub__literal">args</code>). In exception handlers, you list a
            variable to be assigned to the raised instance, then go through
            this name to access attached state information and call any
            methods defined in the class.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The error message text in class-based exceptions can be
            specified with a custom <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code>
            operator overloading method. For simpler needs, built-in exception
            superclasses automatically display anything you pass to the class
            constructor. Operations like <code class="epub__literal">print</code> and <code class="epub__literal">str</code> automatically fetch the display
            string of an exception object when is it printed either explicitly
            or as part of an error message.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Because Guido said so—they have been removed in both Python
            2.6 and 3.0. Really, there are good reasons for this: string-based
            exceptions did not support categories, state information, or
            behavior inheritance in the way class-based exceptions do. In
            practice, this made string-based exceptions easier to use at
            first, when programs were small, but more complex to use as
            programs grew larger.</p></li></ol>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[77] </sup>As a clever student of mine suggested, the library module
            could also provide a tuple object that contains all the exceptions
            the library can possibly raise—the client could then import the
            tuple and name it in an <code class="epub__literal">except</code>
            clause to catch all the library’s exceptions (recall that
            including a tuple in an <code class="epub__literal">except</code>
            means catch <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>any</em></span> of its exceptions). When new
            exceptions are added later, the library can just expand the
            exported tuple. This would work, but you’d still need to keep the
            tuple up-to-date with raised exceptions inside the library module.
            Also, class hierarchies offer more benefits than just
            categories—they also support inherited state and methods and a
            customization model that individual exceptions do not.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[78] </sup>As suggested earlier, the raised instance object is also
              available generically as the second item in the result tuple of
              the <code class="epub__literal">sys.exc_info()</code> call—a
              tool that returns information about the most recently raised
              exception. This interface must be used if you do not list an
              exception name in an <code class="epub__literal">except</code>
              clause but still need access to the exception that occurred, or
              to any of its attached state information or methods. More on
              <code class="epub__literal">sys.exc_info</code> in the next
              chapter.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
