<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Exception Idioms</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="exception_idioms"></a>Exception Idioms</h1>
<p>We’ve <a id="ch35excptnstypusesfor"></a>seen the mechanics behind exceptions. Now let’s take a
        look at some of the other ways they are typically used.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Exceptions Aren’t Always Errors"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="exceptions_aren_apostrophy_t_always_err"></a>Exceptions Aren’t Always Errors</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In Python, all <a id="ch35excptnsnonerrexcpts"></a>errors are exceptions, but not all exceptions are
          errors. For instance, we saw in Chapter 9 that file
          object read methods return an empty string at the end of a file. In
          contrast, the built-in <code class="epub__literal">input</code>
          function (which we first met in Chapter 3 and deployed in an interactive
          loop in Chapter 10) reads a
          line of text from the standard input stream, <code class="epub__literal">sys.stdin</code>, at each call and raises the
          built-in <code class="epub__literal">EOFError</code> at end-of-file.
          (This function is known as <code class="epub__literal">raw_input</code> in Python 2.6.)</p>
<p>Unlike file methods, this function does not return an empty
          string—an empty string from <code class="epub__literal">input</code>
          means an empty line. Despite its name, the <code class="epub__literal">EOFError</code> exception is just a signal in
          this context, not an error. Because of this behavior, unless the
          end-of-file should terminate a script, <code class="epub__literal">input</code> often appears wrapped in a <code class="epub__literal">try</code> handler and nested in a loop, as in
          the following code:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e86613"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">while True:
    try:
        line = input()           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Read line from stdin</span></em>
    except EOFError:
        break                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Exit loop at end-of-file</span></em>
    else:
        ...<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>process next line here</code></em>...</pre>
<p>Several other built-in exceptions are similarly signals, not
          errors—calling <code class="epub__literal">sys.exit()</code> and
          pressing Ctrl-C on your keyboard, respectively, raise <code class="epub__literal">SystemExit</code> and <code class="epub__literal">Keyboard</code><code class="epub__literal">Interrupt</code>, for example. Python
          also has a set of built-in exceptions that represent
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>warnings</em></span> rather than errors; some of these are
          used to signal use of deprecated (phased out) language features. See
          the standard library manual’s description of built-in exceptions for
          more information, and consult the <code class="epub__literal">warnings</code> module’s documentation for more
          on warnings.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Functions Can Signal Conditions with raise"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="functions_can_signal_conditions_with_ra"></a>Functions Can Signal Conditions with raise</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>User-defined <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e86649"></a>exceptions <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e86657"></a>can also signal nonerror conditions. For instance, a
          search routine can be coded to raise an exception when a match is
          found instead of returning a status flag for the caller to
          interpret. In the following, the <code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">except</code>/<code class="epub__literal">else</code> exception handler does the work of an
          <code class="epub__literal">if</code>/<code class="epub__literal">else</code> return-value tester:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e86679"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Found(Exception): pass

def searcher():
    if ...<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>success</code></em>...:
        raise Found()
    else:
        return

try:
    searcher()
except Found:                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Exception if item was found</span></em>
    ...<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>success</code></em>...
else:                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># else returned: not found</span></em>
    ...<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>failure</code></em>...</pre>
<p>More generally, such a coding structure may also be useful for
          any function that cannot return a sentinel value to designate
          success or failure. For instance, if all objects are potentially
          valid return values, it’s impossible for any return value to signal
          unusual conditions. Exceptions provide a way to signal results
          without a return value:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e86698"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Failure(Exception): pass

def searcher():
    if ...<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>success</code></em>...:
        return ...<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>founditem</code></em>...
    else:
        raise Failure()

try:
    item = searcher()
except Failure:
    ...<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>report</code></em>...
else:
    ...<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>use item here</code></em>...</pre>
<p>Because Python is dynamically typed and polymorphic to the
          core, exceptions, rather than sentinel return values, are the
          generally preferred way to signal such conditions<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e86714"></a>.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Closing Files and Server Connections"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="closing_files_and_server_connections"></a>Closing Files and Server Connections</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>We <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e86722"></a>encountered examples in this category in Chapter 33. As a summary, though,
          exception processing tools are also commonly used to ensure that
          system resources are finalized, regardless of whether an error
          occurs during processing or not.</p>
<p>For example, some servers require connections to be closed in
          order to terminate a session. Similarly, output files may require
          close calls to flush their buffers to disk, and input files may
          consume file descriptors if not closed; although file objects are
          automatically closed when garbage collected if still open, it’s
          sometimes difficult to be sure when that will occur.</p>
<p>The most general and explicit way to guarantee termination
          actions for a specific block of code is the <code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">finally</code> statement:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e86740"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">myfile = open(r'C:\misc\script', 'w')
try:
    <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...process myfile...</code></em>
finally:
    myfile.close()</pre>
<p>As we saw in Chapter 33, some
          objects make this easier in Python 2.6 and 3.0 by providing
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>context managers</em></span> run by the <code class="epub__literal">with</code>/<code class="epub__literal">as</code>
          statement that terminate or close the objects for us
          automatically:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e86758"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">with open(r'C:\misc\script', 'w') as myfile:
    <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...process myfile...</code></em></pre>
<p>So which option is better here? As usual, it depends on your
          programs. Compared to the<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e86764"></a> <code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">finally</code>, <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e86776"></a>context managers are <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>more
          implicit</em></span>, which runs contrary to Python’s general design
          philosophy. Context managers are also arguably <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>less
          general</em></span>—they are available only for select objects, and
          writing user-defined context managers to handle general termination
          requirements is more complex than coding a <code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">finally</code>.</p>
<p>On the other hand, using existing context managers requires
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>less code</em></span> than using <code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">finally</code>, as shown by the preceding
          examples. Moreover, the context manager protocol supports
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>entry</em></span> actions in addition to exit actions.
          Although the <code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">finally</code> is perhaps the more widely
          applicable technique, context managers may be more appropriate where
          they are already available, or where their extra complexity is
          warranted.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Debugging with Outer try Statements"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="debugging_with_outer_try_statements"></a>Debugging with Outer try Statements</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>You <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e86821"></a>can <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e86827"></a>also make use of exception handlers to replace
          Python’s default top-level exception-handling behavior. By
          wrapping an entire program (or a call to it) in an outer <code class="epub__literal">try</code> in your top-level code, you can catch
          any exception that may occur while your program runs, thereby
          subverting the default program termination.</p>
<p>In the following, the empty <code class="epub__literal">except</code> clause catches any uncaught
          exception raised while the program runs. To get hold of the actual
          exception that occurred, fetch the <code class="epub__literal">sys.exc_info</code> function call result from the
          built-in <code class="epub__literal">sys</code> module; it returns a
          tuple whose first two items contain the current exception’s class
          and the instance object raised (more on <code class="epub__literal">sys.exc_info</code> in a moment):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e86854"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">try:
    ...<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>run program</code></em>...
except:                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># All uncaught exceptions come here</span></em>
    import sys
    print('uncaught!', sys.exc_info()[0], sys.exc_info()[1])</pre>
<p>This structure is commonly used during development, to keep
          programs active even after errors occur—it allows you to run
          additional tests without having to restart. It’s also used when
          testing other program code, as described in the next section.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Running In-Process Tests"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="running_in-process_tests"></a>Running In-Process Tests</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>You <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e86869"></a>might combine some of the coding patterns we’ve just
          looked at in a test-driver application that tests other code within
          the same process:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e86875"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import sys
log = open('testlog', 'a')
from testapi import moreTests, runNextTest, testName
def testdriver():
    while moreTests():
        try:
            runNextTest()
        except:
            print('FAILED', testName(), sys.exc_info()[:2], file=log)
        else:
            print('PASSED', testName(), file=log)
testdriver()</pre>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e86879"></a><code class="epub__literal">testdriver</code> function
          here cycles through a series of test calls (the module <code class="epub__literal">testapi</code> is left abstract in this example).
          Because an uncaught exception in a test case would normally kill
          this test driver, you need to wrap test case calls in a <code class="epub__literal">try</code> if you want to continue the testing
          process after a test fails. The empty <code class="epub__literal">except</code> catches any uncaught exception
          generated by a test case as usual, and it uses <code class="epub__literal"><a id="ch35sysexcinfo"></a>sys.exc_info</code> to log the exception to a file.
          The <code class="epub__literal">else</code> clause is run when no
          exception occurs—the test success case.</p>
<p>Such boilerplate code is typical of systems that test
          functions, modules, and classes by running them in the same process
          as the test driver. In practice, however, testing can be much more
          sophisticated than this. For instance, to test external programs,
          you could instead check status codes or outputs generated by
          program-launching tools such as <code class="epub__literal">os.system</code> and <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code>, covered in the standard library
          manual (such tools do not generally raise exceptions for errors in
          the external programs—in fact, the test cases may run in parallel
          with the test driver).</p>
<p>At the end of this chapter, we’ll also meet some more complete
          testing frameworks provided by Python, such as <code class="epub__literal">doctest</code> and PyUnit, which provide tools
          for comparing expected outputs with actual results.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="More on sys.exc_info"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="more_on_sys.exc_underscore_info"></a>More on sys.exc_info</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">sys.exc_info</code> result
          used in the last two sections allows an exception handler to gain
          access to the most recently raised exception generically. This is
          especially useful when using the empty <code class="epub__literal">except</code> clause to catch everything blindly,
          to determine what was raised:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e86928"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">try:
    ...
except:
    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># sys.exc_info()[0:2] are the exception class and instance</span></em></pre>
<p>If no exception is being handled, this call it returns a tuple
          containing three <code class="epub__literal">None</code> values.
          Otherwise, the values returned are <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e89025"></a><code class="epub__literal">(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>type</code></em><code class="epub__literal">,</code> <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>value</code></em><code class="epub__literal">,</code>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>traceback</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code>, where:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>type</code></em> is the exception class of
              the exception being handled.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>value</code></em> is the exception class
              instance that was raised.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>traceback</code></em> is a traceback object
              that represents the call stack at the point where the exception
              originally occurred (see the <code class="epub__literal">traceback</code> module’s documentation for
              tools that may be used in conjunction with this object to
              generate error messages manually).</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>As we saw in the prior chapter, <code class="epub__literal">sys.exc_info</code> can also sometimes be useful
          to determine the specific exception type when catching exception
          category superclasses. As we saw, though, because in this case you
          can also get the exception type by fetching the <code class="epub__literal">__class__</code> attribute of the instance
          obtained with the <code class="epub__literal">as</code> clause,
          <code class="epub__literal">sys.exc_info</code> is mostly used by
          the empty <code class="epub__literal">except</code> today:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e86994"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">try:
    ...
except General as instance:
    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># instance.__class__ is the exception class</span></em></pre>
<p>That said, using the instance object’s interfaces and
          polymorphism is often a better approach than testing exception
          types—exception methods can be defined per class and run
          generically:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e87000"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">try:
    ...
except General as instance:
    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># instance.method() does the right thing for this instance</span></em></pre>
<p>As usual, being too specific in Python can limit your code’s
          flexibility. A polymorphic approach like the last example here
          generally supports future evolution better.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Version skew note</em></span>: In Python 2.6, the
            older tools <code class="epub__literal">sys.exc_type</code> and
            <code class="epub__literal">sys.exc_value</code> still work to
            fetch the most recent exception type and value, but they can
            manage only a single, global exception for the entire process.
            These two names have been removed in Python 3.0. The newer and
            preferred <code class="epub__literal">sys.exc_info()</code> call
            available in both 2.6 and 3.0 instead keeps track of each thread’s
            exception information, and so is thread-specific. Of course, this
            distinction matters only when using multiple threads in Python
            programs (a subject beyond this book’s scope), but 3.0 forces the
            issue. See other resources for more <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87020"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87022"></a>details.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Exception Design Tips and Gotchas"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
