<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Exception Design Tips and Gotchas</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="exception_design_tips_and_gotchas"></a>Exception Design Tips and Gotchas</h1>
<p>I’m <a id="ch35excptndsgntipsgotchas"></a>lumping design tips and gotchas together in this
        chapter, because it turns out that the most common gotchas largely
        stem from design issues. By and large, exceptions are easy to use in
        Python. The real art behind them is in deciding how specific or
        general your <code class="epub__literal">except</code> clauses should
        be and how much code to wrap up in <code class="epub__literal">try</code><a name="second of"></a> statements. Let’s address the second of
        these concerns first.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="What Should Be Wrapped"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="what_should_be_wrapped"></a>What Should Be Wrapped</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In principle, <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87047"></a>you could wrap every <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87055"></a>statement in your script in its own <code class="epub__literal">try</code>, but that would just be silly (the
          <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statements would then need to
          be wrapped in <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statements!).
          What to wrap is really a design issue that goes beyond the language
          itself, and it will become more apparent with use. But for now, here
          are a few rules of thumb:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Operations that commonly fail should generally be wrapped
              in <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statements. For
              example, operations that interface with system state (file
              opens, socket calls, and the like) are prime candidates for
              <code class="epub__literal">try</code>s.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>However, there are exceptions to the prior rule—in a
              simple script, you may <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>want</em></span> failures of
              such operations to kill your program instead of being caught and
              ignored. This is especially true if the failure is a
              showstopper. Failures in Python typically result in useful error
              messages (not hard crashes), and this is often the best outcome
              you could hope for.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>You should implement termination actions in <code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">finally</code> statements to guarantee their
              execution, unless a context manager is available as a <code class="epub__literal">with</code>/<code class="epub__literal">as</code> option. The <code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">finally</code> statement form allows you to
              run code whether exceptions occur or not in arbitrary
              scenarios.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>It is sometimes more convenient to wrap the call to a
              large function in a single <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement, rather than littering
              the function itself with many <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statements. That way, all
              exceptions in the function percolate up to the <code class="epub__literal">try</code> around the call, and you reduce
              the amount of code within the function.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>The types of programs you write will probably influence the
          amount of exception handling you code as well. Servers, for
          instance, must generally keep running persistently and so will
          likely require <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statements to
          catch and recover from exceptions. In-process testing programs of
          the kind we saw in this chapter will probably handle exceptions as
          well. Simpler one-shot scripts, though, will often ignore exception
          handling completely because failure at any step requires script
          shutdown.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Catching Too Much: Avoid Empty except and Exception"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="catching_too_much_colon_avoid_empty_exc"></a>Catching Too Much: Avoid Empty except and Exception</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>On to <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87128"></a>the issue of handler generality. Python lets you pick
          and choose which exceptions to catch, but you sometimes have to be
          careful to not be too inclusive. For example, you’ve seen that an
          empty <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87137"></a>except</code> clause catches
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>every</em></span> exception that might be raised while the
          code in the <code class="epub__literal">try</code> block
          runs.</p>
<p>That’s easy to code, and sometimes desirable, but you may also
          wind up intercepting an error that’s expected by a <code class="epub__literal">try</code> handler higher up in the exception
          nesting structure. For example, an exception handler such as the
          following catches and stops every exception that reaches it,
          regardless of whether another handler is waiting for it:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e87155"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def func():
    try:
        ...                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># IndexError is raised in here</span></em>
    except:
        ...                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># But everything comes here and dies!</span></em>
try:
    func()
except IndexError:               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Exception should be processed here</span></em>
    ...</pre>
<p>Perhaps worse, such code might also catch unrelated system
          exceptions. Even things like memory errors, genuine programming
          mistakes, iteration stops, keyboard interrupts, and system exits
          raise exceptions in Python. Such exceptions should not usually be
          intercepted.</p>
<p>For example, scripts normally exit when control falls off the
          end of the top-level file. However, Python also provides a built-in
          <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87171"></a>sys.exit(statuscode)</code> call to allow early
          terminations. This actually works by raising a built-in <code class="epub__literal">SystemExit</code> exception to end the program,
          so that <code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">finally</code> handlers run on the way out and
          special types of programs can intercept the event.<sup>[79]</sup> Because of this, a <code class="epub__literal">try</code> with an empty <code class="epub__literal">except</code> might unknowingly prevent a crucial
          exit, as in the following file (<em class="epub__filename">exiter.py</em>):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e87214"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import sys
def bye():
    sys.exit(40)                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Crucial error: abort now!</span></em>
try:
    bye()
except:
    print('got it')              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Oops--we ignored the exit</span></em>
print('continuing...')

% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python exiter.py</code></strong>
got it
continuing...</pre>
<p>You simply might not expect all the kinds of exceptions that
          could occur during an operation. Using the built-in exception
          classes of the prior chapter can help in this particular case,
          because the <code class="epub__literal">Exception</code> superclass
          is not a superclass of <code class="epub__literal">SystemExit</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e87233"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">try:
    bye()
except Exception:                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Won't catch exits, but _will_ catch many others</span></em>
    ...</pre>
<p>In other cases, though, this scheme is no better than an empty
          <code class="epub__literal">except</code> clause—because <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87243"></a><code class="epub__literal">Exception</code> is a
          superclass above all built-in exceptions except system-exit events,
          it still has the potential to catch exceptions meant for elsewhere
          in the program.</p>
<p>Probably worst of all, both an empty <code class="epub__literal">except</code> and catching the <code class="epub__literal">Exception</code> class will also catch genuine
          programming errors, which should be allowed to pass most of the
          time. In fact, these two techniques can effectively <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>turn
          off</em></span> Python’s error-reporting machinery, making it difficult to notice
          mistakes in your code. Consider this code, for example:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e87266"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">mydictionary = {...}
...
try:
    x = myditctionary['spam']    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Oops: misspelled</span></em>
except:
    x = None                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Assume we got KeyError</span></em>
...<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>continue here with x</code></em>...</pre>
<p>The coder here assumes that the only sort of error that can
          happen when indexing a dictionary is a missing key error. But
          because the name <code class="epub__literal">myditctionary</code> is
          misspelled (it should say <code class="epub__literal">mydictionary</code>), Python raises a <code class="epub__literal">NameError</code> instead for the undefined name
          reference, which the handler will silently catch and ignore. The
          event handler will incorrectly fill in a default for the dictionary
          access, masking the program error. Moreover, catching <code class="epub__literal">Exception</code> here would have the exact same
          effect as an empty <code class="epub__literal">except</code>. If
          this happens in code that is far removed from the place where the
          fetched values are used, it might make for a very interesting
          debugging task!</p>
<p>As a rule of thumb, be as specific in your handlers as you can
          be—empty <code class="epub__literal">except</code> clauses and
          <code class="epub__literal">Exception</code> catchers are handy, but
          potentially error-prone. In the last example, for instance, you
          would be better off saying <code class="epub__literal">except
          KeyError:</code> to make your intentions explicit and avoid
          intercepting unrelated events. In simpler scripts, the potential for
          problems might not be significant enough to outweigh the convenience
          of a catchall, but in general, general handlers are generally
          trouble.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Catching Too Little: Use Class-Based Categories"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="catching_too_little_colon_use_class-bas"></a>Catching Too Little: Use Class-Based Categories</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>On <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87310"></a>the other hand, neither should handlers be too
          specific. When you list specific exceptions in a <code class="epub__literal">try</code>, you catch only what you actually
          list. This isn’t necessarily a bad thing, but if a system evolves to
          raise other exceptions in the future, you may need to go back and
          add them to exception lists elsewhere in your code.</p>
<p>We saw this phenomenon at work in the prior chapter. For
          instance, the following handler is written to treat <code class="epub__literal">MyExcept1</code> and <code class="epub__literal">MyExcept2</code> as normal cases and everything
          else as an error. Therefore, if you add a <code class="epub__literal">MyExcept3</code> in the future, it will be
          processed as an error unless you update the exception list:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e87332"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">try:
    ...
except (MyExcept1, MyExcept2):   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Breaks if you add a MyExcept3</span></em>
    ...                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Non-errors</span></em>
else:
    ...                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Assumed to be an error</span></em></pre>
<p>Luckily, careful use of the class-based exceptions we
          discussed in Chapter 33 can make
          this trap go away completely. As we saw, if you catch a general
          superclass, you can add and raise more specific subclasses in the
          future without having to extend <code class="epub__literal">except</code> clause lists manually—the
          superclass becomes an extendible exceptions category:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e87349"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">try:
    ...
except SuccessCategoryName:      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># OK if I add a myerror3 subclass</span></em>
    ...                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Non-errors</span></em>
else:
    ...                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Assumed to be an error</span></em></pre>
<p>In other words, a little design goes a long way. The moral of
          the story is to be careful to be neither too general nor too
          specific in exception handlers, and to pick the granularity of your
          <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statement wrappings wisely.
          Especially in larger systems, exception policies should be a part of
          the overall <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87364"></a>design.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Core Language Summary"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
