<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Core Language Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="core_language_summary"></a>Core Language Summary</h1>
<p>Congratulations! This concludes your look at the core Python
        programming language. If you’ve gotten this far, you may consider
        yourself an Official Python Programmer (and should feel free to add
        Python to your résumé the next time you dig it out). You’ve already
        seen just about everything there is to see in the language itself, and
        all in much more depth than many practicing Python programmers
        initially do. You’ve studied built-in types, statements, and
        exceptions, as well as tools used to build up larger program units
        (functions, modules, and classes); you’ve even explored important
        design issues, OOP, program architecture, and more.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The Python Toolset"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_python_toolset"></a>The Python Toolset</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>From this <a id="ch35dvlpmnttools"></a>point forward, your future <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87381"></a>Python career will largely consist of becoming
          proficient with the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>toolset</em></span> available for
          application-level Python programming. You’ll find this to be an
          ongoing task. The standard library, for example, contains hundreds
          of modules, and the public domain offers still more tools. It’s
          possible to spend a decade or more seeking proficiency with all
          these tools, especially as new ones are constantly appearing (trust
          me on this!).</p>
<p>Speaking generally, <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87392"></a>Python provides a hierarchy of toolsets:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Built-ins</span></dt><dd>
<p>Built-in types like strings, lists, and dictionaries
                make it easy to write simple programs fast.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Python extensions</span></dt><dd>
<p>For more demanding tasks, you can extend Python by
                writing your own functions, modules, and classes.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Compiled extensions</span></dt><dd>
<p>Although we don’t cover this topic in this book, Python
                can also be extended with modules written in an external
                language like C or C++.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Because Python layers its toolsets, you can decide how deeply
          your programs need to delve into this hierarchy for any given
          task—you can use built-ins for simple scripts, add Python-coded
          extensions for larger systems, and code compiled extensions for
          advanced work. We’ve only covered the first two of these categories
          in this book, and that’s plenty to get you started doing substantial
          programming in Python.</p>
<p>Table 35-1
          summarizes some of the sources of built-in or existing functionality
          available to Python programmers, and some topics you’ll probably be
          busy exploring for the remainder of your Python career. Up until
          now, most of our examples have been very small and self-contained.
          They were written that way on purpose, to help you master the
          basics. But now that you know all about the core language, it’s time
          to start learning how to use Python’s built-in interfaces to do real
          work. You’ll find that with a simple language like Python, common
          tasks are often much easier than you might expect.</p><div class="epub__table"><a id="python_apostrophy_s_toolbox_categories"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Table 35-1. Python’s toolbox categories</p><div class="epub__table-contents">
<table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; " summary="Python’s toolbox categories">
<colgroup><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Category</p></th><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Examples</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Object
                  types</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Lists, dictionaries,
                  files, strings</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Functions</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">len</code>, <code class="epub__literal">range</code>, <code class="epub__literal">open</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Exceptions</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">IndexError</code>, <code class="epub__literal">KeyError</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Modules</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">os</code>, <code class="epub__literal">tkinter</code>, <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code>, <code class="epub__literal">re</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Attributes</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">__dict__</code>, <code class="epub__literal">__name__</code>, <code class="epub__literal">__class__</code></p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Peripheral
                  tools</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>NumPy, SWIG, Jython,
                  IronPython, Django, etc.</p></td></tr></tbody>
</table>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Development Tools for Larger Projects"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="development_tools_for_larger_projects"></a>Development Tools for Larger Projects</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Once you’ve mastered the basics, you’ll find your Python
          programs becoming substantially larger than the examples you’ve
          experimented with so far. For developing larger systems, a set of
          development tools is available in Python and the public domain.
          You’ve seen some of these in action, and I’ve mentioned a few
          others. To help you on your way, here is a summary of some of the
          most commonly used tools in this domain:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">PyDoc and docstrings</span></dt><dd>
<p>PyDoc’s <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87520"></a>help</code> function and HTML interfaces were
                introduced in Chapter 15.
                <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87527"></a>PyDoc provides a documentation system for your
                modules and objects and integrates with Python’s <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87531"></a>docstrings feature. It is a standard part of the
                Python system—see the library manual for more details. Be sure
                to also refer back to the documentation source hints listed in
                Chapter 4 for
                information on other Python information resources.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">PyChecker and PyLint</span></dt><dd>
<p>Because <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87547"></a>Python is such a dynamic language, some
                programming errors are not reported until your program runs
                (e.g., syntax errors are caught when a file is run or
                imported). This isn’t a big drawback—as with most languages,
                it just means that you have to test your Python code before
                shipping it. At worst, with Python you essentially trade a
                compile phase for an initial testing phase. Furthermore,
                Python’s dynamic nature, automatic error messages, and
                exception model make it easier and quicker to find and fix
                errors in Python than it is in some other languages (unlike C,
                for example, Python does not crash on errors).</p>
<p>The PyChecker and PyLint systems provide support for
                catching a large set of common errors ahead of time, before
                your script runs. They serve similar roles to the
                <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>lint</em></span> program in C development. Some
                Python groups run their code through PyChecker prior to
                testing or delivery, to catch any lurking potential problems.
                In fact, the Python standard library is regularly run through
                PyChecker before release. PyChecker and PyLint are third-party
                open source packages; you can find them at http://www.python.org or the PyPI website, or
                via your friendly neighborhood web search engine.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">PyUnit (a.k.a. <code class="epub__literal">unittest</code>)</span></dt><dd>
<p>In Chapter 24, we
                <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87569"></a>learned how to add self-test code to a Python
                file by using the <code class="epub__literal">__name__ ==
                '__main__'</code> trick at the bottom of the file. For more
                advanced testing purposes, Python comes with two testing
                support tools. The first, PyUnit (called <code class="epub__literal">unittest</code> in the library manual),
                provides an object-oriented class framework for specifying and
                customizing test cases and expected results. It mimics the
                JUnit framework for Java. This is a sophisticated class-based
                unit testing system; see the Python library manual for
                details.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">doctest</code></span>
</dt><dd>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">doctest</code>
<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87589"></a>standard library module provides a second and
                simpler approach to regression testing, based upon Python’s
                docstrings feature. Roughly, to use <code class="epub__literal">doc</code><code class="epub__literal">test</code>, you cut and paste a
                log of an interactive testing session into the docstrings of
                your source files. <code class="epub__literal">doctest</code>
                then extracts your docstrings, parses out the test cases and
                results, and reruns the tests to verify the expected results.
                <code class="epub__literal">doctest</code>’s operation can be
                tailored in a variety of ways; see the library manual for more
                details.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">IDEs</span></dt><dd>
<p>We discussed <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87611"></a>IDEs for Python in Chapter 3. IDEs such as IDLE provide a
                graphical environment for editing, running, debugging, and
                browsing your Python programs. Some advanced IDEs
                (such as Eclipse, Komodo, NetBeans, and Wing IDE) may support
                additional development tasks, including source control
                integration, code refactoring, project management tools, and
                more. See Chapter 3, the text
                editors page at http://www.python.org,
                and your favorite web search engine for more on available IDEs
                and GUI builders for Python.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Profilers</span></dt><dd>
<p>Because <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87630"></a>Python is so high-level and dynamic, intuitions
                about performance gleaned from experience with other languages
                usually don’t apply to Python code. To truly isolate
                performance bottlenecks in your code, you need to add timing
                logic with clock tools in the <code class="epub__literal">time</code> or <code class="epub__literal">timeit</code> modules, or run your code
                under the <code class="epub__literal">profile</code> module. We saw an
                example of the timing modules at work when comparing iteration
                tools’ speeds in Chapter 20. Profiling
                is usually your first optimization step—profile to isolate
                bottlenecks, then time alternative codings of them<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87647"></a>.</p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">profile</code> is a standard
                library module that implements a source code profiler for
                Python; it runs a string of code you provide (e.g., a script
                file import, or a call to a function) and then, by default,
                prints a report to the standard output stream that gives
                performance statistics—number of calls to each function, time
                spent in each function, and more.</p>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">profile</code> module
                can be run as a script or imported, and it may be customized
                in various ways; for example, it can save run statistics to a
                file to be analyzed later with the <code class="epub__literal">pstats</code> module. To profile
                interactively, import the <code class="epub__literal">profile</code> module and call <code class="epub__literal">profile.run('code')</code>, passing in the
                code you wish to profile as a string (e.g., a call to a
                function, or an import of an entire file). To profile from a
                system shell command line, use a command of the form <code class="epub__literal">python -m profile main.py args...</code>
                (see Appendix A for
                more on this format). Also see Python’s standard library
                manuals for other profiling options; the <code class="epub__literal">cProfile</code> module, for example, has
                identical interfaces to <code class="epub__literal">profile</code> but runs with less overhead,
                so it may be better suited to profiling long-running
                programs.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Debuggers</span></dt><dd>
<p>We also discussed <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87687"></a>debugging options in Chapter 3 (see its sidebar Debugging Python Code). As a review, most
                development IDEs for Python support GUI-based debugging, and
                the Python standard library also includes a source code
                debugger module called <code class="epub__literal">pdb</code>.
                This module provides a command-line interface and works much
                like common C language debuggers (e.g.,
                <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>dbx</em></span>, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>gdb</em></span>).</p>
<p>Much like the profiler, the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87708"></a>pdb</em></span> debugger can be run either
                interactively or from a command line and can be imported and
                called from a Python program. To use it interactively, import
                the module, start running code by calling a <code class="epub__literal">pdb</code> function (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">pdb.run("main()")</code>), and then type
                debugging commands from <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>pdb</em></span>’s interactive
                prompt. To launch <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>pdb</em></span> from a system shell
                command line, use a command of the form <code class="epub__literal">python -m pdb main.py args...</code> (see
                Appendix A for more on
                this format). <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>pdb</em></span> also includes a useful
                postmortem analysis call, <code class="epub__literal">pdb.pm()</code>, which starts the debugger
                after an exception has been encountered.</p>
<p>Because IDEs such as IDLE also include point-and-click
                debugging interfaces, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>pdb</em></span> isn’t a
                critical a tool today, except when a GUI isn’t available or
                when more control is desired. See Chapter 3 for tips on using IDLE’s
                debugging GUI interfaces. Really, neither
                <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>pdb</em></span> nor IDEs seem to be used much in
                practice—as noted in Chapter 3,
                most programmers either insert <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statements or simply read
                Python’s error messages (not the most high-tech of approaches,
                but the practical tends to win the day in the Python
                world!).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Shipping options</span></dt><dd>
<p>In Chapter 2, we
                introduced common tools for packaging Python programs.
                <em class="epub__filename">py2exe</em>, <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87763"></a><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>PyInstaller</em></span>, and
                <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>freeze</em></span> can package byte code and the
                Python Virtual Machine into “<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87772"></a>frozen binary” standalone executables, which
                don’t require that Python be <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87777"></a>installed on the target machine and fully hide
                your system’s code. In addition, we learned in Chapter 2 that Python programs may
                be shipped in their source (<em class="epub__filename">.py</em>) or byte code (<em class="epub__filename">.pyc</em>) forms, and that import hooks
                support special packaging techniques such as automatic
                extraction of <em class="epub__filename">.zip</em> files
                and byte code encryption<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87792"></a>.</p>
<p>We also briefly met the standard library’s <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87799"></a>distutils</code> modules, which provide
                packaging options for Python modules and packages, and C-coded
                extensions; see the Python manuals for more details. The
                emerging Python <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e89923"></a>“eggs” third-party packaging system provides
                another alternative that also accounts for dependencies;
                search the Web for more details.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Optimization options</span></dt><dd>
<p>There are a couple of options for <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87810"></a>optimizing your programs. The <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87814"></a>Psyco system described in Chapter 2 provides a just-in-time
                compiler for translating Python byte code to binary machine
                code, and <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87820"></a>Shedskin offers a Python-to-C++ translator. You
                may also occasionally see <em class="epub__filename">.pyo</em> optimized byte code files,
                generated and run with the <code class="epub__literal">-O</code> Python command-line flag
                (discussed in Chapters 21 and 33); because this provides a
                very modest performance boost, however, it is not commonly
                used.</p>
<p>As a last resort, you can also move parts of your
                program to a compiled language such as C to boost performance;
                see the book <em class="epub__citetitle">Programming
                Python</em> and the Python standard manuals for
                more on C extensions. In general, Python’s speed also improves
                over time, so be sure to upgrade to the faster releases when
                possible.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Other hints for larger projects</span></dt><dd>
<p>We’ve met a variety of language features in this text
                that will tend to become more useful once you start coding
                larger projects. These include module packages (Chapter 23), class-based exceptions (Chapter 33), class pseudoprivate
                attributes (Chapter 30),
                documentation strings (Chapter 15), module path
                configuration files (Chapter 21), hiding names from
                <code class="epub__literal">from *</code> with <code class="epub__literal">__all__</code> lists and <code class="epub__literal">_X</code>-style names (Chapter 24), adding self-test code
                with the <code class="epub__literal">__name__ ==
                '__main__'</code> trick (Chapter 24), using common design
                rules for functions and modules (Chapters 17, 19, and 24), using object-oriented
                design patterns (Chapter 30 and
                others), and so on.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>To learn about other large-scale Python development tools
          available in the public domain, be sure to browse the pages at the
          PyPI website at http://www.python.org, and the
          Web at <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87888"></a>large.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Chapter Summary"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
