<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="chapter_summary-id34"></a>Chapter Summary</h1>
<p>This chapter wrapped up the exceptions part of the book with a
        survey of related statements, a look at common exception use cases,
        and a brief summary of commonly used development tools.</p>
<p>This chapter also wrapped up the core material of this book. At
        this point, you’ve been exposed to the full subset of Python that most
        programmers use. In fact, if you have read this far, you should feel
        free to consider yourself an <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>official Python
        programmer</em></span>. Be sure to pick up a t-shirt the next time
        you’re online.</p>
<p>The next and final part of this book is a collection of chapters
        dealing with topics that are advanced, but still in the core language
        category. These chapters are all <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>optional
        reading</em></span>, because not every Python programmer must delve
        into their subjects; indeed, most of you can stop here and begin
        exploring Python’s roles in your application domains. Frankly,
        application libraries tend to be more important in practice than
        advanced (and to some, esoteric) language features.</p>
<p>On the other hand, if you do need to care about things like
        Unicode or binary data, have to deal with API-building tools such as
        descriptors, decorators, and metaclasses, or just want to dig a bit
        further in general, the next part of the book will help you get
        started. The larger examples in the final part will also give you a
        chance to see the concepts you’ve already learned being applied in
        more realistic ways.</p>
<p>As this is the end of the core material of this book, you get a
        break on the chapter quiz—just
        one question this time. As always, though, be sure to work through
        this part’s closing exercises to cement what you’ve learned in the
        past few chapters; because the next part is optional reading, this is
        the final end-of-part exercises session. If you want to see some
        examples of how what you’ve learned comes together in real scripts
        drawn from common applications, check out the “solution” to exercise 4
        in Appendix B.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Test Your Knowledge: Quiz"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
