<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Test Your Knowledge: Part VII Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_part_vii_exer"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Part VII Exercises</h1>
<p>As we’ve <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e87943"></a>reached the end of this part of the book, it’s time for
        a few exception exercises to give you a chance to practice the basics.
        Exceptions really are simple tools; if you get these, you’ve probably
        mastered exceptions.</p>
<p>See Part VII, Exceptions and Tools in
        Appendix B for the
        solutions.</p><div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">try</code><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>/</em></span>
<code class="epub__literal">except</code>. Write a function called <code class="epub__literal">oops</code> that explicitly raises an <code class="epub__literal">IndexError</code> exception when called. Then
            write another function that calls <code class="epub__literal">oops</code> inside a <code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">except</code> statement to catch the error.
            What happens if you change <code class="epub__literal">oops</code>
            to raise a <code class="epub__literal">Key</code><code class="epub__literal">Error</code> instead of an <code class="epub__literal">IndexError</code>? Where do the names <code class="epub__literal">KeyError</code> and <code class="epub__literal">IndexError</code> come from? (Hint: recall that
            all unqualified names come from one of four scopes.)</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Exception objects and lists</em></span>. Change the
            <code class="epub__literal">oops</code> function you just wrote to
            raise an exception you define yourself, called <code class="epub__literal">MyError</code>. Identify your exception with a
            class. Then, extend the <code class="epub__literal">try</code>
            statement in the catcher function to catch this exception and its
            instance in addition to <code class="epub__literal">IndexError</code>, and print the instance you
            catch.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Error handling</em></span>. Write a function called
            <code class="epub__literal">safe(func, *args)</code> that runs any
            function with any number of arguments by using the <code class="epub__literal">*name</code> arbitrary arguments call syntax,
            catches any exception raised while the function runs, and prints
            the exception using the <code class="epub__literal">exc_info</code> call in the <code class="epub__literal">sys</code> module. Then use your <code class="epub__literal">safe</code> function to run your <code class="epub__literal">oops</code> function from exercise 1 or 2. Put
            <code class="epub__literal">safe</code> in a module file called
            <em class="epub__filename">tools.py</em>, and pass it the
            <code class="epub__literal">oops</code> function interactively.
            What kind of error messages do you get? Finally, expand <code class="epub__literal">safe</code> to also print a Python stack trace
            when an error occurs by calling the built-in <code class="epub__literal">print_exc</code> function in the standard
            <code class="epub__literal">traceback</code> module (see the
            Python library reference manual for details).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Self-study examples</em></span>. At the end of
            Appendix B, I’ve
            included a handful of example scripts developed as group exercises
            in live Python classes for you to study and run on your own in
            conjunction with Python’s standard manual set. These are not
            described, and they use tools in the Python standard library that
            you’ll have to research on your own. Still, for many readers, it
            helps to see how the concepts we’ve discussed in this book come
            together in real programs. If these whet your appetite for more,
            you can find a wealth of larger and more realistic application-level Python program
            examples in follow-up books like <em class="epub__citetitle">Programming
            Python</em> and on the Web.</p></li></ol>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[79] </sup>A related call, <code class="epub__literal">os._exit</code>, also ends a program, but via
              an immediate termination—it skips cleanup actions and cannot be
              intercepted with <code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">except</code> or <code class="epub__literal">try</code>/<code class="epub__literal">finally</code> blocks. It is usually only
              used in spawned child processes, a topic beyond this book’s
              scope. See the library manual or follow-up texts for
              details.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
