<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 36. Unicode and Byte Strings</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 36. Unicode and Byte Strings"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h1 class="epub__title"><a id="unicode_and_byte_strings"></a>Chapter 36. Unicode and Byte Strings</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>strings</em></span> chapter in the core types part
      of this book (Chapter 7), I deliberately limited
      the scope to the subset of string topics that most Python programmers
      need to know about. Because the vast majority of programmers deal with
      simple forms of text like ASCII, they can happily work with Python’s
      basic <code class="epub__literal">str</code> string type and its
      associated operations and don’t need to come to grips with more advanced
      string concepts. In fact, such programmers can largely ignore the string
      changes in Python 3.0 and continue to use strings as they may have in
      the past.</p>
<p>On the other hand, some programmers deal with more specialized
      types of data: non-ASCII character sets, image file contents, and so on.
      For those programmers (and others who may join them some day), in this
      chapter we’re going to fill in the rest of the Python string story and
      look at some more advanced concepts in Python’s string model.</p>
<p>Specifically, we’ll explore the basics of <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e88097"></a>Python’s support for <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Unicode
      text</em></span>—wide-character
      strings used in internationalized applications—as well as
      <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>binary </em></span>
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>data</em></span>—strings that
      represent absolute byte values. As we’ll see, the advanced string
      representation story has diverged
      in recent versions of Python:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Python 3.0</em></span> provides an alternative string
          type for binary data and supports Unicode text in its normal string
          type (ASCII is treated as a simple type of Unicode).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e88128"></a>Python 2.6</em></span> provides an alternative string
          type for non-ASCII Unicode text and supports both simple text and
          binary data in its normal string type.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>In addition, because Python’s string model has a direct impact on
      how you process non-ASCII <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>files</em></span>, we’ll explore the
      fundamentals of that related topic here as well. Finally, we’ll take a
      brief look at some advanced string and binary
      <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>tools</em></span>, such as pattern matching, object pickling,
      binary data packing, and XML parsing, and the ways in which they are
      impacted by 3.0’s string changes.</p>
<p>This is officially an advanced topics chapter, because not all
      programmers will need to delve into the worlds of Unicode encodings or
      binary data. If you ever need to care about processing either of these,
      though, you’ll find that Python’s string models provide the support you
      need.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="String Changes in 3.0"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
