<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>String Changes in 3.0</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="string_changes_in_3.0"></a>String Changes in 3.0</h1>
<p>One <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e88150"></a>of the <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e88156"></a>most noticeable changes in 3.0 is the mutation of string
        object types. In a nutshell, 2.X’s <code class="epub__literal">str</code> and <code class="epub__literal">unicode</code> types have morphed into 3.0’s
        <code class="epub__literal">str</code> and <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> types, and a new mutable <code class="epub__literal">bytearray</code> type has been added. The <code class="epub__literal">bytearray</code> type is technically available in
        Python 2.6 too (though not earlier), but it’s a back-port from 3.0 and
        does not as clearly distinguish between text and binary content in
        2.6.</p>
<p>Especially if you process data that is either Unicode or binary
        in nature, these changes can have substantial impacts on your code. In
        fact, as a general rule of thumb, how much you need to care about this
        topic depends in large part upon which of the following categories you
        fall into:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>If you deal with non-ASCII <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e88187"></a><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Unicode text</em></span>—for instance, in
            the context of internationalized applications and the results of
            some XML parsers—you will find support for text encodings to be
            different in 3.0, but also probably more direct, accessible, and
            seamless than in 2.6.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>If you deal with <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>binary data</em></span>—for
            example, in the form of image or audio files or packed data
            processed with the <code class="epub__literal">struct</code>
            module—you will need to understand 3.0’s new <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e88205"></a>bytes</code> object and 3.0’s different and
            sharper distinction between text and binary data and files.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>If you fall into <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>neither</em></span> of the prior
            two categories, you can generally use strings in 3.0 much as you
            would in 2.6: with the general <code class="epub__literal">str</code> string type, text files, and all the
            familiar string operations we studied earlier. Your strings will
            be encoded and decoded using your platform’s default encoding
            (e.g., ASCII, or UTF-8 on Windows in the U.S.—<code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e88220"></a>sys.getdefaultencoding()</code> gives your
            default if you care to check), but you probably won’t
            notice.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>In other words, if your text is always ASCII, you can get by
        with normal string objects and text files and can avoid most of the
        following story. As we’ll see in a moment, ASCII is a simple kind of
        Unicode and a subset of other encodings, so string operations and
        files “just work” if your programs process ASCII text.</p>
<p>Even if you fall into the last of the three categories just
        mentioned, though, a basic understanding of 3.0’s string model can
        help both to demystify some of the underlying behavior now, and to
        make mastering Unicode or binary data issues easier if they impact you
        in the future. Though applications are beyond our scope here,
        especially if you work with the Internet, files, directories, network
        interfaces, databases, pipes, and even GUIs, Unicode may no longer be
        an optional topic for you in Python 3.X.</p>
<p>Python 3.0’s support for Unicode and binary data is also
        available in 2.6, albeit in different forms. Although our main focus
        in this chapter is on string types in 3.0, we’ll explore some 2.6
        differences along the way too. Regardless of which version you use,
        the tools we’ll explore here can become important in many types of
        programs.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="String Basics"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
