<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>String Basics</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="string_basics"></a>String Basics</h1>
<p>Before <a id="ch36Pythstrngmodel"></a>we look at any code, let’s begin with a general overview
        of Python’s <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e88242"></a>string model. To understand why 3.0 changed the way it
        did on this front, we have to start with a brief look at how
        characters are actually represented in computers.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Character Encoding Schemes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="character_encoding_schemes"></a>Character Encoding Schemes</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Most <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e88251"></a>programmers <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e88257"></a>think of strings as series of characters used to
          represent textual data. The way characters are stored in a
          computer’s memory can vary, though, depending on what sort of
          character set must be recorded.</p>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e88263"></a><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>ASCII</em></span> standard was created in the
          U.S., and it defines many U.S. programmers’ notion of text strings.
          ASCII defines character codes from 0 through 127 and allows each
          character to be stored in one 8-bit byte (only 7 bits of which are
          actually used). For example, the ASCII standard maps the character
          <code class="epub__literal">'a'</code> to the integer value <code class="epub__literal">97</code> (0x61 in hex), which is stored in a
          single byte in memory and files. If you wish to see how this works,
          Python’s <code class="epub__literal">ord</code> built-in function
          gives the binary value for a character, and <code class="epub__literal">chr</code> returns the character for a given
          integer code value:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e88281"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>ord('a')</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 'a' is a byte with binary value 97 in ASCII</span></em>
97
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>hex(97)</code></strong>
'0x61'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>chr(97)</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Binary value 97 stands for character 'a'</span></em>
'a'</pre>
<p>Sometimes one byte per character isn’t enough, though. Various
          symbols and accented characters, for instance, do not fit into the
          range of possible characters defined by ASCII. To accommodate
          <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e88300"></a>special characters, some standards allow all possible
          values in an 8-bit byte, 0 through 255, to represent characters, and
          assign the values 128 through 255 (outside ASCII’s range) to special
          characters. One such standard, known as <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e88305"></a>Latin-1</em></span>, is widely used in Western Europe.
          In Latin-1, character codes above 127 are assigned to accented and
          otherwise special characters. The character assigned to byte value
          196, for example, is a specially marked non-ASCII character:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e88310"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>0xC4</code></strong>
196
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>chr(196)</code></strong>
'Ä'</pre>
<p>This standard allows for a wide array of extra special
          characters. Still, some alphabets define so many characters that it
          is impossible to represent each of them as one byte.
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Unicode</em></span> allows more flexibility. Unicode text
          is commonly referred to as “wide-character” strings, because each
          character may be represented with multiple bytes. Unicode is
          typically used in <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>internationalized</em></span> programs,
          to represent European and Asian character sets that have more
          characters than 8-bit bytes can represent<a id="I_indexterm1_d1e88329"></a>.</p>
<p>To store such rich text in computer memory, we say that
          characters are translated to and from raw bytes using an
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>encoding</em></span>—the rules for translating a string of
          Unicode characters into a sequence of bytes, and extracting a string
          from a sequence of bytes. More procedurally, this translation back
          and forth between bytes and strings is defined by two terms:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Encoding</em></span> <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e88344"></a>is the process of translating a string of
              characters into its raw bytes form, according to a desired
              encoding name.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Decoding</em></span> <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e88353"></a>is the process of translating a raw string of
              bytes into its character string form, according to its encoding
              name.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>That is, we <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>encode</em></span> from string to raw
          bytes, and <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>decode</em></span> from raw bytes to string. For
          some encodings, the translation process is trivial—ASCII and
          Latin-1, for instance, map each character to a single byte, so no
          translation work is required. For other encodings, the mapping can
          be more complex and yield multiple bytes per character.</p>
<p>The widely used <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e88367"></a><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>UTF-8</em></span> encoding, for example,
          allows a wide range of characters to be represented by employing a
          variable number of bytes scheme. Character codes less than 128 are
          represented as a single byte; codes between 128 and 0x7ff (2047) are
          turned into two bytes, where each byte has a value between 128 and
          255; and codes above 0x7ff are turned into three- or four-byte
          sequences having values between 128 and 255. This keeps simple ASCII
          strings compact, sidesteps byte ordering issues, and avoids null
          (zero) bytes that can cause problems for C libraries and
          networking.</p>
<p>Because encodings’ character maps assign characters to the
          same codes for compatibility, ASCII is a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>subset</em></span>
          of both Latin-1 and UTF-8; that is, a valid ASCII character string
          is also a valid Latin-1- and UTF-8-encoded string. This is also true
          when the data is stored in files: every ASCII file is a valid UTF-8
          file, because ASCII is a 7-bit subset of UTF-8.</p>
<p>Conversely, the UTF-8 encoding is binary compatible with ASCII
          for all character codes less than 128. Latin-1 and UTF-8 simply
          allow for additional characters: Latin-1 for characters mapped to
          values 128 through 255 within a byte, and UTF-8 for characters that
          may be represented with multiple bytes. Other encodings allow wider
          character sets in similar ways (e.g., UTF-16 and UTF-32 format
          strings with 2 and 4 bytes per each character, respectively), but
          all of these—ASCII, Latin-1, UTF-8, and many others—are considered
          to be Unicode.</p>
<p>To Python programmers, encodings are specified as strings
          containing the encoding’s name. Python comes with roughly 100
          different encodings; see the Python library reference for a complete list.
          Importing the module <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e88387"></a>encodings</code> and running <code class="epub__literal">help(encodings)</code> shows
          you many encoding names as well; some are implemented in Python, and
          some in C. Some encodings have multiple names, too; for example,
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>latin-1</em></span>, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>iso_8859_1</em></span>, and
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>8859</em></span> are all synonyms for the same encoding,
          Latin-1. We’ll revisit encodings later in this chapter, when we
          study techniques for writing Unicode strings in a script.</p>
<p>For more on the Unicode story, see the Python standard manual
          set. It includes a “Unicode HOWTO” in its “Python HOWTOs” section,
          which provides additional background that we will skip here in the
          interest of space.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Python’s String Types"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="python_apostrophy_s_string_types"></a>Python’s String Types</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>At a <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e88412"></a>more concrete level, the Python language provides
          string data types to represent character text in your scripts. The
          string types you will use in your scripts depend upon the version of
          Python you’re using. <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Python 2.X</em></span> has a general
          string type for representing binary data and simple 8-bit text like
          ASCII, along with a specific type for representing multibyte Unicode
          text:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">str</code> <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e88427"></a>for representing 8-bit text and binary data</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e88434"></a>unicode</code> for representing wide-character
              Unicode text</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Python 2.X’s two string types are different (<code class="epub__literal">unicode</code> allows for the extra size of
          characters and has extra support for encoding and decoding), but
          their operation sets largely overlap. The <code class="epub__literal">str</code> string type in 2.X is used for text
          that can be represented with 8-bit bytes, as well as binary data
          that represents absolute byte values.</p>
<p>By contrast, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Python 3.X</em></span> comes with three
          string object types—one for textual data and two for binary
          data:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">str</code> for representing
              Unicode text (both 8-bit and wider)</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e88461"></a>bytes</code> for representing binary data
              (including encoded text)</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e88469"></a>bytearray</code>, a mutable flavor of the
              <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> type</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>As mentioned earlier, <code class="epub__literal">bytearray</code> is also available in Python 2.6,
          but it’s simply a back-port from 3.0 with less content-specific
          behavior and is generally considered a 3.0 type.</p>
<p>All three string types in 3.0 support similar operation sets,
          but they have different roles. The main goal behind this change in
          3.X was to <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>merge</em></span> the normal and Unicode string
          types of 2.X into a single string type that supports both normal and
          Unicode text: developers wanted to remove the 2.X string dichotomy
          and make Unicode processing more natural. Given that ASCII and other
          8-bit text is really a simple kind of Unicode, this convergence
          seems logically sound.</p>
<p>To achieve this, the 3.0 <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e88489"></a><code class="epub__literal">str</code> type is defined
          as an <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>immutable sequence of characters</em></span> (not
          necessarily bytes), which may be either normal text such as ASCII
          with one byte per character, or richer character set text such as
          UTF-8 Unicode that may include multibyte characters. Strings
          processed by your script with this type are encoded per the platform
          default, but explicit encoding names may be provided to translate
          <code class="epub__literal">str</code> objects to and from different
          schemes, both in memory and when transferring to and from
          files.</p>
<p>While 3.0’s new <code class="epub__literal">str</code> type
          does achieve the desired string/<code class="epub__literal">unicode</code> merging, many programs still need
          to process raw binary data that is not encoded per any text format.
          Image and audio files, as well as packed data used to interface with
          devices or C programs you
          might process with Python’s <code class="epub__literal">struct</code> module, fall into this category. To
          support processing of truly binary data, therefore, a new type,
          <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>, also was introduced.</p>
<p>In 2.X, the general <code class="epub__literal">str</code>
          type filled this binary data role, because strings were just
          sequences of bytes (the separate <code class="epub__literal">unicode</code> type handles wide-character
          strings). In 3.0, the <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> type
          is defined as an <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>immutable sequence of 8-bit
          integers</em></span> representing absolute byte values. Moreover, the
          3.0 <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> type supports almost
          all the same operations that the <code class="epub__literal">str</code> type does; this includes string
          methods, sequence operations, and even <code class="epub__literal">re</code> module pattern matching, but not string
          formatting.</p>
<p>A 3.0 <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> object really
          is a sequence of small integers, each of which is in the range 0
          through 255; indexing a <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>
          returns an <code class="epub__literal">int</code>, slicing one
          returns another <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>, and
          running the <code class="epub__literal">list</code> built-in on one
          returns a list of integers, not characters. When processed with
          operations that assume characters, though, the contents of <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> objects are assumed to be
          ASCII-encoded bytes (e.g., the <code class="epub__literal">isalpha</code> method assumes each byte is an
          ASCII character code). Further, <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> objects are printed as character
          strings instead of integers for convenience.</p>
<p>While they were at it, Python developers also added a <code class="epub__literal">bytearray</code> type in 3.0. <code class="epub__literal">byte</code><code class="epub__literal">array</code> is a variant of <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> that is <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>mutable</em></span>
          and so supports in-place changes. It supports the usual string
          operations that <code class="epub__literal">str</code> and <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> do, as well as many of the same
          in-place change operations as lists (e.g., the <code class="epub__literal">append</code> and <code class="epub__literal">extend</code> methods, and assignment to
          indexes). Assuming your strings can be treated as raw bytes,
          <code class="epub__literal">bytearray</code> finally adds direct
          in-place mutability for string data—something not possible without
          conversion to a mutable type in Python 2, and not supported by
          Python 3.0’s <code class="epub__literal">str</code> or <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>.</p>
<p>Although Python 2.6 and 3.0 offer much the same functionality,
          they package it differently. In fact, the mapping from 2.6 to 3.0
          string types is not direct—2.6’s <code class="epub__literal">str</code> equates to both <code class="epub__literal">str</code> and <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> in 3.0, and 3.0’s <code class="epub__literal">str</code> equates to both <code class="epub__literal">str</code> and <code class="epub__literal">unicode</code> in 2.6. Moreover, the mutability
          of 3.0’s <code class="epub__literal">bytearray</code> is
          unique.</p>
<p>In practice, though, this asymmetry is not as daunting as it
          might sound. It boils down to the following: in 2.6, you will use
          <code class="epub__literal">str</code> for simple text and binary
          data and <code class="epub__literal">unicode</code> for more
          advanced forms of text; in 3.0, you’ll use <code class="epub__literal">str</code> for any kind of text (simple and
          Unicode) and <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> or <code class="epub__literal">bytearray</code> for binary data. In practice,
          the choice is often made for you by the tools you use—especially in
          the case of file processing tools, the topic of the next
          section.<sup>[80]</sup></p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Text and Binary Files"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="text_and_binary_files"></a>Text and Binary Files</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>File I/O (input and output) <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e88661"></a>has also been revamped in 3.0 to reflect the <code class="epub__literal">str</code>/<code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> distinction and automatically
          support encoding Unicode text. Python now makes a sharp
          platform-independent distinction between text files and binary
          files:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Text files</span></dt><dd>
<p>When <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e88678"></a>a file is opened in <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>text
                mode</em></span>, reading its data automatically decodes its
                content and returns it as a <code class="epub__literal">str</code>; writing takes a <code class="epub__literal">str</code> and automatically encodes it
                before transferring it to the file. Both reads and writes
                translate per a platform default or a provided encoding name.
                Text-mode files also support universal end-of-line translation
                and additional encoding specification arguments. Depending on
                the encoding name, text files may also automatically process
                the byte order mark sequence at the start of a file (more on
                this momentarily).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Binary files</span></dt><dd>
<p>When <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e88697"></a>a file is opened in <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>binary
                mode</em></span> by adding a <code class="epub__literal">b</code> (lowercase only) to the mode
                string argument in the built-in <code class="epub__literal">open</code> call, reading its data does not
                decode it in any way but simply returns its content raw and
                unchanged, as a <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>
                object; writing similarly takes a <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> object and transfers it to the
                file unchanged. Binary-mode files also accept a <code class="epub__literal">bytearray</code> object for the content to
                be written to the file.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Because the language sharply differentiates between <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e88723"></a>str</code> and <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e88731"></a>bytes</code>, you must decide whether your data is
          text or binary in nature and use either <code class="epub__literal">str</code> or <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> objects to represent its content in
          your script, as appropriate. Ultimately, the mode in which you open
          a file will dictate which type of object your script will use to
          represent its content:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>If you are processing image files, packed data created by
              other programs whose content you must extract, or some device
              data streams, chances are good that you will want to deal with
              it using <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> and
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>binary-mode</em></span> files. You might also opt for
              <code class="epub__literal">bytearray</code> if you wish to
              update the data without making copies of it in memory.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>If instead you are processing something that is textual in
              nature, such as program output, HTML, internationalized text, or
              CSV or XML files, you’ll probably want to use <code class="epub__literal">str</code> and <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>text-mode</em></span>
              files.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Notice that the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e88769"></a>mode string</em></span> argument to built-in function
          <code class="epub__literal">open</code> (its second argument)
          becomes fairly crucial in Python 3.0—its content not only specifies
          a file <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>processing mode</em></span>, but also implies a
          Python <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>object type</em></span>. By adding a <code class="epub__literal">b</code> to the mode string, you specify binary
          mode and will receive, or must provide, a <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> object to represent the file’s
          content when reading or writing. Without the <code class="epub__literal">b</code>, your file is processed in text mode,
          and you’ll use <code class="epub__literal">str</code> objects to
          represent its content in your script. For example, the modes
          <code class="epub__literal">rb</code>, <code class="epub__literal">wb</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">rb+</code> imply <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>; <code class="epub__literal">r</code>, <code class="epub__literal">w+</code>,
          and <code class="epub__literal">rt</code> (the default) imply
          <code class="epub__literal">str</code><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e88822"></a>.</p>
<p>Text-mode files also handle the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e88831"></a><a id="I_indexterm1_d1e88836"></a>byte order marker</em></span> (BOM) sequence that may
          appear at the start of files under certain encoding schemes. In the
          UTF-16 and UTF-32 encodings, for example, the BOM specifies big- or
          little-endian format (essentially, which end of a bitstring is most
          significant). A UTF-8 text file may also include a BOM to declare
          that it is UTF-8 in general, but this isn’t guaranteed. When reading
          and writing data using these encoding schemes, Python automatically
          skips or writes the BOM if it is implied by a general encoding name
          or if you provide a more specific encoding name to force the issue.
          For example, the BOM is always processed for “utf-16,” the more
          specific encoding name “utf-16-le” species little-endian UTF-16
          format, and the more specific encoding name “utf-8-sig” forces
          Python to both skip and write a BOM on input and output,
          respectively, for UTF-8 text (the general name “utf-8” does
          not).</p>
<p>We’ll learn more about BOMs and files in general in the
          section Handling the BOM in 3.0. First, let’s
          explore the implications of Python’s new Unicode string <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e88845"></a>model.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Python 3.0 Strings in Action"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
