<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Using Text and Binary Files</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="using_text_and_binary_files"></a>Using Text and Binary Files</h1>
<p>This <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e91137"></a>section expands on the impact of Python 3.0’s string
        model on the file processing basics introduced earlier in the book. As
        mentioned earlier, the mode in which you open a file is crucial—it
        determines which object type you will use to represent the file’s
        content in your script. Text mode implies <code class="epub__literal">str</code> objects, and binary mode implies
        <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> objects:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Text-mode files</em></span> <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e91155"></a>interpret file contents according to a Unicode
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>encoding</em></span>—either the default for your
            platform, or one whose name you pass in. By passing in an encoding
            name to <code class="epub__literal">open</code>, you can force
            conversions for various types of Unicode files. Text-mode files
            also perform universal <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>line-end translations</em></span>:
            by default, all line-end forms map to the single <code class="epub__literal">'\n'</code> character in your script,
            regardless of the platform on which you run it. As described
            earlier, text files also handle reading and writing the
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>byte order mark</em></span> (BOM) stored at the
            start-of-file in some Unicode encoding schemes.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Binary-mode files</em></span> <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e91180"></a>instead return file content to you
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>raw</em></span>, as a sequence of integers representing
            byte values, with no encoding or decoding and no line-end translations.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>The second argument to <code class="epub__literal">open</code>
        determines whether you want text or binary processing, just as it does
        in 2.X Python—adding a “b” to this string implies binary mode (e.g.,
        <code class="epub__literal">"rb"</code> to read binary data files).
        The default mode is <code class="epub__literal">"rt"</code>; this is
        the same as <code class="epub__literal">"r"</code>, which means text
        input (just as in 2.X).</p>
<p>In 3.0, though, this mode argument to <code class="epub__literal">open</code> also implies an <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>object
        type</em></span> for file content representation, regardless of the
        underlying platform—text files return a <code class="epub__literal">str</code> for reads and expect one for writes, but
        binary files return a <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> for
        reads and expect one (or a <code class="epub__literal">bytearray</code>) for writes.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Text File Basics"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="text_file_basics"></a>Text File Basics</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To demonstrate, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e91226"></a>let’s begin with basic file I/O. As long as you’re
          processing basic text files (e.g., ASCII) and don’t care about
          circumventing the platform-default encoding of strings, files in 3.0
          look and feel much as they do in 2.X (for that matter, so do strings
          in general). The following, for instance, writes one line of text to
          a file and reads it back in 3.0, exactly as it would in 2.6 (note
          that <code class="epub__literal">file</code> is no longer a built-in
          name in 3.0, so it’s perfectly OK to use it as a variable
          here):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e91233"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python30\python</code></strong>

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Basic text files (and strings) work the same as in 2.X</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file = open('temp', 'w')</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>size = file.write('abc\n')</code></strong>       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Returns number of bytes written</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file.close()</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Manual close to flush output buffer</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>file = open('temp')</code></strong>              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Default mode is "r" (== "rt"): text input</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>text = file.read()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>text</code></strong>
'abc\n'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(text</code></strong>)
abc</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Text and Binary Modes in 3.0"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="text_and_binary_modes_in_3.0"></a>Text and Binary Modes in 3.0</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In Python 2.6, <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e91278"></a>there <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e91284"></a>is <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e91290"></a>no major distinction between text and binary
          files—both accept and return content as <code class="epub__literal">str</code> strings. The only major difference is
          that text files automatically map <code class="epub__literal">\n</code> <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e91305"></a>end-of-line characters to and from <code class="epub__literal">\r\n</code> on Windows, while binary files do not
          (I’m stringing operations together into one-liners here just for
          brevity):</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e91312"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python26\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('temp', 'w').write('abd\n')</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Write in text mode: adds \r</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('temp', 'r').read()</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Read in text mode: drops \r</span></em>
'abd\n'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('temp', 'rb').read()</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Read in binary mode: verbatim</span></em>
'abd\r\n'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('temp', 'wb').write('abc\n')</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Write in binary mode</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('temp', 'r').read()</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># \n not expanded to \r\n</span></em>
'abc\n'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('temp', 'rb').read()</code></strong>
'abc\n'</pre>
<p>In Python 3.0, things are bit more complex because of the
          distinction between <code class="epub__literal">str</code> for text
          data and <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> for binary data.
          To demonstrate, let’s write a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>text file</em></span> and
          read it back in both modes in 3.0. Notice that we are required to
          provide a <code class="epub__literal">str</code> for writing, but
          reading gives us a <code class="epub__literal">str</code> or a
          <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>, depending on the <code class="epub__literal">open</code> mode:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e91376"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python30\python</code></strong>

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Write and read a text file</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('temp', 'w').write('abc\n')</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Text mode output, provide a str</span></em>
4

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('temp', 'r').read()</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Text mode input, returns a str</span></em>
'abc\n'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('temp', 'rb').read()</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Binary mode input, returns a bytes</span></em>
b'abc\r\n'</pre>
<p>Notice how on Windows text-mode files translate the <code class="epub__literal">\n</code> <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>end-of-line</em></span>
          character to <code class="epub__literal">\r\n</code> on output; on
          input, text mode translates the <code class="epub__literal">\r\n</code> back to <code class="epub__literal">\n</code>, but binary mode does not. This is the
          same in 2.6, and it’s what we want for binary data (no translations
          should occur), although you can control this behavior with extra
          <code class="epub__literal">open</code> arguments in 3.0 if
          desired.</p>
<p>Now let’s do the same again, but with a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>binary
          file</em></span>. We provide a <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> to write in this case, and we still
          get back a <code class="epub__literal">str</code> or a <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>, depending on the input mode:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e91438"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Write and read a binary file</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('temp', 'wb').write(b'abc\n')</code></strong>       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Binary mode output, provide a bytes</span></em>
4

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('temp', 'r').read()</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Text mode input, returns a str</span></em>
'abc\n'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('temp', 'rb').read()</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Binary mode input, returns a bytes</span></em>
b'abc\n'</pre>
<p>Note that the <code class="epub__literal">\n</code>
          end-of-line character is not expanded to <code class="epub__literal">\r\n</code> in binary-mode output—again, a desired result for
          binary data. Type requirements and file behavior are the same even
          if the data we’re writing to the binary file is truly binary in
          nature. In the following, for example, the <code class="epub__literal">"\x00"</code> is a binary zero byte and not a
          printable character:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e91475"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Write and read truly binary data</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('temp', 'wb').write(b'a\x00c')</code></strong>      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Provide a bytes</span></em>
3

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('temp', 'r').read()</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Receive a str</span></em>
'a\x00c'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('temp', 'rb').read()</code></strong>                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Receive a bytes</span></em>
b'a\x00c'</pre>
<p>Binary-mode files always return contents as a <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> object, but accept either a <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> or <code class="epub__literal">bytearray</code> object for writing; this
          naturally follows, given that <code class="epub__literal">bytearray</code> is basically just a mutable
          variant of <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>. In fact, most
          APIs in Python 3.0 that accept a <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> also allow a <code class="epub__literal">bytearray</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e91523"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># bytearrays work too</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>BA = bytearray(b'\x01\x02\x03')</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('temp', 'wb').write(BA)</code></strong>
3

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('temp', 'r').read()</code></strong>
'\x01\x02\x03'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('temp', 'rb').read()</code></strong>
b'\x01\x02\x03'</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Type and Content Mismatches"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="type_and_content_mismatches"></a>Type and Content Mismatches</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Notice <a id="I_indexterm1_d1e91544"></a>that you cannot get away with violating Python’s
          <code class="epub__literal">str</code>/<code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> type distinction when it comes to
          files. As the following examples illustrate, we get errors
          (shortened here) if we try to write a <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> to a text file or a <code class="epub__literal">str</code> to a binary file:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e91564"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Types are not flexible for file content</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('temp', 'w').write('abc\n')</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Text mode makes and requires str</span></em>
4
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('temp', 'w').write(b'abc\n')</code></strong>
TypeError: can't write bytes to text stream

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('temp', 'wb').write(b'abc\n')</code></strong>       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Binary mode makes and requires bytes</span></em>
4
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('temp', 'wb').write('abc\n')</code></strong>
TypeError: can't write str to binary stream</pre>
<p>This makes sense: text has no meaning in binary terms, before
          it is encoded. Although it is often possible to convert between the
          types by encoding <code class="epub__literal">str</code> and
          decoding <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>, as described
          earlier in this chapter, you will usually want to stick to
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>either</em></span> <code class="epub__literal">str</code>
          for text data or <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> for binary
          data. Because the <code class="epub__literal">str</code> and
          <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> operation sets largely
          intersect, the choice won’t be much of a dilemma for most programs
          (see the string tools coverage in the final section of this chapter
          for some prime examples of this).</p>
<p>In addition to type constraints, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>file
          content</em></span> can matter in 3.0. Text-mode output files require
          a <code class="epub__literal">str</code> instead of a <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> for content, so there is no way in
          3.0 to write truly binary data to a text-mode file. Depending on the
          encoding rules, bytes outside the default character set can
          sometimes be embedded in a normal string, and they can always be
          written in binary mode. However, because text-mode input files in
          3.0 must be able to decode content per a Unicode encoding, there is
          no way to read truly binary data in text mode:</p><a id="I_programlisting1_d1e91622"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Can't read truly binary data in text mode</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>chr(0xFF)</code></strong>                                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># FF is a valid char, FE is not</span></em>
'ÿ'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>chr(0xFE)</code></strong>
UnicodeEncodeError: 'charmap' codec can't encode character '\xfe' in position 1...

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('temp', 'w').write(b'\xFF\xFE\xFD')</code></strong>    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Can't use arbitrary bytes!</span></em>
TypeError: can't write bytes to text stream

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('temp', 'w').write('\xFF\xFE\xFD')</code></strong>     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Can write if embeddable in str</span></em>
3
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('temp', 'wb').write(b'\xFF\xFE\xFD')</code></strong>   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Can also write in binary mode</span></em>
3

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('temp', 'rb').read()</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Can always read as binary bytes</span></em>
b'\xff\xfe\xfd'

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>open('temp', 'r').read()</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Can't read text unless decodable!</span></em>
UnicodeEncodeError: 'charmap' codec can't encode characters in position 2-3: ...</pre>
<p>This last error stems from the fact that all text files in 3.0
          are really Unicode text files, as the next section describes.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Using Unicode Files"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
