<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_answers-id35"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</h1>
<div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Python 3.0 has three string types: <code class="epub__literal">str</code> (for Unicode text, including ASCII),
            <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> (for binary data with
            absolute byte values), and <code class="epub__literal">bytearray</code> (a mutable flavor of <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code>). The <code class="epub__literal">str</code> type usually represents content
            stored on a text file, and the other two types generally represent
            content stored on binary files.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Python 2.6 has two main string types: <code class="epub__literal">str</code> (for 8-bit text and binary data) and
            <code class="epub__literal">unicode</code> (for wide-character
            text). The <code class="epub__literal">str</code> type is used for
            both text and binary file content; <code class="epub__literal">unicode</code> is used for text file content
            that is generally more complex than 8 bits. Python 2.6 (but not
            earlier) also has 3.0’s <code class="epub__literal">bytearray</code> type, but it’s mostly a
            back-port and doesn’t exhibit the sharp text/binary distinction
            that it does in 3.0.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The mapping from 2.6 to 3.0 string types is not direct,
            because 2.6’s <code class="epub__literal">str</code> equates to
            both <code class="epub__literal">str</code> and <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> in 3.0, and 3.0’s <code class="epub__literal">str</code> equates to both <code class="epub__literal">str</code> and <code class="epub__literal">unicode</code> in 2.6. The mutability of
            <code class="epub__literal">bytearray</code> in 3.0 is also
            unique.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Python 3.0’s string types share almost all the same
            operations: method calls, sequence operations, and even larger
            tools like pattern matching work the same way. On the other hand,
            only <code class="epub__literal">str</code> supports string
            formatting operations, and <code class="epub__literal">byte</code><code class="epub__literal">array</code> has an additional set of
            operations that perform in-place changes. The <code class="epub__literal">str</code> and <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> types also have methods for
            encoding and decoding text, respectively.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Non-ASCII Unicode characters can be coded in a string with
            both hex (<code class="epub__literal">\xNN</code>) and Unicode
            (<code class="epub__literal">\uNNNN</code>, <code class="epub__literal">\UNNNNNNNN</code>) escapes. On some keyboards,
            some non-ASCII characters—certain Latin-1 characters, for
            example—can also be typed directly.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In 3.0, text-mode files assume their file content is Unicode
            text (even if it’s ASCII) and automatically decode when reading
            and encode when writing. With binary-mode files, bytes are
            transferred to and from the file unchanged. The contents of
            text-mode files are usually represented as <code class="epub__literal">str</code> objects in your script, and the
            contents of binary files are represented as <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> (or <code class="epub__literal">bytearray</code>) objects. Text-mode files also
            handle the BOM for certain encoding types and automatically
            translate end-of-line sequences to and from the single <code class="epub__literal">\n</code> character on input and output unless
            this is explicitly disabled; binary-mode files do not perform
            either of these steps.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>To read files encoded in a different encoding than the
            default for your platform, simply pass the name of the file’s
            encoding to the <code class="epub__literal">open</code> built-in
            in 3.0 (<code class="epub__literal">codecs.open()</code> in 2.6);
            data will be decoded per the specified encoding when it is read
            from the file. You can also read in binary mode and manually
            decode the bytes to a string by giving an encoding name, but this
            involves extra work and is somewhat error-prone for multibyte
            characters (you may accidentally read a partial character
            sequence).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>To create a Unicode text file in a specific encoding format,
            pass the desired encoding name to <code class="epub__literal">open</code> in 3.0 (<code class="epub__literal">codecs.open()</code> in 2.6); strings will be
            encoded per the desired encoding when they are written to the
            file. You can also manually encode a string to bytes and write it
            in binary mode, but this is usually extra work.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>ASCII text is considered to be a kind of Unicode text,
            because its 7-bit range of values is a subset of most Unicode
            encodings. For example, valid ASCII text is also valid Latin-1
            text (Latin-1 simply assigns the remaining possible values in an
            8-bit byte to additional characters) and valid UTF-8 text (UTF-8
            defines a variable-byte scheme for representing more characters,
            but ASCII characters are still represented with the same codes, in
            a single byte).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The impact of Python 3.0’s string types change depends upon
            the types of strings you use. For scripts that use simple ASCII
            text, there is probably no impact at all: the <code class="epub__literal">str</code> string type works the same in 2.6
            and 3.0 in this case. Moreover, although string-related tools in
            the standard library such as <code class="epub__literal">re</code>, <code class="epub__literal">struct</code>, <code class="epub__literal">pickle</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">xml</code> may technically use different types
            in 3.0 than in 2.6, the changes are largely irrelevant to most
            programs because 3.0’s <code class="epub__literal">str</code> and
            <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> and 2.6’s <code class="epub__literal">str</code> support almost identical interfaces.
            If you process Unicode data, the toolset you need has simply moved
            from 2.6’s <code class="epub__literal">unicode</code> and <code class="epub__literal">codecs.open()</code> to 3.0’s <code class="epub__literal">str</code> and <code class="epub__literal">open</code>. If you deal with binary data
            files, you’ll need to deal with content as <code class="epub__literal">bytes</code> objects; since they have a similar
            interface to 2.6 strings, though, the impact should again be
            minimal.</p></li></ol>
</div>
</div><div class="epub__footnotes"><br/><hr/><div class="epub__footnote">
<p><sup>[80] </sup>It may help to know that Python always stores decoded text
              strings in a encoding-neutral, multi-byte format in memory. All
              text processing occurs in this uniform internal format. Text is
              translated to and from an encoding-specific format only when it
              is transferred to or from byte strings, external text files, or
              APIs with specific ecoding requirements. Through Python 3.2,
              strings are stored internally in UTF-16 (roughly, UCS-2) format
              with 2 bytes per character, unless Python is configured to use 4
              bytes/character. Python 3.3 and later will instead use a
              variable-length scheme with 1, 2, or 4 bytes per character,
              depending on a string's content. Either way, encoding pertains
              mostly to files and transfers; once loaded into a Python string,
              text in memory has no notion of encoding, and is simply a
              sequence of Unicode characters (a.k.a. "code points") stored
              generically.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
