<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Why Manage Attributes?</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="why_manage_attributes_question"></a>Why Manage Attributes?</h1>
<p>Object <a id="ch37mngdattribjustif"></a>attributes are central to most Python programs—they are
        where we often store information about the entities our scripts
        process. Normally, attributes are simply names for objects; a person’s
        <code class="epub__literal">name</code> attribute, for example, might
        be a simple string, fetched and set with basic attribute
        syntax:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e93312"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">person.name                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Fetch attribute value</span></em>
person.name = <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>value</code></em>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Change attribute value</span></em></pre>
<p>In most cases, the attribute lives in the object itself, or is
        inherited from a class from which it derives. That basic model
        suffices for most programs you will write in your Python
        career.</p>
<p>Sometimes, though, more flexibility is required. Suppose you’ve
        written a program to use a <code class="epub__literal">name</code>
        attribute directly, but then your requirements change—for example, you
        decide that names should be validated with logic when set or mutated
        in some way when fetched. It’s straightforward to code methods to
        manage access to the attribute’s value (<code class="epub__literal">valid</code> and <code class="epub__literal">transform</code> are abstract here):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e93335"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Person:
    def getName(self):
        if not valid():
            raise TypeError('cannot fetch name')
        else:
            return self.name.transform()
    def setName(self, value):
         if not valid(value):
            raise TypeError('cannot change name')
        else:
            self.name = transform(value)

person = Person()
person.getName()
person.setName('value')</pre>
<p>However, this also requires changing all the places where names
        are used in the entire program—a possibly nontrivial task. Moreover,
        this approach requires the program to be aware of how values are
        exported: as simple names or called methods. If you begin with a
        method-based interface to data, clients are immune to changes; if you
        do not, they can become problematic.</p>
<p>This issue can crop up more often than you might expect. The
        value of a cell in a spreadsheet-like program, for instance, might
        begin its life as a simple discrete value, but later mutate into an
        arbitrary calculation. Since an object’s interface should be flexible
        enough to support such future changes without breaking existing code,
        switching to methods later is less than ideal.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Inserting Code to Run on Attribute Access"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="inserting_code_to_run_on_attribute_acce"></a>Inserting Code to Run on Attribute Access</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>A better <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e93346"></a>solution would allow you to run code automatically on
          attribute access, if needed. At various points in this book, we’ve
          met Python tools that allow our scripts to dynamically compute
          attribute values when fetching them and validate or change attribute
          values when storing them. In this chapter, were going to expand on
          the tools already introduced, explore other available tools, and
          study some larger use-case examples in this domain. Specifically,
          this chapter presents:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e93357"></a>__getattr__</code> and <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e93362"></a><code class="epub__literal">__setattr__</code>
              methods, for routing undefined attribute fetches and all
              attribute assignments to generic handler methods.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e93371"></a> <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> method, for routing
              all attribute fetches to a generic handler method in new-style
              classes in 2.6 and all classes in 3.0.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e93382"></a>property</code> built-in, for routing specific
              attribute access to get and set handler functions, known as
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>properties</em></span>.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e93394"></a>descriptor protocol</em></span>, for routing
              specific attribute accesses to instances of classes with
              arbitrary get and set handler methods.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>The first and third of these were briefly introduced in Part VI; the others are new topics introduced
          and covered here.</p>
<p>As we’ll see, all four techniques share goals to some degree,
          and it’s usually possible to code a given problem using any one of
          them. They do differ in some important ways, though. For example,
          the last two techniques listed here apply to specific attributes,
          whereas the first two are generic enough to be used by
          delegation-based classes that must route arbitrary attributes to
          wrapped objects. As we’ll see, all four schemes also differ in both
          complexity and aesthetics, in ways you must see in action to judge
          for yourself.</p>
<p>Besides studying the specifics behind the four attribute
          interception techniques listed in this section, this chapter also
          presents an opportunity to explore larger programs than we’ve seen
          elsewhere in this book. The <code class="epub__literal">CardHolder</code> case study at the end, for
          example, should serve as a self-study example of larger classes in
          action. We’ll also be using some of the techniques outlined here in
          the next chapter to code decorators, so be sure you have at least a
          general understanding of these topics before you move <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e93410"></a>on.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Properties"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
