<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Properties</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="properties"></a>Properties</h1>
<p>The <a id="ch37mngdattribprop"></a>property protocol allows us to route a specific
        attribute’s get and set operations to functions or methods we provide,
        enabling us to insert code to be run automatically on attribute
        access, intercept attribute deletions, and provide documentation for
        the attributes if desired.</p>
<p>Properties are created with the <code class="epub__literal">property</code> built-in and are assigned to class
        attributes, just like method functions. As such, they are inherited by
        subclasses and instances, like any other class attributes. Their
        access-interception functions are provided with the <code class="epub__literal">self</code> instance argument, which grants access
        to state information and class attributes available on the subject
        instance.</p>
<p>A property manages a single, specific attribute; although it
        can’t catch all attribute accesses generically, it allows us to
        control both fetch and assignment accesses and enables us to change an
        attribute from simple data to a computation freely, without breaking
        existing code. As we’ll see, properties are strongly related to
        descriptors; they are essentially a restricted form of them.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The Basics"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_basics-id5"></a>The Basics</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>A property is created by assigning the result of a built-in
          function to a class attribute:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e93439"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">attribute = property(fget, fset, fdel, doc)</pre>
<p>None of this built-in’s arguments are required, and all
          default to <code class="epub__literal">None</code> if not passed;
          such operations are not supported, and attempting them will raise an
          exception. When using them, we pass <code class="epub__literal">fget</code> a function for intercepting attribute
          fetches, <code class="epub__literal">fset</code> a function for
          assignments, and <code class="epub__literal">fdel</code> a function
          for attribute deletions; the <code class="epub__literal">doc</code>
          argument receives a documentation string for the attribute, if
          desired (otherwise the property copies the docstring of <code class="epub__literal">fget</code>, if provided, which defaults to
          <code class="epub__literal">None</code>). <code class="epub__literal">fget</code> returns the computed attribute value,
          and <code class="epub__literal">fset</code> and <code class="epub__literal">fdel</code> return nothing (really, <code class="epub__literal">None</code>).</p>
<p>This built-in call returns a property object, which we assign
          to the name of the attribute to be managed in the class scope, where
          it will be inherited by every instance.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="A First Example"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="a_first_example-id1"></a>A First Example</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e93484"></a>demonstrate <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e93490"></a>how this translates to working code, the following
          class uses a property to trace access to an attribute named <code class="epub__literal">name</code>; the actual stored data is named
          <code class="epub__literal">_name</code> so it does not clash with
          the property:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e93504"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Person:                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Use (object) in 2.6</span></em>
    def __init__(self, name):
        self._name = name
    def getName(self):
        print('fetch...')
        return self._name
    def setName(self, value):
        print('change...')
        self._name = value
    def delName(self):
        print('remove...')
        del self._name
    name = property(getName, setName, delName, "name property docs")

bob = Person('Bob Smith')           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># bob has a managed attribute</span></em>
print(bob.name)                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs getName</span></em>
bob.name = 'Robert Smith'           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs setName</span></em>
print(bob.name)
del bob.name                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs delName</span></em>

print('-'*20)
sue = Person('Sue Jones')           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># sue inherits property too</span></em>
print(sue.name)
print(Person.name.__doc__)          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Or help(Person.name)</span></em></pre>
<p>Properties <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e93529"></a>are available in both 2.6 and 3.0, but they require
          new-style <code class="epub__literal">object</code> derivation in
          2.6 to work correctly for assignments—add <code class="epub__literal">object</code> as a superclass here to run this in
          2.6 (you can list the superclass in 3.0 too, but it’s implied and
          not required).</p>
<p>This particular property doesn’t do much—it simply intercepts
          and traces an attribute—but it
          serves to demonstrate the protocol. When this code is run, two
          instances inherit the property, just as they would any other
          attribute attached to their class. However, their attribute accesses
          are caught:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e93548"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">fetch...
Bob Smith
change...
fetch...
Robert Smith
remove...
--------------------
fetch...
Sue Jones
name property docs</pre>
<p>Like all class attributes, properties are
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>inherited</em></span> by both instances and lower
          subclasses. If we change our example as follows, for example:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e93555"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Super:
    ...the original Person class code...
    name = property(getName, setName, delName, 'name property docs')

class Person(Super):
    pass                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Properties are inherited</span></em>

bob = Person('Bob Smith')
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...rest unchanged...</code></em></pre>
<p>the output is the same—the <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> subclass inherits the <code class="epub__literal">name</code> property from <code class="epub__literal">Super</code>, and the <code class="epub__literal">bob</code> instance gets it from <code class="epub__literal">Person</code>. In terms of inheritance,
          properties work the same as normal methods; because they have access
          to the <code class="epub__literal">self</code> instance argument,
          they can access instance state information like methods, as the next
          section demonstrates.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Computed Attributes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="computed_attributes"></a>Computed Attributes</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e93588"></a>example in the prior section <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e93596"></a>simply traces attribute accesses. Usually, though,
          properties do much more—computing the value of an attribute
          dynamically when fetched, for example. The following example
          illustrates:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e93602"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class PropSquare:
    def __init__(self, start):
        self.value = start
    def getX(self):                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On attr fetch</span></em>
        return self.value ** 2
    def setX(self, value):                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On attr assign</span></em>
        self.value = value
    X = property(getX, setX)                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># No delete or docs</span></em>

P = PropSquare(3)       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 2 instances of class with property</span></em>
Q = PropSquare(32)      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Each has different state information</span></em>

print(P.X)              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 3 ** 2</span></em>
P.X = 4
print(P.X)              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 4 ** 2</span></em>
print(Q.X)              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 32 ** 2</span></em></pre>
<p>This class defines an attribute <code class="epub__literal">X</code> that is accessed as though it were
          static data, but really runs code to compute its value when fetched.
          The effect is much like an implicit method call. When the code is
          run, the value is stored in the instance as state information, but
          each time we fetch it via the managed attribute, its value is
          automatically squared:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e93633"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">9
16
1024</pre>
<p>Notice that we’ve made two different instances—because
          property methods automatically receive a <code class="epub__literal">self</code> argument, they have access to the
          state information stored in instances. In our case, this mean the
          fetch computes the square of the subject instance’s data.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Coding Properties with Decorators"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="coding_properties_with_decorators"></a>Coding Properties with Decorators</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Although <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e93645"></a>we’re saving additional <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e93653"></a>details until the next chapter, we introduced
          <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e93659"></a>function decorator basics earlier, in Chapter 31. Recall that the function
          decorator syntax:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e93667"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">@decorator
def func(args): ...</pre>
<p>is automatically translated to this equivalent by Python, to
          rebind the function name to the result of the <code class="epub__literal">decorator</code> callable:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e93674"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def func(args): ...
func = decorator(func)</pre>
<p>Because of this mapping, it turns out that the <code class="epub__literal">property</code> built-in can serve as a
          decorator, to define a function that will run automatically when an
          attribute is fetched:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e93681"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Person:
    @property
    def name(self): ...             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Rebinds: name = property(name)</span></em></pre>
<p>When run, the decorated method is automatically passed to the
          first argument of the <code class="epub__literal">property</code>
          built-in. This is really just alternative syntax for creating a
          property and rebinding the attribute name manually:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e93690"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Person:
    def name(self): ...
    name = property(name)</pre>
<p>As of Python 2.6, property objects also have <code class="epub__literal">getter</code>, <code class="epub__literal">setter</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">deleter</code> methods that assign the
          corresponding property accessor methods and return a copy of the
          property itself. We can use these to specify components of
          properties by decorating normal methods too, though the <code class="epub__literal">getter</code> component is usually filled in
          automatically by the act of creating the property itself:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e93706"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Person:
    def __init__(self, name):
        self._name = name

    @property
    def name(self):                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># name = property(name)</span></em>
        "name property docs"
        print('fetch...')
        return self._name

    @name.setter
    def name(self, value):          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># name = name.setter(name)</span></em>
        print('change...')
        self._name = value

    @name.deleter
    def name(self):                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># name = name.deleter(name)</span></em>
        print('remove...')
        del self._name

bob = Person('Bob Smith')           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># bob has a managed attribute</span></em>
print(bob.name)                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs name getter (name 1)</span></em>
bob.name = 'Robert Smith'           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs name setter (name 2)</span></em>
print(bob.name)
del bob.name                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs name deleter (name 3)</span></em>

print('-'*20)
sue = Person('Sue Jones')           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># sue inherits property too</span></em>
print(sue.name)
print(Person.name.__doc__)          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Or help(Person.name)</span></em></pre>
<p>In fact, this code is equivalent to the first example in this
          section—decoration is just an alternative way to code properties in
          this case. When it’s run, the results are the same:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e93738"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">fetch...
Bob Smith
change...
fetch...
Robert Smith
remove...
--------------------
fetch...
Sue Jones
name property docs</pre>
<p>Compared to manual assignment of <code class="epub__literal">property</code> results, in this case using
          decorators to code properties requires just three extra lines of
          code (a negligible difference). As is so often the case with
          alternative tools, the choice between the two techniques is largely
          <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e93745"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e93747"></a>subjective.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Descriptors"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
