<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Descriptors</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="descriptors"></a>Descriptors</h1>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Descriptors</em></span> <a id="ch37mngdattribdescrip"></a>provide<a id="ch37descrip"></a> an alternative way to intercept attribute access; they
        are strongly related to the properties discussed in the prior section.
        In fact, a property is a kind of descriptor—technically speaking, the
        <code class="epub__literal">property</code> built-in is just a
        simplified way to create a specific type of descriptor that runs
        method functions on attribute accesses.</p>
<p>Functionally speaking, the descriptor protocol allows us to
        route a specific attribute’s get and set operations to methods of a
        separate class object that we provide: they provide a way to insert
        code to be run automatically on attribute access, and they allow us to
        intercept attribute deletions and provide documentation for the
        attributes if desired.</p>
<p>Descriptors are created as independent
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>classes</em></span>, and they are assigned to class
        attributes just like method functions. Like any other class attribute,
        they are inherited by subclasses and instances. Their
        access-interception methods are provided with both a <code class="epub__literal">self</code> for the descriptor itself, and the
        instance of the client class. Because of this, they can retain and use
        state information of their own, as well as state information of the
        subject instance. For example, a descriptor may call methods available
        in the client class, as well as descriptor-specific methods it
        defines.</p>
<p>Like a property, a descriptor manages a single, specific
        attribute; although it can’t catch all attribute accesses generically,
        it provides control over both fetch and assignment accesses and allows
        us to change an attribute freely from simple data to a computation
        without breaking existing code. Properties really are just a
        convenient way to create a specific kind of descriptor, and as we
        shall see, they can be coded as descriptors directly.</p>
<p>Whereas properties are fairly narrow in scope, descriptors
        provide a more general solution.
        For instance, because they are coded as normal classes, descriptors
        have their own state, may participate in descriptor inheritance
        hierarchies, can use composition to aggregate objects, and provide a
        natural structure for coding internal methods and attribute
        documentation strings.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The Basics"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_basics-id6"></a>The Basics</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As mentioned <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e93792"></a>previously, descriptors are coded as separate classes
          and provide specially named accessor methods for the attribute
          access operations they wish to intercept—get, set, and deletion
          methods in the descriptor class are automatically run when the
          attribute assigned to the <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e93803"></a>descriptor class instance is accessed in the
          corresponding way:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e93809"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Descriptor:
    "docstring goes here"
    def __get__(self, instance, owner): ...        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Return attr value</span></em>
    def __set__(self, instance, value): ...        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Return nothing (None)</span></em>
    def __delete__(self, instance): ...            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Return nothing (None)</span></em></pre>
<p>Classes with any of these methods are considered descriptors,
          and their methods are special when one of their instances is
          assigned to another class’s attribute—when the attribute is accessed, they are
          automatically invoked. If any of these methods are absent, it
          generally means that the corresponding type of access is not
          supported. Unlike with properties, however, omitting a <code class="epub__literal">__set__</code> allows the name to be redefined in
          an instance, thereby hiding the descriptor—to make an attribute
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>read-only</em></span>, you must define <code class="epub__literal">__set__</code> to catch assignments and raise an
          exception.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Descriptor method arguments"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="descriptor_method_arguments"></a>Descriptor method arguments</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Before <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e93838"></a>we code anything realistic, let’s take a brief look
            at some fundamentals. <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e93844"></a>All three descriptor methods outlined in the prior
            section are passed both the descriptor class instance (<code class="epub__literal">self</code>) and the instance of the client
            class to which the descriptor instance is attached (<code class="epub__literal">instance</code>).</p>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e93860"></a><code class="epub__literal">__get__</code>
<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e93868"></a>access method additionally receives an <code class="epub__literal">owner</code> argument, specifying the class to
            which the descriptor instance is attached. Its <code class="epub__literal">instance</code> argument is either the instance
            through which the attribute was accessed (for
            <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>instance</code></em><code class="epub__literal">.attr</code>), or <code class="epub__literal">None</code> when the attribute is accessed through the owner
            class directly (for <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>class</code></em><code class="epub__literal">.attr</code>). The former of these generally
            computes a value for instance access, and the latter usually
            returns <code class="epub__literal">self</code> if descriptor
            object access is supported.</p>
<p>For example, in the following, when <code class="epub__literal">X.attr</code> is fetched, Python automatically
            runs the <code class="epub__literal">__get__</code> method of the
            <code class="epub__literal">Descriptor</code> class to which the
            <code class="epub__literal">Subject.attr</code> class attribute is
            assigned (as with properties, in Python 2.6 we must derive from
            <code class="epub__literal">object</code> to use descriptors here;
            in 3.0 this is implied, but doesn’t hurt):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e93915"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class Descriptor(object):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __get__(self, instance, owner):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(self, instance, owner, sep='\n')</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class Subject:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>attr = Descriptor()</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Descriptor instance is class attr</span></em>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = Subject()</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.attr</code></strong>
&lt;__main__.Descriptor object at 0x0281E690&gt;
&lt;__main__.Subject object at 0x028289B0&gt;
&lt;class '__main__.Subject'&gt;

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Subject.attr</code></strong>
&lt;__main__.Descriptor object at 0x0281E690&gt;
None
&lt;class '__main__.Subject'&gt;</pre>
<p>Notice the arguments automatically passed in to the <code class="epub__literal">__get__</code> method in the first attribute
            fetch—when <code class="epub__literal">X.attr</code> is fetched,
            it’s as though the following translation occurs (though the
            <code class="epub__literal">Subject.attr</code> here doesn’t
            invoke <code class="epub__literal">__get__</code> again):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e93959"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">X.attr  -&gt;  Descriptor.__get__(Subject.attr, X, Subject)</pre>
<p>The descriptor knows it is being accessed directly when its
            instance argument is <code class="epub__literal">None</code>.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Read-only descriptors"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="read-only_descriptors"></a>Read-only descriptors</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e93971"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e93976"></a>mentioned earlier, unlike with properties, with
            descriptors simply omitting the <code class="epub__literal">__set__</code> <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e93987"></a>method isn’t enough to make an attribute read-only,
            because the descriptor name can be assigned to an instance. In the
            following, the attribute assignment to <code class="epub__literal">X.a</code> stores <code class="epub__literal">a</code> in the instance object <code class="epub__literal">X</code>, thereby hiding the descriptor stored
            in class <code class="epub__literal">C</code><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e94003"></a>:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e94009"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class D:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __get__(*args): print('get')</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class C:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a = D()</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = C()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.a</code></strong>                                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs inherited descriptor __get__</span></em>
get
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>C.a</code></strong>
get
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.a = 99</code></strong>                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Stored on X, hiding C.a</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.a</code></strong>
99
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>list(X.__dict__.keys())</code></strong>
['a']
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Y = C()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>Y.a</code></strong>                                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Y still inherits descriptor</span></em>
get
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>C.a</code></strong>
get</pre>
<p>This is the way all instance attribute assignments work in
            Python, and it allows classes to selectively override class-level
            defaults in their instances. To make a descriptor-based attribute
            read-only, catch the assignment in the descriptor class and raise
            an exception to prevent attribute assignment—when assigning an
            attribute that is a descriptor, Python effectively bypasses the
            normal instance-level assignment behavior and routes the operation
            to the descriptor object:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e94063"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class D:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __get__(*args): print('get')</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __set__(*args): raise AttributeError('cannot set')</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class C:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>a = D()</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = C()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.a</code></strong>                                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Routed to C.a.__get__</span></em>
get
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.a = 99</code></strong>                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Routed to C.a.__set__</span></em>
AttributeError: cannot set</pre><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p>Also be careful not to confuse the <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e94099"></a>descriptor <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e94105"></a><code class="epub__literal">__delete__</code>
              method with the general <code class="epub__literal">__del__</code> method. The former is called
              on attempts to delete the managed attribute name on an instance
              of the owner class; the latter is the general instance
              destructor method, run when an instance of any kind of class is
              about to be garbage collected. <code class="epub__literal">__delete__</code> is more closely related to
              the <code class="epub__literal">__delattr__</code> generic
              attribute deletion method we’ll meet later in this chapter. See
              Chapter 29 for more on operator
              overloading methods.</p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="A First Example"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="a_first_example-id2"></a>A First Example</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To see <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e94128"></a>how this all comes together in more realistic code,
          let’s get started with the same first example we wrote for
          properties. The following defines a descriptor that intercepts
          access to an attribute named <code class="epub__literal">name</code>
          in its clients. Its methods use their <code class="epub__literal">instance</code> argument to access state
          information in the subject instance, where the name string is
          actually stored. Like properties, descriptors work properly only for
          new-style classes, so be sure to derive both classes in the
          following from <code class="epub__literal">object</code> if you’re
          using 2.6:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e94145"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Name:                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Use (object) in 2.6</span></em>
    "name descriptor docs"
    def __get__(self, instance, owner):
        print('fetch...')
        return instance._name
    def __set__(self, instance, value):
        print('change...')
        instance._name = value
    def __delete__(self, instance):
        print('remove...')
        del instance._name

class Person:                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Use (object) in 2.6</span></em>
    def __init__(self, name):
        self._name = name
    name = Name()                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Assign descriptor to attr</span></em>

bob = Person('Bob Smith')               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># bob has a managed attribute</span></em>
print(bob.name)                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs Name.__get__</span></em>
bob.name = 'Robert Smith'               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs Name.__set__</span></em>
print(bob.name)
del bob.name                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs Name.__delete__</span></em>

print('-'*20)
sue = Person('Sue Jones')               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># sue inherits descriptor too</span></em>
print(sue.name)
print(Name.__doc__)                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Or help(Name)</span></em></pre>
<p>Notice in this code how we assign an instance of our
          descriptor class to a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>class attribute</em></span> in the client class;
          because of this, it is inherited by all instances of the class, just
          like a class’s methods. Really, we <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>must</em></span> assign
          the descriptor to a class attribute like this—it won’t work if assigned to a
          <code class="epub__literal">self</code> instance attribute instead.
          When the descriptor’s <code class="epub__literal">__get__</code>
          method is run, it is passed three objects to define its
          context:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">self</code> is the <code class="epub__literal">Name</code> class instance.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">instance</code> is the
              <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> class instance.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">owner</code> is the <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> class.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>When this code is run the descriptor’s methods intercept
          accesses to the attribute, much like the property version. In fact,
          the output is the same again:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e94220"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">fetch...
Bob Smith
change...
fetch...
Robert Smith
remove...
--------------------
fetch...
Sue Jones
name descriptor docs</pre>
<p>Also like in the property example, our descriptor class
          instance is a class attribute and thus is
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>inherited</em></span> by all instances of the client class
          and any subclasses. If we change the <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> class in our example to the
          following, for instance, the output of our script is the
          same:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e94230"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">...
class Super:
    def __init__(self, name):
        self._name = name
    name = Name()

class Person(Super):                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Descriptors are inherited</span></em>
   pass
...</pre>
<p>Also note that when a descriptor class is not useful outside
          the client class, it’s perfectly reasonable to embed the
          descriptor’s definition inside its client syntactically. Here’s what
          our example looks like if we use a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>nested
          class</em></span>:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e94240"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Person:
    def __init__(self, name):
        self._name = name

    class Name:                                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Using a nested class</span></em>
        "name descriptor docs"
        def __get__(self, instance, owner):
            print('fetch...')
            return instance._name
        def __set__(self, instance, value):
            print('change...')
            instance._name = value
        def __delete__(self, instance):
            print('remove...')
            del instance._name
    name = Name()</pre>
<p>When coded this way, <code class="epub__literal">Name</code>
          becomes a local variable in the scope of the <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> class statement, such that it won’t
          clash with any names outside the class. This version works the same
          as the original—we’ve simply moved the descriptor class definition
          into the client class’s scope—but the last line of the testing code
          must change to fetch the docstring from its new location:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e94254"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">...
print(Person.Name.__doc__)     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Differs: not Name.__doc__ outside class</span></em></pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Computed Attributes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="computed_attributes-id1"></a>Computed Attributes</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e94263"></a>was the case when using properties, our first
          descriptor example of the prior section didn’t do much—it simply
          printed trace messages for attribute accesses. In practice,
          descriptors can also be used to compute attribute values each time
          they are fetched. The following illustrates—it’s a rehash of the
          same example we coded for properties, which uses a descriptor to
          automatically square an attribute’s value each time it is
          fetched:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e94271"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class DescSquare:
    def __init__(self, start):                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Each desc has own state</span></em>
        self.value = start
    def __get__(self, instance, owner):         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On attr fetch</span></em>
        return self.value ** 2
    def __set__(self, instance, value):         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On attr assign</span></em>
        self.value = value                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># No delete or docs</span></em>

class Client1:
    X = DescSquare(3)          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Assign descriptor instance to class attr</span></em>

class Client2:
    X = DescSquare(32)         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Another instance in another client class</span></em>
                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Could also code 2 instances in same class</span></em>
c1 = Client1()
c2 = Client2()

print(c1.X)                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 3 ** 2</span></em>
c1.X = 4
print(c1.X)                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 4 ** 2</span></em>
print(c2.X)                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 32 ** 2</span></em></pre>
<p>When run, the output of this example is the same as that of
          the original property-based version, but here a descriptor class
          object is intercepting the attribute accesses:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e94305"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">9
16
1024</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Using State Information in Descriptors"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="using_state_information_in_descriptors"></a>Using State Information in Descriptors</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>If you <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e94312"></a>study the two descriptor examples we’ve written so
          far, you might notice that they get their information from different
          places—the first (the <code class="epub__literal">name</code>
          attribute example) uses data stored on the client
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>instance</em></span>, and the second (the attribute
          squaring example) uses data attached to the
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>descriptor</em></span> object itself. In fact, descriptors
          can use <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>both</em></span> instance state and descriptor
          state, or any combination thereof:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Descriptor state is used to manage data internal to the
              workings of the descriptor.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Instance state records information related to and possibly
              created by the client class.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Descriptor methods may use either, but descriptor state often
          makes it unnecessary to use special naming conventions to avoid name
          collisions for descriptor data stored on an instance. For example,
          the following descriptor attaches information to its own instance,
          so it doesn’t clash with that on the client class’s instance:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e94341"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class DescState:                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Use descriptor state</span></em>
    def __init__(self, value):
        self.value = value
    def __get__(self, instance, owner):    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On attr fetch</span></em>
        print('DescState get')
        return self.value * 10
    def __set__(self, instance, value):    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On attr assign</span></em>
        print('DescState set')
        self.value = value

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Client class</span></em>

class CalcAttrs:
    X = DescState(2)                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Descriptor class attr</span></em>
    Y = 3                                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Class attr</span></em>
    def __init__(self):
        self.Z = 4                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Instance attr</span></em>

obj = CalcAttrs()
print(obj.X, obj.Y, obj.Z)                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># X is computed, others are not</span></em>
obj.X = 5                                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># X assignment is intercepted</span></em>
obj.Y = 6
obj.Z = 7
print(obj.X, obj.Y, obj.Z)</pre>
<p>This code’s <code class="epub__literal">value</code>
          information lives only in the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>descriptor</em></span>, so
          there won’t be a collision if the same name is used in the client’s
          instance. Notice that only the descriptor attribute is managed
          here—get and set accesses to <code class="epub__literal">X</code>
          are intercepted, but accesses to <code class="epub__literal">Y</code> and <code class="epub__literal">Z</code>
          are not (<code class="epub__literal">Y</code> is attached to the
          client class and <code class="epub__literal">Z</code> to the
          instance). When this code is run, <code class="epub__literal">X</code> is computed when fetched:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e94398"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">DescState get
20 3 4
DescState set
DescState get
50 6 7</pre>
<p>It’s also feasible for a descriptor to store or use an
          attribute attached to the client class’s instance, instead of
          itself. Unlike data stored in the descriptor itself, this allows for
          data that can vary per client class instance. The descriptor in the
          following example assumes the instance has an attribute <code class="epub__literal">_Y</code> attached by the client class, and uses
          it to compute the value of the attribute it represents:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e94405"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class InstState:                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Using instance state</span></em>
    def __get__(self, instance, owner):
        print('InstState get')             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Assume set by client class</span></em>
        return instance._Y * 100
    def __set__(self, instance, value):
        print('InstState set')
        instance._Y = value

<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Client class</span></em>

class CalcAttrs:
    X = DescState(2)                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Descriptor class attr</span></em>
    Y = InstState()                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Descriptor class attr</span></em>
    def __init__(self):
        self._Y = 3                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Instance attr</span></em>
        self.Z  = 4                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Instance attr</span></em>

obj = CalcAttrs()
print(obj.X, obj.Y, obj.Z)                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># X and Y are computed, Z is not</span></em>
obj.X = 5                                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># X and Y assignments intercepted</span></em>
obj.Y = 6
obj.Z = 7
print(obj.X, obj.Y, obj.Z)</pre>
<p>This time, <code class="epub__literal">X</code> and <code class="epub__literal">Y</code> are both assigned to descriptors and
          computed when fetched (<code class="epub__literal">X</code> is
          assigned the descriptor of the prior example). The new descriptor
          here has no information itself, but it uses an attribute assumed to
          exist in the instance—that attribute is named <code class="epub__literal">_Y</code>, to avoid collisions with the name of
          the descriptor itself. When this version is run the results are
          similar, but a second attribute is managed, using state that lives
          in the instance instead of the descriptor:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e94449"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">DescState get
InstState get
20 300 4
DescState set
InstState set
DescState get
InstState get
50 600 7</pre>
<p>Both descriptor and instance state have roles. In fact, this
          is a general advantage that descriptors have over properties—because
          they have state of their own, they can easily retain data
          internally, without adding it to the namespace of the client
          instance object.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="How Properties and Descriptors Relate"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="how_properties_and_descriptors_relate"></a>How Properties and Descriptors Relate</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e94459"></a>mentioned earlier, properties and descriptors are
          strongly related—the <code class="epub__literal">property</code>
          built-in is just a convenient way to create a descriptor. Now that
          you know how both work, you should also be able to see that it’s
          possible to simulate the <code class="epub__literal">property</code>
          built-in with a descriptor class like the following:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e94473"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Property:
    def __init__(self, fget=None, fset=None, fdel=None, doc=None):
        self.fget = fget
        self.fset = fset
        self.fdel = fdel                                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Save unbound methods</span></em>
        self.__doc__ = doc                                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># or other callables</span></em>

    def __get__(self, instance, instancetype=None):
        if instance is None:
            return self
        if self.fget is None:
            raise AttributeError("can't get attribute")
        return self.fget(instance)                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Pass instance to self</span></em>
                                                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># in property accessors</span></em>
    def __set__(self, instance, value):
        if self.fset is None:
            raise AttributeError("can't set attribute")
        self.fset(instance, value)

    def __delete__(self, instance):
        if self.fdel is None:
            raise AttributeError("can't delete attribute")
        self.fdel(instance)

class Person:
    def getName(self): ...
    def setName(self, value): ...
    name = Property(getName, setName)                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Use like property()</span></em></pre>
<p>This <code class="epub__literal">Property</code> class catches
          attribute accesses with the descriptor protocol and routes requests
          to functions or methods passed in and saved in descriptor state when
          the class is created. Attribute fetches, for example, are routed
          from the <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> class, to the
          <code class="epub__literal">Property</code> class’s <code class="epub__literal">__get__</code> method, and back to the <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> class’s <code class="epub__literal">getName</code>. With descriptors, this “just
          works.”</p>
<p>Note that this descriptor class equivalent only handles basic
          property usage, though; to use <code class="epub__literal">@</code>
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>decorator syntax</em></span> to also specify set and delete
          operations, our <code class="epub__literal">Property</code> class
          would also have to be extended with <code class="epub__literal">setter</code> and <code class="epub__literal">deleter</code> methods, which would save the
          decorated accessor function and return the property object (<code class="epub__literal">self</code> should suffice). Since the <code class="epub__literal">property</code> built-in already does this, we’ll
          omit a formal coding of this extension here.</p>
<p>Also note that <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e94536"></a>descriptors are used to implement Python’s<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e94542"></a> <code class="epub__literal">__slots__</code>;
          instance attribute dictionaries are avoided by intercepting slot
          names with descriptors stored at the class level. See Chapter 31 for more on slots.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p>In Chapter 38, we’ll also make use of
            descriptors to implement function decorators that apply to both
            functions and methods. As you’ll see there, because descriptors
            receive both descriptor and subject class instances they work well
            in this role, though nested functions are usually a simpler
            <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e94558"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e94560"></a>solution.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="__getattr__ and __getattribute__"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
