<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>__getattr__ and __getattribute__</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="_underscore_underscore_getattr_undersco"></a>__getattr__ and __getattribute__</h1>
<p>So <a id="ch37mngdattribgetattrgetattrib"></a>far, <a id="ch37getattrmethod"></a>we’ve <a id="ch37getattributemethod"></a>studied properties and descriptors—tools for managing
        specific attributes. The <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> and <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> operator overloading
        methods provide still other ways to intercept attribute fetches for
        class instances. Like properties and descriptors, they allow us to
        insert code to be run automatically when attributes are accessed; as
        we’ll see, though, these two methods can be used in more general
        ways.</p>
<p>Attribute fetch interception comes in two flavors, coded with
        two different methods:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> is run for
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>undefined</em></span> attributes—that is, attributes not
            stored on an instance or inherited from one of its classes.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> is run
            for <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>every</em></span> attribute, so when using it you
            must be cautious to avoid recursive loops by passing attribute
            accesses to a superclass.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>We met the former of these in Chapter 29; it’s available for all Python
        versions. The latter of these is available for new-style classes in
        2.6, and for all (implicitly new-style) classes in 3.0. These two
        methods are representatives of a set of attribute interception methods
        that also includes<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e94611"></a> <code class="epub__literal">__setattr__</code> and
        <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e94619"></a>__delattr__</code>. Because these methods have
        similar roles, we will generally treat them as a single topic
        here.</p>
<p>Unlike properties and descriptors, these methods are part of
        Python’s <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>operator overloading</em></span> protocol—specially
        named methods of a class, inherited by subclasses, and run
        automatically when instances are used in the implied built-in
        operation. Like all methods of a class, they each receive a first
        <code class="epub__literal">self</code> argument when called, giving
        access to any required instance state information or other methods of
        the class.</p>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> and <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> methods are also more
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>generic</em></span> than properties and descriptors—they can
        be used to intercept access to any (or even all) instance attribute
        fetches, not just the specific name to which they are assigned.
        Because of this, these two methods are well suited to general
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>delegation</em></span>-based coding patterns—they can be used
        to implement wrapper objects that manage all attribute accesses for an
        embedded object. By contrast, we must define one property or
        descriptor for every attribute we wish to intercept.</p>
<p>Finally, these two methods are more <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>narrowly
        focused</em></span> than the alternatives we considered earlier: they
        intercept attribute fetches only, not assignments. To also catch
        attribute changes by assignment, we must code a <code class="epub__literal">__setattr__</code> method—an operator overloading
        method run for every attribute fetch, which must take care to avoid
        recursive loops by routing attribute assignments through the instance
        namespace dictionary.</p>
<p>Although much less common, we can also code a <code class="epub__literal">__delattr__</code> overloading method (which must
        avoid looping in the same way) to intercept attribute deletions. By
        contrast, properties and descriptors catch get, set,
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>and</em></span> delete operations by design.</p>
<p>Most of these operator overloading methods were introduced
        earlier in the book; here, we’ll expand on their usage and study their
        roles in larger contexts.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The Basics"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_basics-id7"></a>The Basics</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p><code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> and <code class="epub__literal">__setattr__</code> were introduced in Chapters
          29 and 31, and <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> was mentioned
          briefly in Chapter 31. In short, if a
          class defines or inherits the following methods, they will be run
          automatically when an instance is used in the context described by
          the comments to the right:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e94683"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def __getattr__(self, name):        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On undefined attribute fetch [obj.name]</span></em>
def __getattribute__(self, name):   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On all attribute fetch [obj.name]</span></em>
def __setattr__(self, name, value): <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On all attribute assignment [obj.name=value]</span></em>
def __delattr__(self, name):        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On all attribute deletion [del obj.name]</span></em></pre>
<p>In all of these, <code class="epub__literal">self</code> is
          the subject instance object as usual, <code class="epub__literal">name</code> is the string name of the attribute being accessed, and
          <code class="epub__literal">value</code> is the object being
          assigned to the attribute. The two get methods normally return an
          attribute’s value, and the other two return nothing (<code class="epub__literal">None</code>). For example, to catch every
          attribute fetch, we can use either of the first two methods above,
          and to catch every attribute assignment we can use the third:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e94713"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Catcher:
    def __getattr__(self, name):
        print('Get:', name)
    def __setattr__(self, name, value):
        print('Set:', name, value)

X = Catcher()
X.job                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Prints "Get: job"</span></em>
X.pay                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Prints "Get: pay"</span></em>
X.pay = 99                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Prints "Set: pay 99"</span></em></pre>
<p>Such a coding structure can be used to implement the
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e94726"></a>delegation</em></span> design pattern we met earlier,
          in Chapter 30. Because all attribute
          are routed to our interception methods generically, we can validate
          and pass them along to embedded, managed objects. The following
          class (borrowed from Chapter 30), for
          example, traces <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>every</em></span> attribute fetch made to
          another object passed to the wrapper class:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e94742"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Wrapper:
    def __init__(self, object):
        self.wrapped = object                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Save object</span></em>
    def __getattr__(self, attrname):
        print('Trace:', attrname)                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Trace fetch</span></em>
        return getattr(self.wrapped, attrname)   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Delegate fetch</span></em></pre>
<p>There is no such analog for properties and descriptors, short
          of coding accessors for every possible attribute in every possibly
          wrapped object.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Avoiding loops in attribute interception methods"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="avoiding_loops_in_attribute_interceptio"></a>Avoiding loops in attribute interception methods</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>These <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e94759"></a>methods <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e94767"></a>are <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e94773"></a>generally straightforward to use; their only complex
            part is the potential for <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>looping</em></span> (a.k.a.
            recursing). Because <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code>
            is called for undefined attributes only, it can freely fetch other
            attributes within its own code. However, because <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> and <code class="epub__literal">__setattr__</code> are run for all attributes,
            their code needs to be careful when accessing other attributes to
            avoid calling themselves again and triggering a recursive
            loop.</p>
<p>For example, another attribute fetch run inside a <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> method’s code will
            trigger <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> again,
            and the code will loop until memory is exhausted:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e94800"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">    def __getattribute__(self, name):
        x = self.other                                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># LOOPS!</span></em></pre>
<p>To work around this, route the fetch through a higher
            superclass instead to skip this level’s version—the <code class="epub__literal">object</code> class is always a superclass, and
            it serves well in this role:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e94809"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">    def __getattribute__(self, name):
        x = object.__getattribute__(self, 'other')    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Force higher to avoid me</span></em></pre>
<p>For <code class="epub__literal">__setattr__</code>, the
            situation is similar; assigning any attribute inside this method
            triggers <code class="epub__literal">__setattr__</code> again and
            creates a similar loop:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e94821"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">    def __setattr__(self, name, value):
        self.other = value                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># LOOPS!</span></em></pre>
<p>To work around this problem, assign the attribute as a key
            in the instance’s <code class="epub__literal">__dict__</code>
            namespace dictionary instead. This avoids direct attribute
            assignment:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e94830"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">    def __setattr__(self, name, value):
        self.__dict__['other'] = value                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Use atttr dict to avoid me</span></em></pre>
<p>Although it’s a less common approach, <code class="epub__literal">__setattr__</code> can also pass its own
            attribute assignments to a higher superclass to avoid looping,
            just like <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e94843"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">    def __setattr__(self, name, value):
        object.__setattr__(self, 'other', value)      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Force higher to avoid me</span></em></pre>
<p>By contrast, though, we <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>cannot</em></span> use the
            <code class="epub__literal">__dict__</code> trick to avoid loops
            in <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e94858"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">    def __getattribute__(self, name):
        x = self.__dict__['other']                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># LOOPS!</span></em></pre>
<p>Fetching the <code class="epub__literal">__dict__</code>
            attribute itself triggers <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> again, causing a
            recursive loop. Strange but true!</p>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">__delattr__</code> method is
            rarely used in practice, but when it is, it is called for every
            attribute deletion (just as <code class="epub__literal">__setattr__</code> is called for every
            attribute assignment). Therefore, you must take care to avoid
            loops when deleting attributes, by using the same techniques:
            namespace dictionaries or superclass method calls.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="A First Example"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="a_first_example-id3"></a>A First Example</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>All this <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e94884"></a>is not nearly<a id="I_indexterm2_d1e94892"></a> as <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e94898"></a>complicated as the prior section may have implied. To
          see how to put these ideas to work, here is the same first example
          we used for properties and descriptors in action again, this time
          implemented with attribute operator overloading methods. Because
          these methods are so generic, we test attribute names here to know
          when a managed attribute is being accessed; others are allowed to
          pass normally:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e94904"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Person:
    def __init__(self, name):               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On [Person()]</span></em>
        self._name = name                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Triggers __setattr__!</span></em>

    def __getattr__(self, attr):            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On [obj.undefined]</span></em>
        if attr == 'name':                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Intercept name: not stored</span></em>
            print('fetch...')
            return self._name               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Does not loop: real attr</span></em>
        else:                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Others are errors</span></em>
            raise AttributeError(attr)

    def __setattr__(self, attr, value):     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On [obj.any = value]</span></em>
        if attr == 'name':
            print('change...')
            attr = '_name'                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Set internal name</span></em>
        self.__dict__[attr] = value         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Avoid looping here</span></em>

    def __delattr__(self, attr):            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On [del obj.any]</span></em>
        if attr == 'name':
            print('remove...')
            attr = '_name'                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Avoid looping here too</span></em>
        del self.__dict__[attr]             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># but much less common</span></em>

bob = Person('Bob Smith')           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># bob has a managed attribute</span></em>
print(bob.name)                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs __getattr__</span></em>
bob.name = 'Robert Smith'           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs __setattr__</span></em>
print(bob.name)
del bob.name                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs __delattr__</span></em>

print('-'*20)
sue = Person('Sue Jones')           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># sue inherits property too</span></em>
print(sue.name)
#print(Person.name.__doc__)         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># No equivalent here</span></em></pre>
<p>Notice that the attribute assignment in the <code class="epub__literal">__init__</code> constructor triggers <code class="epub__literal">__setattr__</code> too—this method catches every
          attribute assignment, even those within the class itself. When this
          code is run, the same output is produced, but this time it’s the
          result of Python’s normal operator overloading mechanism and our
          attribute interception methods:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e94973"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">fetch...
Bob Smith
change...
fetch...
Robert Smith
remove...
--------------------
fetch...
Sue Jones</pre>
<p>Also note that, unlike with properties and descriptors,
          there’s no direct notion of specifying
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>documentation</em></span> for our attribute here; managed
          attributes exist within the code of our interception methods, not as
          distinct objects.</p>
<p>To achieve exactly the same results with <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code>, replace <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> in the example with the
          following; because it catches all attribute fetches, this version
          must be careful to avoid looping by passing new fetches to a
          superclass, and it can’t generally assume unknown names are
          errors:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e94988"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Replace __getattr__ with this</span></em>

    def __getattribute__(self, attr):                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On [obj.any]</span></em>
        if attr == 'name':                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Intercept all names</span></em>
            print('fetch...')
            attr = '_name'                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Map to internal name</span></em>
        return object.__getattribute__(self, attr)    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Avoid looping here</span></em></pre>
<p>This example is equivalent to that coded for properties and
          descriptors, but it’s a bit artificial, and it doesn’t really
          highlight these tools in practice. Because they are generic,
          <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> and <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> are probably more
          commonly used in delegation-base code (as sketched earlier), where
          attribute access is validated and routed to an embedded object.
          Where just a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>single</em></span> attribute must be managed,
          properties and descriptors might do as well or better.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Computed Attributes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="computed_attributes-id2"></a>Computed Attributes</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e95019"></a>before, <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e95027"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e95032"></a>our prior example doesn’t really do anything but trace
          attribute fetches; it’s not much more work to compute an attribute’s
          value when fetched. As for properties and descriptors, the following
          creates a virtual attribute <code class="epub__literal">X</code>
          that runs a calculation when fetched:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e95041"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class AttrSquare:
    def __init__(self, start):
        self.value = start                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Triggers __setattr__!</span></em>

    def __getattr__(self, attr):                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On undefined attr fetch</span></em>
        if attr == 'X':
            return self.value ** 2                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># value is not undefined</span></em>
        else:
            raise AttributeError(attr)

    def __setattr__(self, attr, value):               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On all attr assignments</span></em>
        if attr == 'X':
            attr = 'value'
        self.__dict__[attr] = value

A = AttrSquare(3)       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 2 instances of class with overloading</span></em>
B = AttrSquare(32)      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Each has different state information</span></em>

print(A.X)              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 3 ** 2</span></em>
A.X = 4
print(A.X)              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 4 ** 2</span></em>
print(B.X)              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 32 ** 2</span></em></pre>
<p>Running this code results in the same output that we got
          earlier when using properties and descriptors, but this script’s
          mechanics are based on generic attribute interception
          methods:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e95072"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">9
16
1024</pre>
<p>As before, we can achieve the same effect with <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> instead of <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code>; the following
          replaces the fetch method with a <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> and changes the <code class="epub__literal">__setattr__</code> assignment method to avoid
          looping by using direct superclass method calls instead of <code class="epub__literal">__dict__</code> keys:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e95092"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class AttrSquare:
    def __init__(self, start):
        self.value = start                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Triggers __setattr__!</span></em>

    def __getattribute__(self, attr):       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On all attr fetches</span></em>
        if attr == 'X':
            return self.value ** 2          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Triggers __getattribute__ again!</span></em>
        else:
            return object.__getattribute__(self, attr)

    def __setattr__(self, attr, value):     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On all attr assignments</span></em>
        if attr == 'X':
            attr = 'value'
        object.__setattr__(self, attr, value)</pre>
<p>When this version is run, the results are the same again.
          Notice the implicit routing going on in inside this class’s
          methods:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">self.value=start</code> inside
              the constructor triggers <code class="epub__literal">__setattr__</code></p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">self.value</code> inside
              <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> triggers
              <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> again</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>In fact, <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code>
          is run <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>twice</em></span> each time we fetch attribute
          <code class="epub__literal">X</code>. This doesn’t happen in the
          <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> version, because the
          <code class="epub__literal">value</code> attribute is not undefined.
          If you care about speed and want to avoid this, change <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> to use the superclass to
          fetch <code class="epub__literal">value</code> as well:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e95151"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">    def __getattribute__(self, attr):
        if attr == 'X':
            return object.__getattribute__(self, 'value') ** 2</pre>
<p>Of course, this still incurs a call to the superclass method,
          but not an additional recursive call before we get there. Add
          <code class="epub__literal">print</code> calls to these methods to
          trace how and when they run.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="__getattr__ and __getattribute__ Compared"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="underscore_underscore_getattr_undersco"></a>__getattr__ and __getattribute__ Compared</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e95164"></a>summarize <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e95172"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e95177"></a>the coding differences between <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> and <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code>, the following example
          uses both to implement three attributes—<code class="epub__literal">attr1</code> is a class attribute, <code class="epub__literal">attr2</code> is an instance attribute, and
          <code class="epub__literal">attr3</code> is a virtual managed
          attribute computed when fetched:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e95199"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class GetAttr:
    attr1 = 1
    def __init__(self):
        self.attr2 = 2
    def __getattr__(self, attr):            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On undefined attrs only</span></em>
        print('get: ' + attr)               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Not attr1: inherited from class</span></em>
        return 3                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Not attr2: stored on instance</span></em>

X = GetAttr()
print(X.attr1)
print(X.attr2)
print(X.attr3)

print('-'*40)

class GetAttribute(object):                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># (object) needed in 2.6 only</span></em>
    attr1 = 1
    def __init__(self):
        self.attr2 = 2
    def __getattribute__(self, attr):       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On all attr fetches</span></em>
        print('get: ' + attr)               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Use superclass to avoid looping here</span></em>
        if attr == 'attr3':
            return 3
        else:
            return object.__getattribute__(self, attr)

X = GetAttribute()
print(X.attr1)
print(X.attr2)
print(X.attr3)</pre>
<p>When run, the <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code>
          version intercepts only <code class="epub__literal">attr3</code>
          accesses, because it is undefined. The <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> version, on the other
          hand, intercepts all attribute fetches and must route those it does
          not manage to the superclass fetcher to avoid loops:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e95231"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">1
2
get: attr3
3
----------------------------------------
get: attr1
1
get: attr2
2
get: attr3
3</pre>
<p>Although <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code>
          can catch more attribute fetches than <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code>, in practice they are often
          just variations on a theme—if attributes are not physically stored,
          the two have the same effect.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Management Techniques Compared"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="management_techniques_compared"></a>Management Techniques Compared</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e95246"></a>summarize the coding differences in all four attribute
          management schemes we’ve seen in this chapter, let’s quickly step
          through a more comprehensive computed-attribute example using each
          technique. The following version uses properties to intercept and
          calculate attributes named <code class="epub__literal">square</code>
          and <code class="epub__literal">cube</code>. Notice how their base
          values are stored in names that begin with an underscore, so they
          don’t clash with the names of the properties themselves:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e95261"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 2 dynamically computed attributes with properties</span></em>

class Powers:
    def __init__(self, square, cube):
        self._square = square                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># _square is the base value</span></em>
        self._cube   = cube                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># square is the property name</span></em>

    def getSquare(self):
        return self._square ** 2
    def setSquare(self, value):
        self._square = value
    square = property(getSquare, setSquare)

    def getCube(self):
        return self._cube ** 3
    cube = property(getCube)

X = Powers(3, 4)
print(X.square)      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 3 ** 2 = 9</span></em>
print(X.cube)        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 4 ** 3 = 64</span></em>
X.square = 5
print(X.square)      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 5 ** 2 = 25</span></em></pre>
<p>To do the same with descriptors, we define the attributes with
          complete classes. Note that these descriptors store base values as
          instance state, so they must use leading underscores again so as not
          to clash with the names of descriptors (as we’ll see in the final
          example of this chapter, we could avoid this renaming requirement by
          storing base values as descriptor state instead):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e95281"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same, but with descriptors</span></em>

class DescSquare:
    def __get__(self, instance, owner):
        return instance._square ** 2
    def __set__(self, instance, value):
        instance._square = value

class DescCube:
    def __get__(self, instance, owner):
        return instance._cube ** 3

class Powers:                                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Use (object) in 2.6</span></em>
    square = DescSquare()
    cube   = DescCube()
    def __init__(self, square, cube):
        self._square = square                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># "self.square = square" works too,</span></em>
        self._cube   = cube                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># because it triggers desc __set__!</span></em>

X = Powers(3, 4)
print(X.square)      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 3 ** 2 = 9</span></em>
print(X.cube)        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 4 ** 3 = 64</span></em>
X.square = 5
print(X.square)      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 5 ** 2 = 25</span></em></pre>
<p>To achieve the same result with <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> fetch interception, we again
          store base values with underscore-prefixed names so that accesses to
          managed names are undefined and thus invoke our method; we also need
          to code a <code class="epub__literal">__setattrr__</code> to
          intercept assignments, and take care to avoid its potential for
          looping:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e95311"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same, but with generic __getattr__ undefined attribute interception</span></em>

class Powers:
    def __init__(self, square, cube):
        self._square = square
        self._cube   = cube

    def __getattr__(self, name):
        if name == 'square':
            return self._square ** 2
        elif name == 'cube':
            return self._cube ** 3
        else:
            raise TypeError('unknown attr:' + name)

    def __setattr__(self, name, value):
        if name == 'square':
            self.__dict__['_square'] = value
        else:
            self.__dict__[name] = value

X = Powers(3, 4)
print(X.square)      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 3 ** 2 = 9</span></em>
print(X.cube)        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 4 ** 3 = 64</span></em>
X.square = 5
print(X.square)      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 5 ** 2 = 25</span></em></pre>
<p>The final option, coding this with <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code>, is similar to the prior
          version. Because we catch every attribute now, though, we must route
          base value fetches to a superclass to avoid looping:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e95328"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same, but with generic __getattribute__ all attribute interception</span></em>

class Powers:
    def __init__(self, square, cube):
        self._square = square
        self._cube   = cube
    def __getattribute__(self, name):
        if name == 'square':
            return object.__getattribute__(self, '_square') ** 2
        elif name == 'cube':
            return object.__getattribute__(self, '_cube') ** 3
        else:
            return object.__getattribute__(self, name)
    def __setattr__(self, name, value):
        if name == 'square':
            self.__dict__['_square'] = value
        else:
            self.__dict__[name] = value

X = Powers(3, 4)
print(X.square)      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 3 ** 2 = 9</span></em>
print(X.cube)        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 4 ** 3 = 64</span></em>
X.square = 5
print(X.square)      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 5 ** 2 = 25</span></em></pre>
<p>As you can see, each technique takes a different form in code,
          but all four produce the same result when run:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e95342"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">9
64
25</pre>
<p>For more on how these alternatives compare, and other coding
          options, stay tuned for a more realistic application of them in the
          attribute validation example in the section Example: Attribute Validations. First, though, we
          need to study a pitfall associated with two of these tools.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Intercepting Built-in Operation Attributes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="intercepting_built-in_operation_attribu"></a>Intercepting Built-in Operation Attributes</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>When<a id="ch37mngdattrbtsgetatsintblt"></a> <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e95362"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e95367"></a>I introduced <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> and <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code>, I stated that they
          intercept undefined and all attribute fetches, respectively, which
          makes them ideal for delegation-based coding patterns. While this is
          true for normally named attributes, their behavior needs some
          additional clarification: for method-name attributes implicitly
          fetched by built-in operations, these methods may <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>not be
          run at all</em></span>. This means that operator overloading method
          calls cannot be delegated to wrapped objects unless wrapper classes
          somehow redefine these methods themselves.</p>
<p>For example, attribute fetches for the <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code>, <code class="epub__literal">__add__</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">__getitem__</code> methods run implicitly by
          printing, <code class="epub__literal">+</code> expressions, and
          indexing, respectively, are not routed to the generic attribute
          interception methods in 3.0. Specifically:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In Python 3.0, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>neither</em></span> <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> nor <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> is run for such
              attributes.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In Python 2.6, <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>is</em></span>
              run for such attributes if they are undefined in the
              class.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In Python 2.6, <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> is available for
              new-style classes only and works as it does in 3.0.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>In other words, in Python 3.0 classes (and 2.6 new-style
          classes), there is no direct way to generically intercept built-in
          operations like printing and addition. In Python 2.X, the methods
          such operations invoke are looked up at runtime in instances, like
          all other attributes; in Python 3.0 such methods are looked up in
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>classes</em></span> instead.</p>
<p>This change makes delegation-based coding patterns more
          complex in 3.0, since they cannot generically intercept operator
          overloading method calls and route them to an embedded object. This
          is not a showstopper—wrapper classes can work around this constraint
          by redefining all relevant operator overloading methods in the
          wrapper itself, in order to delegate calls. These extra methods can
          be added either manually, with tools, or by definition in and
          inheritance from common superclasses. This does, however, make
          wrappers more work than they used to be when operator overloading
          methods are a part of a wrapped object’s interface.</p>
<p>Keep in mind that this issue applies only to <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> and <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code>. Because properties and
          descriptors are defined for specific attributes only, they don’t
          really apply to delegation-based classes at all—a single property or
          descriptor cannot be used to intercept arbitrary attributes.
          Moreover, a class that defines <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>both</em></span> operator
          overloading methods and attribute interception will work correctly,
          regardless of the type of attribute interception defined. Our
          concern here is only with classes that do not have operator
          overloading methods defined, but try to intercept them
          generically.</p>
<p>Consider the following example, the file <em class="epub__filename">getattr.py</em>, which tests various attribute
          types and built-in operations
          on instances of classes containing <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> and <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> methods:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e95456"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class GetAttr:
    eggs = 88             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># eggs stored on class, spam on instance</span></em>
    def __init__(self):
       self.spam = 77
    def __len__(self):    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># len here, else __getattr__ called with __len__</span></em>
        print('__len__: 42')
        return 42
    def __getattr__(self, attr):     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Provide __str__ if asked, else dummy func</span></em>
        print('getattr: ' + attr)
        if attr == '__str__':
            return lambda *args: '[Getattr str]'
        else:
            return lambda *args: None

class GetAttribute(object):          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># object required in 2.6, implied in 3.0</span></em>
    eggs = 88                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># In 2.6 all are isinstance(object) auto</span></em>
    def __init__(self):              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># But must derive to get new-style tools,</span></em>
        self.spam = 77               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># incl __getattribute__, some __X__ defaults</span></em>
    def __len__(self):
        print('__len__: 42')
        return 42
    def __getattribute__(self, attr):
        print('getattribute: ' + attr)
        if attr == '__str__':
            return lambda *args: '[GetAttribute str]'
        else:
            return lambda *args: None

for Class in GetAttr, GetAttribute:
    print('\n' + Class.__name__.ljust(50, '='))

    X = Class()
    X.eggs               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Class attr</span></em>
    X.spam               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Instance attr</span></em>
    X.other              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Missing attr</span></em>
    len(X)               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># __len__ defined explicitly</span></em>

    try:                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># New-styles must support [], +, call directly: redefine</span></em>
        X[0]             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># __getitem__?</span></em>
    except:
        print('fail []')

    try:
        X + 99           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># __add__?</span></em>
    except:
        print('fail +')

    try:
        X()              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># __call__?  (implicit via built-in)</span></em>
    except:
        print('fail ()')
    X.__call__()         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># __call__?  (explicit, not inherited)</span></em>

    print(X.__str__())   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># __str__?   (explicit, inherited from type)</span></em>
    print(X)             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># __str__?   (implicit via built-in)</span></em></pre>
<p>When run under Python 2.6, <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>does</em></span>
          receive a variety of implicit attribute fetches for built-in
          operations, because Python looks up such attributes in instances
          normally. Conversely, <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> is
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>not</em></span> run for any of the operator overloading
          names, because such names are looked up in classes only:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e95528"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python26\python getattr.py</code></strong>

GetAttr===========================================
getattr: other
__len__: 42
getattr: __getitem__
getattr: __coerce__
getattr: __add__
getattr: __call__
getattr: __call__
getattr: __str__
[Getattr str]
getattr: __str__
[Getattr str]

GetAttribute======================================
getattribute: eggs
getattribute: spam
getattribute: other
__len__: 42
fail []
fail +
fail ()
getattribute: __call__
getattribute: __str__
[GetAttribute str]
&lt;__main__.GetAttribute object at 0x025EA1D0&gt;</pre>
<p>Note how <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code>
          intercepts both implicit and explicit fetches of <code class="epub__literal">__call__</code> and <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> in 2.6 here. By contrast, <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> fails to catch implicit
          fetches of either attribute name for built-in operations.</p>
<p>Really, the <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> case is the same in 2.6
          as it is in 3.0, because in 2.6 classes must be made new-style by
          deriving from <code class="epub__literal">object</code> to use this
          method. This code’s <code class="epub__literal">object</code>
          derivation is optional in 3.0 because all classes are
          new-style.</p>
<p>When run under Python 3.0, though, results for <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code>
          differ—<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>none</em></span> of the implicitly run operator
          overloading methods trigger <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>either</em></span> attribute
          interception method when their attributes are fetched by built-in
          operations. Python 3.0 skips the normal instance lookup mechanism
          when resolving such names:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e95570"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python30\python getattr.py</code></strong>

GetAttr===========================================
getattr: other
__len__: 42
fail []
fail +
fail ()
getattr: __call__
&lt;__main__.GetAttr object at 0x025D17F0&gt;
&lt;__main__.GetAttr object at 0x025D17F0&gt;

GetAttribute======================================
getattribute: eggs
getattribute: spam
getattribute: other
__len__: 42
fail []
fail +
fail ()
getattribute: __call__
getattribute: __str__
[GetAttribute str]
&lt;__main__.GetAttribute object at 0x025D1870&gt;</pre>
<p>We can trace these outputs back to <code class="epub__literal">print</code>s in the script to see how this
          works:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> access fails to
              be caught twice by <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> in 3.0: once for the
              built-in print, and once for explicit fetches because a default
              is inherited from the class (really, from the built-in <code class="epub__literal">object</code>, which is a superclass to every
              class).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> fails to be
              caught only once by the <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> catchall, during the
              built-in print operation; explicit fetches bypass the inherited
              version.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">__call__</code> fails to be
              caught in both schemes in 3.0 for built-in call expressions, but
              it is intercepted by both when fetched explicitly; unlike with
              <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code>, there is no
              inherited <code class="epub__literal">__call__</code> default to
              defeat <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code>.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">__len__</code> is caught by
              both classes, simply because it is an explicitly defined method
              in the classes themselves—its name it is not routed to either
              <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> or <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> in 3.0 if we delete
              the class’s <code class="epub__literal">__len__</code>
              methods.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>All other built-in operations fail to be intercepted by
              both schemes in 3.0.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Again, the net effect is that operator overloading methods
          implicitly run by built-in operations are never routed through
          either attribute interception method in 3.0: Python 3.0 searches for
          such attributes in <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>classes</em></span> and skips instance
          lookup entirely.</p>
<p>This makes delegation-based wrapper classes more difficult to
          code in 3.0—if wrapped classes may contain operator overloading
          methods, those methods must be redefined redundantly in the wrapper
          class in order to delegate to the wrapped object. In general
          delegation tools, this can add many extra methods.</p>
<p>Of course, the addition of such methods can be partly
          automated by tools that augment classes with new methods (the class
          decorators and metaclasses of the next two chapters might help
          here). Moreover, a superclass might be able to define all these
          extra methods once, for inheritance in delegation-based classes.
          Still, delegation coding patterns require extra work in 3.0.</p>
<p>For a more realistic illustration of this phenomenon as well
          as its workaround, see the <code class="epub__literal">Private</code> decorator example in the following
          chapter. There, we’ll see that it’s also possible to insert a <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> in the client class to
          retain its original type, although this method still won’t be called
          for operator overloading methods; printing still runs a <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> defined in such a class directly,
          for example, instead of routing the request through <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code>.</p>
<p>As another example, the next section resurrects our class
          tutorial example. Now that you understand how attribute interception
          works, I’ll be able to explain one of its stranger bits.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p>For an example of this 3.0 change at work in Python itself,
            see the discussion of the 3.0 <code class="epub__literal">os.popen</code> object in Chapter 14. Because it
            is implemented with a wrapper that uses <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> to delegate attribute
            fetches to an embedded object, it does not intercept the <code class="epub__literal">next(X)</code> built-in iterator function in
            Python 3.0, which is defined to run <code class="epub__literal">__next__</code>. It does, however, intercept
            and delegate explicit <code class="epub__literal">X.__next__()</code> calls, because these are
            not routed through the built-in and are not inherited from a
            superclass like <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code>
            is.</p>
<p>This is equivalent to <code class="epub__literal">__call__</code> in our example—implicit calls
            for built-ins do not trigger <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code>, but explicit calls to names
            not inherited from the class type do. In other words, this change
            impacts not only our delegators, but also those in the Python
            standard library! Given the scope of this change, it’s possible
            that this behavior may evolve in the future, so be sure to verify
            this issue in later releases.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Delegation-Based Managers Revisited"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="delegation-based_managers_revisited"></a>Delegation-Based Managers Revisited</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e95697"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e95702"></a>object-oriented tutorial of Chapter 27 presented a <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> class that used object embedding
          and method delegation to customize its superclass, rather than
          inheritance. Here is the code again for reference, with some
          irrelevant testing removed:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e95713"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Person:
    def __init__(self, name, job=None, pay=0):
        self.name = name
        self.job  = job
        self.pay  = pay
    def lastName(self):
        return self.name.split()[-1]
    def giveRaise(self, percent):
        self.pay = int(self.pay * (1 + percent))
    def __str__(self):
        return '[Person: %s, %s]' % (self.name, self.pay)

class Manager:
    def __init__(self, name, pay):
        self.person = Person(name, 'mgr', pay)      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Embed a Person object</span></em>
    def giveRaise(self, percent, bonus=.10):
        self.person.giveRaise(percent + bonus)      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Intercept and delegate</span></em>
    def __getattr__(self, attr):
        return getattr(self.person, attr)           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Delegate all other attrs</span></em>
    def __str__(self):
        return str(self.person)                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Must overload again (in 3.0)</span></em>

if __name__ == '__main__':
    sue = Person('Sue Jones', job='dev', pay=100000)
    print(sue.lastName())
    sue.giveRaise(.10)
    print(sue)
    tom = Manager('Tom Jones', 50000)    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Manager.__init__</span></em>
    print(tom.lastName())                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Manager.__getattr__ -&gt; Person.lastName</span></em>
    tom.giveRaise(.10)                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Manager.giveRaise -&gt; Person.giveRaise</span></em>
    print(tom)                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Manager.__str__ -&gt; Person.__str__</span></em></pre>
<p>Comments at the end of this file show which methods are
          invoked for a line’s operation. In particular, notice how <code class="epub__literal">lastName</code> calls are undefined in <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code>, and thus are routed into the
          generic <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> and from
          there on to the embedded <code class="epub__literal">Person</code>
          object. Here is the script’s output—Sue receives a 10% raise from
          <code class="epub__literal">Person</code>, but Tom gets 20% because
          <code class="epub__literal">giveRaise</code> is customized in
          <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e95763"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python30\python person.py</code></strong>
Jones
[Person: Sue Jones, 110000]
Jones
[Person: Tom Jones, 60000]</pre>
<p>By contrast, though, notice what occurs when we
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>print</em></span> a <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> at the end of the script: the
          wrapper class’s <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> is
          invoked, and it delegates to the embedded <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> object’s <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code>. With that in mind, watch what
          happens if we <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>delete</em></span> the <code class="epub__literal">Manager.__str__</code> method in this
          code:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e95792"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Delete the Manager __str__ method</span></em>

class Manager:
    def __init__(self, name, pay):
        self.person = Person(name, 'mgr', pay)      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Embed a Person object</span></em>
    def giveRaise(self, percent, bonus=.10):
        self.person.giveRaise(percent + bonus)      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Intercept and delegate</span></em>
    def __getattr__(self, attr):
        return getattr(self.person, attr)           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Delegate all other attrs</span></em></pre>
<p>Now printing does <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>not</em></span> route its attribute
          fetch through the generic <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> interceptor under Python 3.0
          for <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> objects. Instead, a
          default <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> display method
          inherited from the class’s implicit <code class="epub__literal">object</code> superclass is looked up and run
          (<code class="epub__literal">sue</code> still prints correctly,
          because <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> has an explicit
          <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code>):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e95831"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python30\python person.py</code></strong>
Jones
[Person: Sue Jones, 110000]
Jones
&lt;__main__.Manager object at 0x02A5AE30&gt;</pre>
<p>Curiously, running without a <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> like this
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>does</em></span> trigger <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> in Python 2.6, because
          operator overloading attributes are routed through this method, and
          classes do not inherit a default for <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e95850"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python26\python person.py</code></strong>
Jones
[Person: Sue Jones, 110000]
Jones
[Person: Tom Jones, 60000]</pre>
<p>Switching to <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> won’t help 3.0 here
          either—like <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code>, it is
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>not</em></span> run for operator overloading attributes
          implied by built-in operations in either Python 2.6 or 3.0:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e95867"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Replace __getattr_ with __getattribute__</span></em>

class Manager:                                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Use (object) in 2.6</span></em>
    def __init__(self, name, pay):
        self.person = Person(name, 'mgr', pay)           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Embed a Person object</span></em>
    def giveRaise(self, percent, bonus=.10):
        self.person.giveRaise(percent + bonus)           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Intercept and delegate</span></em>
    def __getattribute__(self, attr):
        print('**', attr)
        if attr in ['person', 'giveRaise']:
            return object.__getattribute__(self, attr)   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Fetch my attrs</span></em>
        else:
            return getattr(self.person, attr)            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Delegate all others</span></em></pre>
<p>Regardless of which attribute interception method is used in
          3.0, we still must include a redefined <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> in <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> (as shown above) in order to
          intercept printing operations and route them to the embedded
          <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> object:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e95896"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python30\python person.py</code></strong>
Jones
[Person: Sue Jones, 110000]
** lastName
** person
Jones
** giveRaise
** person
&lt;__main__.Manager object at 0x028E0590&gt;</pre>
<p>Notice that <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> gets called
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>twice</em></span> here for methods—once for the method
          name, and again for the <code class="epub__literal">self.person</code> embedded object fetch. We
          could avoid that with a different coding, but we would still have to
          redefine <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> to catch
          printing, albeit differently here (<code class="epub__literal">self.person</code> would cause this <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> to fail):</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e95922"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Code __getattribute__ differently to minimize extra calls</span></em>

class Manager:
    def __init__(self, name, pay):
        self.person = Person(name, 'mgr', pay)
    def __getattribute__(self, attr):
        print('**', attr)
        person = object.__getattribute__(self, 'person')
        if attr == 'giveRaise':
            return lambda percent: person.giveRaise(percent+.10)
        else:
            return getattr(person, attr)
    def __str__(self):
        person = object.__getattribute__(self, 'person')
        return str(person)</pre>
<p>When this alternative runs, our object prints properly, but
          only because we’ve added an explicit <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> in the wrapper—this attribute is
          still not routed to our generic attribute interception
          method:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e95931"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">Jones
[Person: Sue Jones, 110000]
** lastName
Jones
** giveRaise
[Person: Tom Jones, 60000]</pre>
<p>That short story here is that delegation-based classes like
          <code class="epub__literal">Manager</code> must redefine some
          operator overloading methods (like <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code>) to route them to embedded objects
          in Python 3.0, but not in Python 2.6 unless new-style classes are
          used. Our only direct options seem to be using <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> and Python 2.6, or redefining
          operator overloading methods in wrapper classes redundantly in
          3.0.</p>
<p>Again, this isn’t an impossible task; many wrappers can
          predict the set of operator overloading methods required, and tools
          and superclasses can automate part of this task. Moreover, not all
          classes use operator overloading methods (indeed, most application
          classes usually should not). It is, however, something to keep in
          mind for delegation coding models used in Python 3.0; when operator
          overloading methods are part of an object’s interface, wrappers must
          accommodate them portably by redefining them <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e95946"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e95948"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e95950"></a><a id="I_indexterm2_d1e95952"></a>locally.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Example: Attribute Validations"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
