<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Example: Attribute Validations</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="example_colon_attribute_validations"></a>Example: Attribute Validations</h1>
<p>To <a id="ch37mngdattribattrvalidexamp"></a>close out this chapter, let’s turn to a more realistic
        example, coded in all four of our attribute management schemes. The
        example we will use defines a <code class="epub__literal">CardHolder</code> object with four attributes,
        three of which are managed. The managed attributes validate or
        transform values when fetched or stored. All four versions produce the
        same results for the same test code, but they implement their
        attributes in very different ways. The examples are included largely
        for self-study; although I won’t go through their code in detail, they
        all use concepts we’ve already explored in this chapter.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Using Properties to Validate"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="using_properties_to_validate"></a>Using Properties to Validate</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Our <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e95974"></a>first coding uses properties to manage three
          attributes. As usual, we could use simple methods instead of managed
          attributes, but properties help if we have been using attributes in
          existing code already. Properties run code automatically on
          attribute access, but are focused on a specific set of attributes;
          they cannot be used to intercept all attributes generically.</p>
<p>To understand this code, it’s crucial to notice that the
          attribute assignments inside the <code class="epub__literal">__init__</code> constructor method trigger
          property setter methods too. When this method assigns to <code class="epub__literal">self.name</code>, for example, it automatically
          invokes the <code class="epub__literal">setName</code> method, which
          transforms the value and assigns it to an instance attribute called
          <code class="epub__literal">__name</code> so it won’t clash with the
          property’s name.</p>
<p>This renaming (sometimes called <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>name
          mangling</em></span>) is necessary because properties use common
          instance state and have none of their own. Data is stored in an
          attribute called <code class="epub__literal">__name</code>, and the
          attribute called <code class="epub__literal">name</code> is always a
          property, not data.</p>
<p>In the end, this class manages attributes called <code class="epub__literal">name</code>, <code class="epub__literal">age</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">acct</code>; allows the attribute <code class="epub__literal">addr</code> to be accessed directly; and provides
          a read-only attribute called <code class="epub__literal">remain</code> that is entirely virtual and
          computed on demand. For comparison purposes, this property-based
          coding weighs in at 39 lines of code:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e96024"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class CardHolder:
    acctlen = 8                                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Class data</span></em>
    retireage = 59.5

    def __init__(self, acct, name, age, addr):
        self.acct = acct                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Instance data</span></em>
        self.name = name                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># These trigger prop setters too</span></em>
        self.age  = age                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># __X mangled to have class name</span></em>
        self.addr = addr                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># addr is not managed</span></em>
                                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># remain has no data</span></em>
    def getName(self):
        return self.__name
    def setName(self, value):
        value = value.lower().replace(' ', '_')
        self.__name = value
    name = property(getName, setName)

    def getAge(self):
        return self.__age
    def setAge(self, value):
        if value &lt; 0 or value &gt; 150:
            raise ValueError('invalid age')
        else:
            self.__age = value
    age = property(getAge, setAge)

    def getAcct(self):
        return self.__acct[:-3] + '***'
    def setAcct(self, value):
        value = value.replace('-', '')
        if len(value) != self.acctlen:
            raise TypeError('invald acct number')
        else:
            self.__acct = value
    acct = property(getAcct, setAcct)

    def remainGet(self):                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Could be a method, not attr</span></em>
        return self.retireage - self.age       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Unless already using as attr</span></em>
    remain = property(remainGet)</pre>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Self-test code"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="self-test_code"></a>Self-test code</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The following code tests our class; add this to the bottom
            of your file, or place the class in a module and import it first.
            We’ll use this same testing code for all four versions of this
            example. When it runs, we make two instances of our
            managed-attribute class and fetch and change its various
            attributes. Operations expected to fail are wrapped in <code class="epub__literal">try</code> statements:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e96059"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">bob = CardHolder('1234-5678', 'Bob Smith', 40, '123 main st')
print(bob.acct, bob.name, bob.age, bob.remain, bob.addr, sep=' / ')
bob.name = 'Bob Q. Smith'
bob.age  = 50
bob.acct = '23-45-67-89'
print(bob.acct, bob.name, bob.age, bob.remain, bob.addr, sep=' / ')

sue = CardHolder('5678-12-34', 'Sue Jones', 35, '124 main st')
print(sue.acct, sue.name, sue.age, sue.remain, sue.addr, sep=' / ')
try:
    sue.age = 200
except:
    print('Bad age for Sue')

try:
    sue.remain = 5
except:
    print("Can't set sue.remain")

try:
    sue.acct = '1234567'
except:
    print('Bad acct for Sue')</pre>
<p>Here is the output of our self-test code; again, this is the
            same for all versions of this example. Trace through this code to
            see how the class’s methods are invoked; accounts are displayed
            with some digits hidden, names are converted to a standard format,
            and time remaining until retirement is computed when fetched using
            a class attribute cutoff:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e96063"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">12345*** / bob_smith / 40 / 19.5 / 123 main st
23456*** / bob_q._smith / 50 / 9.5 / 123 main st
56781*** / sue_jones / 35 / 24.5 / 124 main st
Bad age for Sue
Can't set sue.remain
Bad acct for Sue</pre>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Using Descriptors to Validate"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="using_descriptors_to_validate"></a>Using Descriptors to Validate</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Now, let’s <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e96070"></a>recode our example using descriptors instead of
          properties. As we’ve seen, descriptors are very similar to
          properties in terms of functionality and roles; in fact, properties
          are basically a restricted form of descriptor. Like properties,
          descriptors are designed to handle specific attributes, not generic
          attribute access. Unlike properties, descriptors have their own
          state, and they’re a more general scheme.</p>
<p>To understand this code, it’s again important to notice that
          the attribute assignments inside the <code class="epub__literal">__init__</code> constructor method trigger
          descriptor <code class="epub__literal">__set__</code> methods. When
          the constructor method assigns to <code class="epub__literal">self.name</code>, for example, it automatically
          invokes the <code class="epub__literal">Name.__set__()</code>
          method, which transforms the value and assigns it to a descriptor
          attribute called <code class="epub__literal">name</code>.</p>
<p>Unlike in the prior property-based variant, though, in this
          case the actual <code class="epub__literal">name</code> value is
          attached to the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>descriptor</em></span> object, not the
          client class instance. Although we could store this value in either
          instance or descriptor state, the latter avoids the need to mangle
          names with underscores to avoid collisions. In the <code class="epub__literal">CardHolder</code> client class, the attribute
          called <code class="epub__literal">name</code> is always a
          descriptor object, not data. The downside of this scheme is that
          state stored inside a descriptor itself is class-level data which is
          effectively shared by all client class instances, and so cannot vary
          between them.</p>
<p>In the end, this class implements the same attributes as the
          prior version: it manages attributes called <code class="epub__literal">name</code>, <code class="epub__literal">age</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">acct</code>; allows the attribute <code class="epub__literal">addr</code> to be accessed directly; and provides
          a read-only attribute called <code class="epub__literal">remain</code> that is entirely virtual and
          computed on demand. Notice how we must catch assignments to the
          <code class="epub__literal">remain</code> name in its descriptor and
          raise an exception; as we learned earlier, if we did not do this,
          assigning to this attribute of an instance would silently create an
          instance attribute that hides the class attribute descriptor. For
          comparison purposes, this descriptor-based coding takes 45 lines of
          code:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e96130"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class CardHolder:
    acctlen = 8                                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Class data</span></em>
    retireage = 59.5

    def __init__(self, acct, name, age, addr):
        self.acct = acct                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Instance data</span></em>
        self.name = name                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># These trigger __set__ calls too</span></em>
        self.age  = age                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># __X not needed: in descriptor</span></em>
        self.addr = addr                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># addr is not managed</span></em>
                                                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># remain has no data</span></em>
    class Name:
        def __get__(self, instance, owner):      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Class names: CardHolder locals</span></em>
            return self.name
        def __set__(self, instance, value):
            value = value.lower().replace(' ', '_')
            self.name = value
    name = Name()

    class Age:
        def __get__(self, instance, owner):
            return self.age                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Use descriptor data</span></em>
        def __set__(self, instance, value):
            if value &lt; 0 or value &gt; 150:
                raise ValueError('invalid age')
            else:
                self.age = value
    age = Age()

    class Acct:
        def __get__(self, instance, owner):
            return self.acct[:-3] + '***'
        def __set__(self, instance, value):
            value = value.replace('-', '')
            if len(value) != instance.acctlen:          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Use instance class data</span></em>
                raise TypeError('invald acct number')
            else:
                self.acct = value
    acct = Acct()

    class Remain:
        def __get__(self, instance, owner):
            return instance.retireage - instance.age    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Triggers Age.__get__</span></em>
        def __set__(self, instance, value):
            raise TypeError('cannot set remain')        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Else set allowed here</span></em>
    remain = Remain()</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Using __getattr__ to Validate"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="using_underscore_underscore_getattr_und"></a>Using __getattr__ to Validate</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As we’ve seen, <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e96171"></a>the <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code>
          method intercepts all undefined attributes, so it can be more
          generic than using properties or descriptors. For our example, we
          simply test the attribute name to know when a managed attribute is
          being fetched; others are stored physically on the instance and so
          never reach <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code>. Although
          this approach is more general than using properties or descriptors,
          extra work may be required to imitate the specific-attribute focus
          of other tools. We need to check names at runtime, and we must code
          a <code class="epub__literal">__setattr__</code> in order to
          intercept and validate attribute assignments.</p>
<p>As for the property and descriptor versions of this example,
          it’s critical to notice that the attribute assignments inside the
          <code class="epub__literal">__init__</code> constructor method
          trigger the class’s <code class="epub__literal">__setattr__</code>
          method too. When this method assigns to <code class="epub__literal">self.name</code>, for example, it automatically
          invokes the <code class="epub__literal">__setattr__</code> method,
          which transforms the value and assigns it to an instance attribute
          called <code class="epub__literal">name</code>. By storing <code class="epub__literal">name</code> on the instance, it ensures that
          future accesses will not trigger <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code>. In contrast, <code class="epub__literal">acct</code> is stored as <code class="epub__literal">_acct</code>, so that later accesses to <code class="epub__literal">acct</code> do invoke <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code>.</p>
<p>In the end, this class, like the prior two, manages attributes
          called <code class="epub__literal">name</code>, <code class="epub__literal">age</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">acct</code>; allows the attribute <code class="epub__literal">addr</code> to be accessed directly; and provides
          a read-only attribute called <code class="epub__literal">remain</code> that is entirely virtual and is
          computed on demand.</p>
<p>For comparison purposes, this alternative comes in at 32 lines
          of code—7 fewer than the property-based version, and 13 fewer than
          the version using descriptors. Clarity matters more than code size,
          of course, but extra code can sometimes imply extra development and
          maintenance work. Probably more important here are
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>roles</em></span>: generic tools like <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> may be better suited to
          generic delegation, while properties and descriptors are more
          directly designed to manage specific attributes.</p>
<p>Also note that the code here incurs <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>extra
          calls</em></span> when setting unmanaged attributes (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">addr</code>), although no extra calls are
          incurred for fetching unmanaged attributes, since they are defined.
          Though this will likely result in negligible overhead for most
          programs, properties and descriptors incur an extra call only when
          managed attributes are accessed.</p>
<p>Here’s the <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code>
          version of our code:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e96265"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class CardHolder:
    acctlen = 8                                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Class data</span></em>
    retireage = 59.5

    def __init__(self, acct, name, age, addr):
        self.acct = acct                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Instance data</span></em>
        self.name = name                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># These trigger __setattr__ too</span></em>
        self.age  = age                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># _acct not mangled: name tested</span></em>
        self.addr = addr                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># addr is not managed</span></em>
                                                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># remain has no data</span></em>
    def __getattr__(self, name):
        if name == 'acct':                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On undefined attr fetches</span></em>
            return self._acct[:-3] + '***'           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># name, age, addr are defined</span></em>
        elif name == 'remain':
            return self.retireage - self.age         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Doesn't trigger __getattr__</span></em>
        else:
            raise AttributeError(name)

    def __setattr__(self, name, value):
        if name == 'name':                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On all attr assignments</span></em>
            value = value.lower().replace(' ', '_')  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># addr stored directly</span></em>
        elif name == 'age':                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># acct mangled to _acct</span></em>
            if value &lt; 0 or value &gt; 150:
                raise ValueError('invalid age')
        elif name == 'acct':
            name  = '_acct'
            value = value.replace('-', '')
            if len(value) != self.acctlen:
                raise TypeError('invald acct number')
        elif name == 'remain':
            raise TypeError('cannot set remain')
        self.__dict__[name] = value                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Avoid looping</span></em></pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Using __getattribute__ to Validate"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="using_underscore_underscore_getattribut"></a>Using __getattribute__ to Validate</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Our final <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e96312"></a>variant uses the <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> catchall to intercept
          attribute fetches and manage them as needed. Every attribute fetch
          is caught here, so we test the attribute names to detect managed
          attributes and route all others to the superclass for normal fetch
          processing. This version uses the same <code class="epub__literal">__setattr__</code> to catch assignments as the
          prior version.</p>
<p>The code works very much like the <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> version, so I won’t repeat the
          full description here. Note, though, that because
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>every</em></span> attribute fetch is routed to <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code>, we don’t need
          to mangle names to intercept them here (<code class="epub__literal">acct</code> is stored as <code class="epub__literal">acct</code>). On the other hand, this code must
          take care to route nonmanaged attribute fetches to a superclass to
          avoid looping.</p>
<p>Also notice that this version incurs extra calls for both
          setting and fetching unmanaged attributes (e.g., <code class="epub__literal">addr</code>); if speed is paramount, this
          alternative may be the slowest of the bunch. For comparison
          purposes, this version amounts to 32 lines of code, just like the
          prior version:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e96349"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class CardHolder:
    acctlen = 8                                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Class data</span></em>
    retireage = 59.5

    def __init__(self, acct, name, age, addr):
        self.acct = acct                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Instance data</span></em>
        self.name = name                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># These trigger __setattr__ too</span></em>
        self.age  = age                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># acct not mangled: name tested</span></em>
        self.addr = addr                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># addr is not managed</span></em>
                                                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># remain has no data</span></em>
    def __getattribute__(self, name):
        superget = object.__getattribute__             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Don't loop: one level up</span></em>
        if name == 'acct':                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On all attr fetches</span></em>
            return superget(self, 'acct')[:-3] + '***'
        elif name == 'remain':
            return superget(self, 'retireage') - superget(self, 'age')
        else:
            return superget(self, name)                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># name, age, addr: stored</span></em>

    def __setattr__(self, name, value):
        if name == 'name':                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On all attr assignments</span></em>
            value = value.lower().replace(' ', '_')    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># addr stored directly</span></em>
        elif name == 'age':
            if value &lt; 0 or value &gt; 150:
                raise ValueError('invalid age')
        elif name == 'acct':
            value = value.replace('-', '')
            if len(value) != self.acctlen:
                raise TypeError('invald acct number')
        elif name == 'remain':
            raise TypeError('cannot set remain')
        self.__dict__[name] = value                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Avoid loops, orig names</span></em></pre>
<p>Be sure to study and run this section’s code on your own for
          more pointers on managed attribute coding <a id="I_indexterm2_d1e96390"></a>techniques.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Chapter Summary"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
