<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Test Your Knowledge: Quiz</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_quiz-id36"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Quiz</h1>
<div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>How do <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> and
            <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> differ?</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>How do properties and descriptors differ?</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>How are properties and decorators related?</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>What are the main functional differences between <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> and <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> and properties and
            descriptors?</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Isn’t all this feature comparison just a kind of
            argument?</p></li></ol>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Test Your Knowledge: Answers"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_answers-id36"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> method
              is run for fetches of <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>undefined</em></span> attributes
              only—i.e., those not present on an instance and not inherited
              from any of its classes. By contrast, the <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> method is called for
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>every</em></span> attribute fetch, whether the
              attribute is defined or not. Because of this, code inside a
              <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> can freely fetch
              other attributes if they are defined, whereas <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> must use special code
              for all such attribute fetches to avoid looping (it must route
              fetches to a superclass to skip itself).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Properties serve a specific role, while descriptors are
              more general. Properties define get, set, and delete functions
              for a specific attribute; descriptors provide a class with
              methods for these actions, too, but they provide extra
              flexibility to support more arbitrary actions. In fact,
              properties are really a simple way to create a specific kind of
              descriptor—one that runs functions on attribute accesses. Coding
              differs too: a property is created with a built-in function, and
              a descriptor is coded with a class; as such, descriptors can
              leverage all the usual OOP features of classes, such as
              inheritance. Moreover, in addition to the instance’s state
              information, descriptors have local state of their own, so they
              can avoid name collisions in the instance.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Properties can be coded with decorator syntax. Because the
              <code class="epub__literal">property</code> built-in accepts a
              single function argument, it can be used directly as a function
              decorator to define a fetch access property. Due to the name
              rebinding behavior of decorators, the name of the decorated
              function is assigned to a property whose get accessor is set to
              the original function decorated (<code class="epub__literal">name =
              property(name)</code>). Property <code class="epub__literal">setter</code> and <code class="epub__literal">deleter</code> attributes allow us to further
              add set and delete accessors with decoration syntax—they set the
              accessor to the decorated function and return the augmented
              property.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> and
              <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> methods are
              more generic: they can be used to catch arbitrarily many
              attributes. In contrast, each property or descriptor provides
              access interception for only one <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>specific</em></span>
              attribute—we can’t catch every attribute fetch with a single
              property or descriptor. On the other hand, properties and
              descriptors handle both attribute fetch and
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>assignment</em></span> by design: <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> and <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> handle fetches only;
              to intercept assignments as well, <code class="epub__literal">__setattr__</code> must also be coded. The
              implementation is also different: <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> and <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> are operator
              overloading methods, whereas properties and descriptors are
              objects manually assigned to class attributes.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>No it isn’t. To quote from Python namesake <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Monty
              Python’s Flying Circus</em></span>:</p><a id="I_programlisting2_d1e96531"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">An argument is a connected series of statements intended to establish a
proposition.
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>No it isn't</em></span>.
Yes it is! It's not just contradiction.
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Look, if I argue with you, I must take up a contrary position</em></span>.
Yes, but that's not just saying "No it isn't."
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Yes it is!</em></span>
No it isn't!
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Yes it is!</em></span>
No it isn't. Argument is an intellectual process. Contradiction is just
the automatic gainsaying of any statement the other person makes.
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>(short pause)</code></em>
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>No it isn't</em></span>.
It is.
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Not at all</em></span>.
Now look...</pre></li></ol>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
