<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 38. Decorators</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 38. Decorators"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h1 class="epub__title"><a id="decorators"></a>Chapter 38. Decorators</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In the advanced class topics chapter of this book (Chapter 31), we met static and class methods and
      took a quick look at the <code class="epub__literal">@</code> decorator
      syntax Python offers for declaring them. We also met function decorators
      briefly in the prior chapter (Chapter 37),
      while exploring the <code class="epub__literal">property</code>
      built-in’s ability to serve as a decorator, and in Chapter 28 while studying the notion of abstract
      superclasses.</p>
<p>This chapter picks up where the previous decorator coverage left
      off. Here, we’ll dig deeper into the inner workings of decorators and
      study more advanced ways to code new decorators ourselves. As we’ll see,
      many of the concepts we studied in earlier chapters, such as state
      retention, show up regularly in decorators.</p>
<p>This is a somewhat advanced topic, and decorator construction
      tends to be of more interest to tool builders than to application
      programmers. Still, given that decorators are becoming increasingly
      common in popular Python frameworks, a basic understanding can help
      demystify their role, even if you’re just a decorator user.</p>
<p>Besides covering decorator construction details, this chapter
      serves as a more realistic <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>case study</em></span> of Python in
      action. Because its examples are somewhat larger than most of the others
      we’ve seen in this book, they better illustrate how code comes together
      into more complete systems and tools. As an extra perk, much of the code
      we’ll write here may be used as general-purpose tools in your day-to-day
      programs.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="What’s a Decorator?"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
