<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>What’s a Decorator?</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="what_apostrophy_s_a_decorator_question"></a>What’s a Decorator?</h1>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Decoration</em></span> <a id="ch38decorators"></a>is a way to specify management code for functions and
        classes. Decorators themselves take the form of callable objects
        (e.g., functions) that process other callable objects. As we saw
        earlier in this book, Python decorators come in two related
        flavors:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Function decorators</em></span> do name rebinding
            at function definition time, providing a layer of logic that can
            manage functions and methods, or later calls to them.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Class decorators</em></span> do name rebinding at
            class definition time, providing a layer of logic that can manage
            classes, or the instances created by calling them later.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>In short, decorators provide a way to insert
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>automatically run code</em></span> at the end of function and
        class definition statements—at the end of a <code class="epub__literal">def</code> for function decorators, and at the end
        of a <code class="epub__literal">class</code> for class decorators.
        Such code can play a variety of roles, as described in the following
        sections.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Managing Calls and Instances"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="managing_calls_and_instances"></a>Managing Calls and Instances</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>For example, <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e96619"></a>in typical use, this automatically run code may be
          used to augment calls to functions and classes. It arranges this by
          installing <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e96626"></a>wrapper objects</em></span> to be invoked later:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Function <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e96635"></a>decorators install wrapper objects to intercept
              later <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>function calls</em></span> and process them as
              needed.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Class <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e96645"></a>decorators install wrapper objects to intercept
              later <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>instance creation calls</em></span> and process
              them as required.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>Decorators achieve these effects by automatically rebinding
          function and class names to other callables, at the end of <code class="epub__literal">def</code> and <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statements. When later invoked,
          these callables can perform tasks such as tracing and timing
          function calls, managing access to class instance attributes, and so
          on.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Managing Functions and Classes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="managing_functions_and_classes"></a>Managing Functions and Classes</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Although <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e96665"></a>most examples in this chapter deal with using wrappers
          to intercept later calls to functions and classes, this is not the
          only way decorators can be used:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Function decorators</em></span> can also be used
              to manage <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>function</em></span> objects, instead of
              later calls to them—to register a function to an API, for
              instance. Our primary focus here, though, will be on their more
              commonly used call wrapper application.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Class decorators</em></span> can also be used to
              manage <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>class</em></span> objects directly, instead of
              instance creation calls—to augment a class with new methods, for
              example. Because this role intersects strongly with that of
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>metaclasses</em></span> (indeed, both run at the end of
              the class creation process), we’ll see additional use cases in
              the next chapter.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>In other words, function decorators can be used to manage both
          function calls and function objects, and class decorators can be
          used to manage both class instances and classes themselves. By
          returning the decorated object itself instead of a wrapper,
          decorators become a simple post-creation step for functions and
          classes.</p>
<p>Regardless of the role they play, decorators provide a
          convenient and explicit way to code tools useful both during program
          development and in live production systems.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Using and Defining Decorators"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="using_and_defining_decorators"></a>Using and Defining Decorators</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Depending <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e96700"></a>on your job description, you might encounter
          decorators as a user or a provider. As we’ve seen, Python itself
          comes with built-in decorators that have specialized roles—static method declaration,
          property creation, and more. In addition, many popular Python
          toolkits include decorators to perform tasks such as managing
          database or user-interface logic. In such cases, we can get by
          without knowing how the decorators are coded.</p>
<p>For more general tasks, programmers can code arbitrary
          decorators of their own. For example, function decorators may be
          used to augment functions with code that adds call tracing, performs
          argument validity testing during debugging, automatically acquires
          and releases thread locks, times calls made to function for
          optimization, and so on. Any behavior you can imagine adding to a
          function call is a candidate for custom function decorators.</p>
<p>On the other hand, function decorators are designed to augment
          only a specific function or method <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>call</em></span>, not an
          entire object <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>interface</em></span>. Class decorators fill
          the latter role better—because
          they can intercept instance creation calls, they can be used to
          implement arbitrary object interface augmentation or management
          tasks. For example, custom class decorators can trace or validate
          every attribute reference made for an object. They can also be used
          to implement proxy objects, <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e98853"></a>singleton classes, and other common coding patterns.
          In fact, we’ll find that many class decorators bear a strong
          resemblance to the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>delegation</em></span> coding pattern we
          met in Chapter 30.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Why Decorators?"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="why_decorators_question"></a>Why Decorators?</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Like <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e96732"></a>many advanced Python tools, decorators are never
          strictly required from a purely technical perspective: their
          functionality can often be implemented instead using simple helper
          function calls or other techniques (and at a base level, we can
          always manually code the name rebinding that decorators perform
          automatically).</p>
<p>That said, decorators provide an explicit syntax for such
          tasks, which makes intent clearer, can minimize augmentation code
          redundancy, and may help ensure correct API usage:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Decorators have a very <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>explicit</em></span>
              syntax, which makes them easier to spot than helper function
              calls that may be arbitrarily far-removed from the subject
              functions or classes.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Decorators are applied <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>once</em></span>, when the
              subject function or class is defined; it’s not necessary to add
              extra code (which may have to be changed in the future) at every
              call to the class or function.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Because of both of the prior points, decorators make it
              less likely that a user of an API will
              <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>forget</em></span> to augment a function or class
              according to API requirements.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>In other words, beyond their technical model, decorators offer
          some advantages in terms of code maintenance and aesthetics.
          Moreover, as structuring tools, decorators naturally foster
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>encapsulation</em></span> of code, which reduces redundancy
          and makes future changes easier.</p>
<p>Decorators do have some potential
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>drawbacks</em></span>, too—when they insert wrapper logic,
          they can alter the types of the decorated objects, and they may
          incur extra calls. On the other hand, the same considerations apply
          to any technique that adds wrapping logic to objects.</p>
<p>We’ll explore these tradeoffs in the context of real code
          later in this chapter. Although the choice to use decorators is
          still somewhat subjective, their advantages are compelling enough
          that they are quickly becoming best practice in the Python world. To
          help you decide for yourself, let’s turn to the details.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="The Basics"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
