<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>The Basics</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="the_basics-id8"></a>The Basics</h1>
<p>Let’s get started with a first-pass look at decoration behavior
        from a symbolic perspective. We’ll write real code soon, but since
        most of the magic of decorators boils down to an automatic rebinding
        operation, it’s important to understand this mapping first.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Function Decorators"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="function_decorators"></a>Function Decorators</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Function <a id="ch3821decfundec"></a>decorators <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e96787"></a>have been available in Python since version 2.5. As we
          saw earlier in this book, they are largely just syntactic sugar that
          runs one function through another at the end of a <code class="epub__literal">def</code> statement, and rebinds the original
          function name to the result.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Usage"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="usage"></a>Usage</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>A <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e96799"></a>function decorator is a kind of <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>runtime
            declaration</em></span> about the function whose definition
            follows. The decorator is coded on a line just before the <code class="epub__literal">def</code> statement that defines a function or
            method, and it consists of the <code class="epub__literal">@</code> symbol followed by a reference to a
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>metafunction</em></span>—a function (or other callable
            object) that manages another function.</p>
<p>In terms of code, function decorators automatically map the
            following syntax:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e96819"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">@decorator              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Decorate function</span></em>
def F(arg):
    ...

F(99)                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Call function</span></em></pre>
<p>into this equivalent form, where <code class="epub__literal">decorator</code> is a one-argument callable
            object that returns a callable object with the same number of
            arguments as <code class="epub__literal">F</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e96834"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def F(arg):
    ...
F = decorator(F)        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Rebind function name to decorator result</span></em>

F(99)                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Essentially calls decorator(F)(99)</span></em></pre>
<p>This automatic name rebinding
            works on any <code class="epub__literal">def</code> statement,
            whether it’s for a simple function or a method within a class.
            When the function <code class="epub__literal">F</code> is later
            called, it’s actually calling the object
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>returned</em></span> by the decorator, which may be
            either another object that implements required wrapping logic, or
            the original function itself.</p>
<p>In other words, decoration essentially maps the first of the
            following into the second (though the decorator is really run only
            once, at decoration time):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e96855"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">func(6, 7)
decorator(func)(6, 7)</pre>
<p>This automatic name rebinding accounts for the static method
            and property decoration syntax we met earlier in the book:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e96859"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class C:
    @staticmethod
    def meth(...): ...            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># meth = staticmethod(meth)</span></em>

class C:
    @property
    def name(self): ...           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># name = property(name)</span></em></pre>
<p>In both cases, the method name is rebound to the result of a
            built-in function decorator, at the end of the <code class="epub__literal">def</code> statement. Calling the original name
            later invokes whatever object the decorator returns.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Implementation"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="implementation"></a>Implementation</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>A <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e96877"></a>decorator itself is a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>callable that
            returns a callable</em></span>. That is, it returns the object to
            be called later when the decorated function is invoked through its
            original name—either a wrapper object to intercept later calls, or
            the original function augmented in some way. In fact, decorators
            can <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>be</em></span> any type of callable and
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>return</em></span> any type of callable: any combination
            of functions and classes may be used, though some are better
            suited to certain contexts.</p>
<p>For example, to tap into the decoration protocol in order to
            manage a function just after it is created, we might code a
            decorator of this form:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e96894"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def decorator(F):
    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Process function F</span></em>
    return F

@decorator
def func(): ...                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># func = decorator(func)</span></em></pre>
<p>Because the original decorated function is assigned back to
            its name, this simply adds a post-creation step to function
            definition. Such a structure might be used to register a function
            to an API, assign function attributes, and so on.</p>
<p>In more typical use, to insert
            logic that intercepts later calls to a function, we might code a
            decorator to return a different object than the original
            function:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e96906"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def decorator(F):
    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Save or use function F</span></em>
    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Return a different callable: nested def, class with __call__, etc.</span></em>

@decorator
def func(): ...                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># func = decorator(func)</span></em></pre>
<p>This decorator is invoked at decoration time, and the
            callable it returns is invoked when the original function name is
            later called. The decorator itself receives the decorated
            function; the callable returned receives whatever arguments are
            later passed to the decorated function’s name. This works the same
            for class <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>methods</em></span>: the implied instance
            object simply shows up in the first argument of the returned
            callable.</p>
<p>In skeleton terms, here’s one common coding pattern that
            captures this idea—the decorator returns a wrapper that retains
            the original function in an enclosing scope:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e96923"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def decorator(F):                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On @ decoration</span></em>
    def wrapper(*args):               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On wrapped function call</span></em>
        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Use F and args</span></em>
        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># F(*args) calls original function</span></em>
    return wrapper

@decorator                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># func = decorator(func)</span></em>
def func(x, y):                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># func is passed to decorator's F</span></em>
    ...

func(6, 7)                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 6, 7 are passed to wrapper's *args</span></em></pre>
<p>When the name <code class="epub__literal">func</code> is later called, it really invokes
            the <code class="epub__literal">wrapper</code> function returned
            by <code class="epub__literal">decorator</code>; the <code class="epub__literal">wrapper</code> function can then run the
            original <code class="epub__literal">func</code> because it is
            still available in an <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>enclosing scope</em></span>. When
            coded this way, each decorated function produces a new scope to
            retain state.</p>
<p>To do the same with <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>classes</em></span>, we can
            overload the call operation and use instance attributes instead of
            enclosing scopes:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e96974"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class decorator:
    def __init__(self, func):         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On @ decoration</span></em>
        self.func = func
    def __call__(self, *args):        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On wrapped function call</span></em>
        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Use self.func and args</span></em>
        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># self.func(*args) calls original function</span></em>

@decorator
def func(x, y):                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># func = decorator(func)</span></em>
    ...                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># func is passed to __init__</span></em>

func(6, 7)                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 6, 7 are passed to __call__'s *args</span></em></pre>
<p>When the name <code class="epub__literal">func</code> is
            later called now, it really invokes the <code class="epub__literal">__call__</code> operator overloading method of
            the instance created by <code class="epub__literal">decorator</code>; the <code class="epub__literal">__call__</code> method can then run the
            original <code class="epub__literal">func</code> because it is
            still available in an <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>instance attribute</em></span>.
            When coded this way, each decorated function produces a new
            instance to retain state.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Supporting method decoration"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="supporting_method_decoration"></a>Supporting method decoration</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>One s<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e97023"></a>ubtle point about the prior class-based coding is
            that while it works to intercept simple function calls, it does
            not quite work when applied to class <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>method</em></span>
            functions:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e97032"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class decorator:
    def __init__(self, func):           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># func is method without instance</span></em>
        self.func = func
    def __call__(self, *args):          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># self is decorator instance</span></em>
        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># self.func(*args) fails!  # C instance not in args!</span></em>

class C:
    @decorator
    def method(self, x, y):             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># method = decorator(method)</span></em>
        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation">...</span></em>                              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Rebound to decorator instance</span></em></pre>
<p>When coded this way, the decorated method is rebound to an
            instance of the decorator class, instead of a simple
            function.</p>
<p>The problem with this is that the <code class="epub__literal">self</code> in the decorator’s <code class="epub__literal">__call__</code> receives the <code class="epub__literal">decorator</code> class
            instance when the method is later run, and the instance of class
            <code class="epub__literal">C</code> is never included in <code class="epub__literal">*args</code>. This makes it impossible to
            dispatch the call to the original method—the decorator object retains
            the original method function, but it has no instance to pass to
            it.</p>
<p>To support <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>both</em></span> functions and methods,
            the nested function alternative works better:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e97080"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def decorator(F):                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># F is func or method without instance</span></em>
    def wrapper(*args):                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># class instance in args[0] for method</span></em>
        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># F(*args) runs func or method</span></em>
    return wrapper

@decorator
def func(x, y):                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># func = decorator(func)</span></em>
    ...
func(6, 7)                              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Really calls wrapper(6, 7)</span></em>

class C:
    @decorator
    def method(self, x, y):             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># method = decorator(method)</span></em>
        ...                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Rebound to simple function</span></em>

X = C()
X.method(6, 7)                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Really calls wrapper(X, 6, 7)</span></em></pre>
<p>When coded this way <code class="epub__literal">wrapper</code> receives the <code class="epub__literal">C</code> class instance in its first argument,
            so it can dispatch to the original method and access state
            information.</p>
<p>Technically, this nested-function version works because
            Python creates a bound method object and thus passes the subject
            class instance to the <code class="epub__literal">self</code>
            argument only when a method attribute references a simple
            function; when it references an instance of a callable class
            instead, the callable class’s instance is passed to <code class="epub__literal">self</code> to give the callable class access
            to its own state information. We’ll see how this subtle difference
            can matter in more realistic examples later in this
            chapter.</p>
<p>Also note that nested functions are perhaps the most
            straightforward way to support decoration of both functions and
            methods, but not necessarily the only way. The prior chapter’s
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>descriptors</em></span>, for example, receive both the
            descriptor and subject class instance when called. Though more
            complex, later in this chapter we’ll see how this tool can be
            leveraged in this context as <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e97127"></a>well.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Class Decorators"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="class_decorators"></a>Class Decorators</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Function <a id="ch3822decclssdec"></a>decorators <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e97141"></a>proved so useful that the model was extended to allow
          class decoration in Python 2.6 and 3.0. Class decorators are
          strongly related to function decorators; in fact, they use the same
          syntax and very similar coding patterns. Rather than wrapping
          individual functions or methods, though, class decorators are a way
          to manage classes, or wrap up instance construction calls with extra
          logic that manages or augments instances created from a
          class.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Usage"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="usage-id1"></a>Usage</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Syntactically, <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e97150"></a>class decorators appear just before <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statements (just as function
            decorators appear just before function definitions). In symbolic
            terms, assuming that <code class="epub__literal">decorator</code>
            is a one-argument function that returns a callable, the class
            decorator syntax:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e97162"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">@decorator                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Decorate class</span></em>
class C:
    ...

x = C(99)                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Make an instance</span></em></pre>
<p>is equivalent to the following—the class is automatically
            passed to the decorator function, and the decorator’s result is
            assigned back to the class name:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e97171"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class C:
    ...
C = decorator(C)           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Rebind class name to decorator result</span></em>

x = C(99)                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Essentially calls decorator(C)(99)</span></em></pre>
<p>The net effect is that calling the class name later to
            create an instance winds up triggering the callable returned by
            the decorator, instead of calling the original class
            itself.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Implementation"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="implementation-id1"></a>Implementation</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>New <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e97185"></a>class decorators are coded using many of the same
            techniques used for function decorators. Because a class decorator
            is also a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>callable that returns a callable</em></span>,
            most combinations of functions and classes suffice.</p>
<p>However it’s coded, the decorator’s result is what runs when
            an instance is later created. For example, to simply manage a
            class just after it is created, return the original class
            itself:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e97196"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def decorator(C):
    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Process class C</span></em>
    return C

@decorator
class C: ...                                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># C = decorator(C)</span></em></pre>
<p>To instead insert a wrapper layer that intercepts later
            instance creation calls, return a different callable
            object:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e97205"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def decorator(C):
    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Save or use class C</span></em>
    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Return a different callable: nested def, class with __call__, etc.</span></em>

@decorator
class C: ...                                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># C = decorator(C)</span></em></pre>
<p>The callable returned by such a class decorator typically
            creates and returns a new instance of the original class,
            augmented in some way to manage its interface. For example, the
            following inserts an object that intercepts undefined attributes
            of a class instance:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e97217"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def decorator(cls):                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On @ decoration</span></em>
    class Wrapper:
        def __init__(self, *args):              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On instance creation</span></em>
            self.wrapped = cls(*args)
        def __getattr__(self, name):            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On attribute fetch</span></em>
            return getattr(self.wrapped, name)
    return Wrapper

@decorator
class C:                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># C = decorator(C)</span></em>
    def __init__(self, x, y):        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Run by Wrapper.__init__</span></em>
        self.attr = 'spam'

x = C(6, 7)                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Really calls Wrapper(6, 7)</span></em>
print(x.attr)                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs Wrapper.__getattr__, prints "spam"</span></em></pre>
<p>In this example, the decorator rebinds the class name to
            another class, which retains the original class in an enclosing
            scope and creates and embeds an instance of the original class
            when it’s called. When an attribute is later fetched from the
            instance, it is intercepted by the wrapper’s <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> and delegated to the
            embedded instance of the original class. Moreover, each decorated
            class creates a new scope, which remembers the original class.
            We’ll flesh out this example into some more useful code later in
            this chapter.</p>
<p>Like function decorators, class
            decorators are commonly coded as either “factory” functions that
            create and return callables, classes that use <code class="epub__literal">__init__</code> or <code class="epub__literal">__call__</code> methods to intercept call
            operations, or some combination thereof. Factory functions
            typically retain state in enclosing scope references, and classes
            in attributes.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Supporting multiple instances"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="supporting_multiple_instances"></a>Supporting multiple instances</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As with <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e97259"></a>function decorators, with class decorators some
            callable type combinations work better than others. Consider the
            following invalid alternative to the class decorator of the prior
            example:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e97265"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Decorator:
    def __init__(self, C):                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On @ decoration</span></em>
        self.C = C
    def __call__(self, *args):                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On instance creation</span></em>
        self.wrapped = self.C(*args)
        return self
    def __getattr__(self, attrname):          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On atrribute fetch</span></em>
        return getattr(self.wrapped, attrname)

@Decorator
class C: ...                                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># C = Decorator(C)</span></em>

x = C()
y = C()                                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Overwrites x!</span></em></pre>
<p>This code handles multiple decorated classes (each makes a
            new <code class="epub__literal">Decorator</code> instance) and
            will intercept instance creation calls (each runs <code class="epub__literal">__call__</code>). Unlike the prior version,
            however, this version fails to handle <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>multiple
            instances</em></span> of a given class—each instance creation call
            overwrites the prior saved instance. The original version does
            support multiple instances, because each instance creation call
            makes a new independent wrapper object. More generally, either of
            the following patterns supports multiple wrapped instances:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e97292"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def decorator(C):                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On @ decoration</span></em>
    class Wrapper:
        def __init__(self, *args):            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On instance creation</span></em>
            self.wrapped = C(*args)
    return Wrapper

class Wrapper: ...
def decorator(C):                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On @ decoration</span></em>
    def onCall(*args):                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On instance creation</span></em>
        return Wrapper(C(*args))              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Embed instance in instance</span></em>
    return onCall</pre>
<p>We’ll study this phenomenon in a more realistic context
            later in the chapter; in practice, though, we must be careful to
            combine callable types properly to support our <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e97311"></a>intent.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Decorator Nesting"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="decorator_nesting"></a>Decorator Nesting</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Sometimes one <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e97319"></a>decorator isn’t enough. To support multiple steps of
          augmentation, decorator syntax allows you to add multiple layers of
          wrapper logic to a decorated function or method. When this feature
          is used, each decorator must appear on a line of its own. Decorator
          syntax of this form:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e97325"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">@A
@B
@C
def f(...):
    ...</pre>
<p>runs the same as the following:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e97329"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def f(...):
    ...
f = A(B(C(f)))</pre>
<p>Here, the original function is passed through three different
          decorators, and the resulting callable object is assigned back to
          the original name. Each decorator processes the result of the prior,
          which may be the original function or an inserted wrapper.</p>
<p>If all the decorators insert wrappers, the net effect is that
          when the original function name is called, three different layers of
          wrapping object logic will be invoked, to augment the original
          function in three different ways. The last decorator listed is the
          first applied, and the most deeply nested (insert joke about
          “interior decorators” here...).</p>
<p>Just as for functions, multiple class decorators result in
          multiple nested function calls, and possibly multiple levels of
          wrapper logic around instance creation calls. For example, the
          following code:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e97337"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">@spam
@eggs
class C:
    ...

X = C()</pre>
<p>is equivalent to the following:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e97341"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class C:
    ...
C = spam(eggs(C))

X = C()</pre>
<p>Again, each decorator is free to return either the original
          class or an inserted wrapper object. With wrappers, when an instance
          of the original <code class="epub__literal">C</code> class is
          finally requested, the call is redirected to the wrapping layer
          objects provided by both the <code class="epub__literal">spam</code>
          and <code class="epub__literal">eggs</code> decorators, which may
          have arbitrarily different roles.</p>
<p>For example, the following
          do-nothing decorators simply return the decorated function:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e97361"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def d1(F): return F
def d2(F): return F
def d3(F): return F

@d1
@d2
@d3
def func():               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># func = d1(d2(d3(func)))</span></em>
    print('spam')

func()                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Prints "spam"</span></em></pre>
<p>The same syntax works on classes, as do these same do-nothing
          decorators.</p>
<p>When decorators insert wrapper function objects, though, they
          may augment the original function when called—the following
          concatenates to its result in the decorator layers, as it runs the
          layers from inner to outer:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e97372"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def d1(F): return lambda: 'X' + F()
def d2(F): return lambda: 'Y' + F()
def d3(F): return lambda: 'Z' + F()

@d1
@d2
@d3
def func():               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># func = d1(d2(d3(func)))</span></em>
    return 'spam'

print(func())             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Prints "XYZspam"</span></em></pre>
<p>We use <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code> functions to
          implement wrapper layers here (each retains the wrapped function in
          an enclosing scope); in practice, wrappers can take the form of
          functions, callable classes, and more. When designed well, decorator
          nesting allows us to combine augmentation steps in a wide variety of
          ways.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Decorator Arguments"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="decorator_arguments"></a>Decorator Arguments</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Both <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e97389"></a>function and class decorators can also seem to take
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>arguments</em></span>, although really these arguments are
          passed to a callable that in effect <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>returns</em></span> the
          decorator, which in turn returns a callable. The following, for
          instance:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e97401"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">@decorator(A, B)
def F(arg):
    ...

F(99)</pre>
<p>is automatically mapped into this equivalent form, where
          <code class="epub__literal">decorator</code> is a callable that
          returns the actual decorator. The returned decorator in turn returns
          the callable run later for calls to the original function
          name:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e97408"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def F(arg):
    ...
F = decorator(A, B)(F)    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Rebind F to result of decorator's return value</span></em>

F(99)                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Essentially calls decorator(A, B)(F)(99)</span></em></pre>
<p>Decorator arguments are resolved before decoration ever
          occurs, and they are usually used to retain state information for
          use in later calls. The decorator function in this example, for
          instance, might take a form like the following:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e97417"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def decorator(A, B):
    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Save or use A, B</span></em>
    def actualDecorator(F):
        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Save or use function F</span></em>
        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Return a callable: nested def, class with __call__, etc.</span></em>
        return callable
    return actualDecorator</pre>
<p>The outer function in this structure generally saves the
          decorator arguments away as state information, for use in the actual
          decorator, the callable it returns, or both. This code snippet
          retains the state information argument in enclosing function scope
          references, but class attributes are commonly used as well.</p>
<p>In other words, decorator arguments often imply
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>three levels of callables</em></span>: a callable to accept
          decorator arguments, which returns a callable to serve as decorator,
          which returns a callable to handle calls to the original function or
          class. Each of the three levels may be a function or class and may
          retain state in the form of scopes or class attributes. We’ll see
          concrete examples of decorator arguments employed later in this
          chapter.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Decorators Manage Functions and Classes, Too"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="decorators_manage_functions_and_classes"></a>Decorators Manage Functions and Classes, Too</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Although <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e97440"></a>much of the rest of this chapter focuses on wrapping
          later calls to functions and classes, I should underscore that the
          decorator mechanism is more general than this—it is a protocol for
          passing functions and classes through a callable immediately after
          they are created. As such, it can also be used to invoke arbitrary
          post-creation processing:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e97446"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def decorator(O):
    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Save or augment function or class O</span></em>
    return O

@decorator
def F(): ...                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># F = decorator(F)</span></em>

@decorator
class C: ...                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># C = decorator(C)</span></em></pre>
<p>As long as we return the original decorated object this way
          instead of a wrapper, we can manage functions and classes
          themselves, not just later calls to them. We’ll see more realistic
          examples later in this chapter that use this idea to register
          callable objects to an API with decoration and assign attributes to
          functions when they are <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e97458"></a>created.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Coding Function Decorators"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
