<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Coding Function Decorators</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="coding_function_decorators"></a>Coding Function Decorators</h1>
<p>On <a id="ch38decfundeccod"></a><a id="ch38fundeccod"></a>to the code—in the rest of this chapter, we are going to
        study working examples that demonstrate the decorator concepts we just
        explored. This section presents a handful of function decorators at
        work, and the next shows class decorators in action. Following that,
        we’ll close out with some larger case studies of class and function
        decorator usage.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Tracing Calls"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="tracing_calls"></a>Tracing Calls</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To get <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e97484"></a>started, let’s revive the call tracer example we met
          in Chapter 31. The following defines
          and applies a function decorator that counts the number of calls
          made to the decorated function and prints a trace message for each
          call:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e97494"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class tracer:
    def __init__(self, func):             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On @ decoration: save original func</span></em>
        self.calls = 0
        self.func = func
    def __call__(self, *args):            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On later calls: run original func</span></em>
        self.calls += 1
        print('call %s to %s' % (self.calls, self.func.__name__))
        self.func(*args)

@tracer
def spam(a, b, c):           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># spam = tracer(spam)</span></em>
    print(a + b + c)         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Wraps spam in a decorator object</span></em></pre>
<p>Notice how each function decorated with this class will create
          a new instance, with its own saved function object and calls
          counter. Also observe how the <code class="epub__literal">*args</code> argument syntax is used to pack and
          unpack arbitrarily many passed-in arguments. This generality enables
          this decorator to be used to wrap any function with any number of
          arguments (this version doesn’t yet work on class methods, but we’ll
          fix that later in this section).</p>
<p>Now, if we import this module’s function and test it
          interactively, we get the following sort of behavior—each call
          generates a trace message initially, because the decorator class
          intercepts it. This code runs under both Python 2.6 and 3.0, as does
          all code in this chapter unless otherwise noted:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e97514"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from decorator1 import spam</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>spam(1, 2, 3)</code></strong>            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Really calls the tracer wrapper object</span></em>
call 1 to spam
6

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>spam('a', 'b', 'c')</code></strong>      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Invokes __call__ in class</span></em>
call 2 to spam
abc

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>spam.calls</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Number calls in wrapper state information</span></em>
2
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>spam</code></strong>
&lt;decorator1.tracer object at 0x02D9A730&gt;</pre>
<p>When run, the <code class="epub__literal">tracer</code> class
          saves away the decorated function, and intercepts later calls to it,
          in order to add a layer of logic that counts and prints each call.
          Notice how the total number of calls shows up as an attribute of the
          decorated function—<code class="epub__literal">spam</code> is really
          an instance of the <code class="epub__literal">tracer</code> class
          when decorated (a finding that may have ramifications for programs
          that do type checking, but is generally benign).</p>
<p>For function calls, the <code class="epub__literal">@</code>
          decoration syntax can be more convenient than modifying each call to
          account for the extra logic level, and it avoids accidentally
          calling the original function directly. Consider a nondecorator
          equivalent such as the following:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e97557"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">calls = 0
def tracer(func, *args):
    global calls
    calls += 1
    print('call %s to %s' % (calls, func.__name__))
    func(*args)

def spam(a, b, c):
    print(a, b, c)

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>spam(1, 2, 3)</code></strong>            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Normal non-traced call: accidental?</span></em>
1 2 3

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>tracer(spam, 1, 2, 3)</code></strong>    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Special traced call without decorators</span></em>
call 1 to spam
1 2 3</pre>
<p>This alternative can be used on any function without the
          special <code class="epub__literal">@</code> syntax, but unlike the
          decorator version, it requires extra syntax at every place where the
          function is called in your code; furthermore, its intent may not be
          as obvious, and it does not ensure that the extra layer will be
          invoked for normal calls. Although decorators are never
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>required</em></span> (we can always rebind names manually),
          they are often the most convenient option.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="State Information Retention Options"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="state_information_retention_options"></a>State Information Retention Options</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <a id="ch3832fundeccodstatinfreten"></a>last example of the prior section raises an important
          issue. Function decorators have a variety of options for retaining
          state information provided at decoration time, for use during the
          actual function call. They generally need to support multiple
          decorated objects and multiple calls, but there are a number of ways
          to implement these goals: instance attributes, global variables,
          nonlocal variables, and function attributes can all be used for
          retaining state<a id="ch38-state-retention"></a>.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Class instance attributes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="class_instance_attributes"></a>Class instance attributes</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>For example, here is an augmented version of the prior
            example, which adds support for <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>keyword</em></span>
            arguments and <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>returns</em></span> the wrapped function’s
            result to support more use cases:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e97609"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class tracer:                                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># State via instance attributes</span></em>
    def __init__(self, func):                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On @ decorator</span></em>
        self.calls = 0                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Save func for later call</span></em>
        self.func  = func
    def __call__(self, *args, **kwargs):     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On call to original function</span></em>
        self.calls += 1
        print('call %s to %s' % (self.calls, self.func.__name__))
        return self.func(*args, **kwargs)

@tracer
def spam(a, b, c):          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same as: spam = tracer(spam)</span></em>
    print(a + b + c)        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Triggers tracer.__init__</span></em>

@tracer
def eggs(x, y):             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same as: eggs = tracer(eggs)</span></em>
    print(x ** y)           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Wraps eggs in a tracer object</span></em>

spam(1, 2, 3)               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Really calls tracer instance: runs tracer.__call__</span></em>
spam(a=4, b=5, c=6)         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># spam is an instance attribute</span></em>

eggs(2, 16)                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Really calls tracer instance, self.func is eggs</span></em>
eggs(4, y=4)                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># self.calls is per-function here (need 3.0 nonlocal)</span></em></pre>
<p>Like the original, this uses <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>class instance
            attributes</em></span> to save state explicitly. Both the wrapped
            function and the calls counter are
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>per-instance</em></span> information—each decoration gets
            its own copy. When run as a script under either 2.6 or 3.0, the
            output of this version is as follows; notice how the <code class="epub__literal">spam</code> and <code class="epub__literal">eggs</code> functions each have their own calls
            counter, because each decoration creates a new class
            instance:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e97662"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">call 1 to spam
6
call 2 to spam
15
call 1 to eggs
65536
call 2 to eggs
256</pre>
<p>While useful for decorating functions, this coding scheme
            has issues when applied to methods (more on this later).</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Enclosing scopes and globals"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="enclosing_scopes_and_globals"></a>Enclosing scopes and globals</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Enclosing <code class="epub__literal">def</code> scope
            references and nested <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s can
            often achieve the same effect, especially for static data like the
            decorated original function. In this example, though, we would
            also need a counter in the enclosing scope that changes on each
            call, and that’s not possible in Python 2.6. In 2.6, we can either
            use classes and attributes, as we did earlier, or move the state
            variable out to the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>global scope</em></span>, with global
            declarations:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e97680"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">calls = 0
def tracer(func):                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># State via enclosing scope and global</span></em>
    def wrapper(*args, **kwargs):         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Instead of class attributes</span></em>
        global calls                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># calls is global, not per-function</span></em>
        calls += 1
        print('call %s to %s' % (calls, func.__name__))
        return func(*args, **kwargs)
    return wrapper

@tracer
def spam(a, b, c):        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same as: spam = tracer(spam)</span></em>
    print(a + b + c)

@tracer
def eggs(x, y):           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same as: eggs = tracer(eggs)</span></em>
    print(x ** y)

spam(1, 2, 3)             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Really calls wrapper, bound to func</span></em>
spam(a=4, b=5, c=6)       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># wrapper calls spam</span></em>

eggs(2, 16)               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Really calls wrapper, bound to eggs</span></em>
eggs(4, y=4)              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Global calls is not per-function here!</span></em></pre>
<p>Unfortunately, moving the counter out to the common global
            scope to allow it to be changed like this also means that it will
            be <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>shared</em></span> by every wrapped function. Unlike
            class instance attributes, global counters are cross-program, not
            per-function—the counter is incremented for
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>any</em></span> traced function call. You can tell the
            difference if you compare this version’s output with the prior
            version’s—the single, shared global call counter is incorrectly
            updated by calls to every decorated function:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e97717"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">call 1 to spam
6
call 2 to spam
15
call 3 to eggs
65536
call 4 to eggs
256</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Enclosing scopes and nonlocals"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="enclosing_scopes_and_nonlocals"></a>Enclosing scopes and nonlocals</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Shared global state may be what we want in some cases. If we
            really want a <span class="epub__keep-together">per-function</span> counter, though, we
            can either use classes as before, or make use of the new <code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code> statement in Python 3.0,
            described in Chapter 17. Because this new statement
            allows enclosing function scope variables to be changed, they can
            serve as per-decoration and
            changeable data:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e97735"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def tracer(func):                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># State via enclosing scope and nonlocal</span></em>
    calls = 0                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Instead of class attrs or global</span></em>
    def wrapper(*args, **kwargs):        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># calls is per-function, not global</span></em>
        nonlocal calls
        calls += 1
        print('call %s to %s' % (calls, func.__name__))
        return func(*args, **kwargs)
    return wrapper

@tracer
def spam(a, b, c):        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same as: spam = tracer(spam)</span></em>
    print(a + b + c)

@tracer
def eggs(x, y):           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same as: eggs = tracer(eggs)</span></em>
    print(x ** y)

spam(1, 2, 3)             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Really calls wrapper, bound to func</span></em>
spam(a=4, b=5, c=6)       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># wrapper calls spam</span></em>

eggs(2, 16)               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Really calls wrapper, bound to eggs</span></em>
eggs(4, y=4)              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Nonlocal calls _is_ not per-function here</span></em></pre>
<p>Now, because enclosing scope variables are not cross-program
            globals, each wrapped function gets its own counter again, just as
            for classes and attributes. Here’s the new output when run under
            3.0<a id="I_indexterm3_d1e97766"></a>:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e97768"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">call 1 to spam
6
call 2 to spam
15
call 1 to eggs
65536
call 2 to eggs
256</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Function attributes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="function_attributes-id1"></a>Function attributes</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Finally, if you are not using Python 3.X and don’t have a
            <code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code> statement, you may
            still be able to avoid globals and classes by making use of
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>function attributes</em></span> for some changeable state
            instead. In recent Pythons, we can assign arbitrary attributes to
            functions to attach them, with <code class="epub__literal">func.</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>attr</code></em><code class="epub__literal">=</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>value</code></em>. In
            our example, we can simply use <code class="epub__literal">wrapper.calls</code> for state. The
            following works the same as the preceding <code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code> version because the counter is
            again per-decorated-function, but it also runs in Python
            2.6:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e97797"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def tracer(func):                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># State via enclosing scope and func attr</span></em>
    def wrapper(*args, **kwargs):        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># calls is per-function, not global</span></em>
        wrapper.calls += 1
        print('call %s to %s' % (wrapper.calls, func.__name__))
        return func(*args, **kwargs)
    wrapper.calls = 0
    return wrapper</pre>
<p>Notice that this only works because the name <code class="epub__literal">wrapper</code> is retained in the enclosing
            <code class="epub__literal">tracer</code> function’s scope. When
            we later increment <code class="epub__literal">wrapper.calls</code>, we are not changing the
            name <code class="epub__literal">wrapper</code> itself, so no
            <code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code> declaration is
            required.</p>
<p>This scheme was almost relegated to a footnote, because it
            is more obscure than <code class="epub__literal">nonlocal</code> in 3.0 and is probably
            better saved for cases where other schemes don’t help. However, we
            will employ it in an answer to one of the end-of-chapter
            questions, where we’ll need to access the saved state from
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>outside</em></span> the decorator’s code; nonlocals can
            only be seen inside the nested function itself, but function
            attributes have wider visibility.</p>
<p>Because decorators often imply multiple levels of callables,
            you can combine functions with enclosing scopes and classes with
            attributes to achieve a variety of coding structures. As we’ll see
            later, though, this sometimes may be subtler than you expect—each
            decorated function should have its own state, and each decorated
            class may require state both for itself and for each generated
            instance.</p>
<p>In fact, as the next section will explain, if we want to
            apply function decorators to class methods, too, we also have to
            be careful about the distinction Python makes between decorators
            coded as callable class instance objects and decorators coded as
            <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e97837"></a>functions.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Class Blunders I: Decorating Class Methods"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="class_blunders_i_colon_decorating_class"></a>Class Blunders I: Decorating Class Methods</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>When <a id="ch3833fundeccoddecclssmeth"></a>I wrote the first <code class="epub__literal">tracer</code> function decorator above, I naively
          assumed that it could also be applied to any
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>method</em></span>—decorated methods should work the same,
          but the automatic <code class="epub__literal">self</code> instance
          argument would simply be included at the front of <code class="epub__literal">*args</code>. Unfortunately, I was wrong: when
          applied to a class’s method, the first version of the <code class="epub__literal">tracer</code> fails, because <code class="epub__literal">self</code> is the instance of the decorator
          class and the instance of the decorated subject class is not
          included in <code class="epub__literal">*args</code>. This is true
          in both Python 3.0 and 2.6.</p>
<p>I introduced this phenomenon earlier in this chapter, but now
          we can see it in the context of realistic working code. Given the
          class-based tracing decorator:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e97877"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class tracer:
    def __init__(self, func):                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On @ decorator</span></em>
        self.calls = 0                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Save func for later call</span></em>
        self.func  = func
    def __call__(self, *args, **kwargs):     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On call to original function</span></em>
        self.calls += 1
        print('call %s to %s' % (self.calls, self.func.__name__))
        return self.func(*args, **kwargs)</pre>
<p>decoration of simple functions works as advertised
          earlier:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e97890"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">@tracer
def spam(a, b, c):                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># spam = tracer(spam)</span></em>
    print(a + b + c)                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Triggers tracer.__init__</span></em>

spam(1, 2, 3)                                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs tracer.__call__</span></em>
spam(a=4, b=5, c=6)                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># spam is an instance attribute</span></em></pre>
<p>However, decoration of class methods
          fails (more lucid readers might recognize this as our <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> class resurrected from the
          object-oriented tutorial in Chapter 27):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e97911"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Person:
    def __init__(self, name, pay):
        self.name = name
        self.pay  = pay

    @tracer
    def giveRaise(self, percent):            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># giveRaise = tracer(giveRaise)</span></em>
        self.pay *= (1.0 + percent)

    @tracer
    def lastName(self):                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># lastName = tracer(lastName)</span></em>
        return self.name.split()[-1]

bob = Person('Bob Smith', 50000)             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># tracer remembers method funcs</span></em>
bob.giveRaise(.25)                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs tracer.__call__(???, .25)</span></em>
print(bob.lastName())                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs tracer.__call__(???)</span></em></pre>
<p>The root of the problem here is in the <code class="epub__literal">self</code> argument of the tracer class’s
          <code class="epub__literal">__call__</code> method—is it a <code class="epub__literal">tracer</code> instance or a <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> instance? We really need
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>both</em></span> as it’s coded: the <code class="epub__literal">tracer</code> for decorator state, and the
          <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> for routing on to the
          original method. Really, <code class="epub__literal">self</code>
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>must</em></span> be the <code class="epub__literal">tracer</code> object, to provide access to
          <code class="epub__literal">tracer</code>’s state information; this
          is true whether decorating a simple function or a method.</p>
<p>Unfortunately, when our decorated method name is rebound to a
          class instance object with a <code class="epub__literal">__call__</code>, Python passes only the <code class="epub__literal">tracer</code> <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>instance</em></span> to
          <code class="epub__literal">self</code>; it doesn’t pass along the
          <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> subject in the arguments
          list at all. Moreover, because the <code class="epub__literal">tracer</code> knows nothing about the <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> instance we are trying to process
          with method calls, there’s no way to create a bound method with an
          instance, and thus no way to correctly dispatch the call.</p>
<p>In fact, the prior listing winds up passing too few arguments
          to the decorated method, and results in an error. Add a line to the
          decorator’s <code class="epub__literal">__call__</code> to print all
          its arguments to verify this; as you can see, <code class="epub__literal">self</code> is the <code class="epub__literal">tracer</code>, and the <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> instance is entirely absent:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e98006"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&lt;__main__.tracer object at 0x02D6AD90&gt; (0.25,) {}
call 1 to giveRaise
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "C:/misc/tracer.py", line 56, in &lt;module&gt;
    bob.giveRaise(.25)
  File "C:/misc/tracer.py", line 9, in __call__
    return self.func(*args, **kwargs)
TypeError: giveRaise() takes exactly 2 positional arguments (1 given)</pre>
<p>As mentioned earlier, this happens because Python passes the
          implied subject instance to <code class="epub__literal">self</code>
          when a method name is bound to a simple function only; when it is an
          instance of a callable class, that class’s instance is passed
          instead. Technically, Python only makes a bound method object
          containing the subject instance when the method is a simple
          function.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Using nested functions to decorate methods"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="using_nested_functions_to_decorate_meth"></a>Using nested functions to decorate methods</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>If you want your function decorators to work on
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>both</em></span> simple functions and class methods, the
            most straightforward solution lies in using one of the other state
            retention solutions described earlier—code your function decorator
            as nested <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s, so that you
            don’t depend on a single <code class="epub__literal">self</code>
            instance argument to be both the wrapper class instance and the
            subject class instance.</p>
<p>The following alternative applies this fix using Python 3.0
            nonlocals. Because decorated methods are rebound to simple
            functions instead of instance objects, Python correctly passes the
            <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> object as the first
            argument, and the decorator propagates it on in the first item of
            <code class="epub__literal">*args</code> to the <code class="epub__literal">self</code> argument of the real, decorated
            methods:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e98038"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># A decorator for both functions and methods</span></em>

def tracer(func):                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Use function, not class with __call__</span></em>
    calls = 0                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Else "self" is decorator instance only!</span></em>
    def onCall(*args, **kwargs):
        nonlocal calls
        calls += 1
        print('call %s to %s' % (calls, func.__name__))
        return func(*args, **kwargs)
    return onCall


<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Applies to simple functions</span></em>

@tracer
def spam(a, b, c):                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># spam = tracer(spam)</span></em>
    print(a + b + c)                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># onCall remembers spam</span></em>

spam(1, 2, 3)                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs onCall(1, 2, 3)</span></em>
spam(a=4, b=5, c=6)


<em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Applies to class method functions too!</span></em>

class Person:
    def __init__(self, name, pay):
        self.name = name
        self.pay  = pay

    @tracer
    def giveRaise(self, percent):        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># giveRaise = tracer(giveRaise)</span></em>
        self.pay *= (1.0 + percent)      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># onCall remembers giveRaise</span></em>

    @tracer
    def lastName(self):                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># lastName = tracer(lastName)</span></em>
        return self.name.split()[-1]

print('methods...')
bob = Person('Bob Smith', 50000)
sue = Person('Sue Jones', 100000)
print(bob.name, sue.name)
sue.giveRaise(.10)                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs onCall(sue, .10)</span></em>
print(sue.pay)
print(bob.lastName(), sue.lastName())    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs onCall(bob), lastName in scopes</span></em></pre>
<p>This version works the same on both functions and
            methods:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e98081"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">call 1 to spam
6
call 2 to spam
15
methods...
Bob Smith Sue Jones
call 1 to giveRaise
110000.0
call 1 to lastName
call 2 to lastName
Smith Jones</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Using descriptors to decorate methods"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="using_descriptors_to_decorate_methods"></a>Using descriptors to decorate methods</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Although the nested function solution illustrated in the
            prior section is the most straightforward way to support
            decorators that apply to both functions and class methods, other
            schemes are possible. The descriptor feature we explored in the
            prior chapter, for example, can help here as well.</p>
<p>Recall from our discussion in that chapter that a descriptor
            may be a class attribute assigned to objects with a <code class="epub__literal">__get__</code> method run automatically when
            that attribute is referenced and fetched (<code class="epub__literal">object</code> derivation is required in Python
            2.6, but not 3.0):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e98096"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Descriptor(object):
    def __get__(self, instance, owner): ...

class Subject:
    attr = Descriptor()

X = Subject()
X.attr         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Roughly runs Descriptor.__get__(Subject.attr, X, Subject)</span></em></pre>
<p>Descriptors may also have <code class="epub__literal">__set__</code> and <code class="epub__literal">__del__</code> access methods, but we don’t
            need them here. Now, because the descriptor’s <code class="epub__literal">__get__</code> method receives
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>both</em></span> the descriptor class and subject class
            instances when invoked, it’s well suited to decorating methods
            when we need both the decorator’s state and the original class
            instance for dispatching calls. Consider the following alternative
            tracing decorator, which is also a descriptor:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e98114"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class tracer(object):
    def __init__(self, func):                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On @ decorator</span></em>
        self.calls = 0                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Save func for later call</span></em>
        self.func  = func
    def __call__(self, *args, **kwargs):     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On call to original func</span></em>
        self.calls += 1
        print('call %s to %s' % (self.calls, self.func.__name__))
        return self.func(*args, **kwargs)
    def __get__(self, instance, owner):      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On method attribute fetch</span></em>
        return wrapper(self, instance)

class wrapper:
    def __init__(self, desc, subj):          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Save both instances</span></em>
        self.desc = desc                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Route calls back to  decr</span></em>
        self.subj = subj
    def __call__(self, *args, **kwargs):
        return self.desc(self.subj, *args, **kwargs)  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs tracer.__call__</span></em>

@tracer
def spam(a, b, c):                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># spam = tracer(spam)</span></em>
    <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...same as prior...</code></em>                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Uses __call__ only</span></em>

class Person:
    @tracer
    def giveRaise(self, percent):            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># giveRaise = tracer(giverRaise)</span></em>
        <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>...same as prior...</code></em>                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Makes giveRaise a descriptor</span></em></pre>
<p>This works the same as the preceding nested function coding.
            Decorated functions invoke only its <code class="epub__literal">__call__</code>, while decorated methods invoke
            its <code class="epub__literal">__get__</code> first to resolve
            the method name fetch (on
            <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>instance</code></em><code class="epub__literal">.</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>method</code></em>); the
            object returned by <code class="epub__literal">__get__</code>
            retains the subject class instance and is then invoked to complete
            the call expression, thereby triggering <code class="epub__literal">__call__</code> (on <code class="epub__literal">(</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>args...</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code>). For example, the test code’s call
            to:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e98185"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">sue.giveRaise(.10)                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs __get__ then __call__</span></em></pre>
<p>run’s <code class="epub__literal">tracer.__get__</code>
            first, because the <code class="epub__literal">giveRaise</code>
            attribute in the <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> class
            has been rebound to a descriptor by the function decorator. The
            call expression then triggers the <code class="epub__literal">__call__</code> method of the returned <code class="epub__literal">wrapper</code> object, which in turn invokes
            <code class="epub__literal">tracer.__call__</code>.</p>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">wrapper</code> object
            retains both descriptor and subject instances, so it can route
            control back to the original decorator/descriptor class instance.
            In effect, the <code class="epub__literal">wrapper</code> object
            saves the subject class instance available during method attribute
            fetch and adds it to the later call’s arguments list, which is
            passed to <code class="epub__literal">__call__</code>. Routing the
            call back to the descriptor class instance this way is required in
            this application so that all calls to a wrapped method use the
            same <code class="epub__literal">calls</code> counter state
            information in the descriptor instance object.</p>
<p>Alternatively, we could use a nested function and enclosing
            scope references to achieve the same effect—the following version
            works the same as the preceding one, by swapping a class and
            object attributes for a nested function and scope references, but
            it requires noticeably less code:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e98227"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class tracer(object):
    def __init__(self, func):                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On @ decorator</span></em>
        self.calls = 0                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Save func for later call</span></em>
        self.func  = func
    def __call__(self, *args, **kwargs):     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On call to original func</span></em>
        self.calls += 1
        print('call %s to %s' % (self.calls, self.func.__name__))
        return self.func(*args, **kwargs)
    def __get__(self, instance, owner):                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On method fetch</span></em>
        def wrapper(*args, **kwargs):                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Retain both inst</span></em>
            return self(instance, *args, **kwargs)     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs __call__</span></em>
        return wrapper</pre>
<p>Add <code class="epub__literal">print</code> statements to
            these alternatives’ methods to trace the two-step get/call process on your own, and run them
            with the same test code as in the nested function alternative
            shown earlier. In either coding, this descriptor-based scheme is
            also substantially subtler than the nested function option, and so
            is probably a second choice here; it may be a useful coding
            pattern in other contexts, though.</p>
<p>In the rest of this chapter we’re going to be fairly casual
            about using classes or functions to code our function decorators,
            as long as they are applied only to functions. Some decorators may
            not require the instance of the original class, and will still
            work on both functions and methods if coded as a class—something
            like Python’s own <code class="epub__literal">staticmethod</code> decorator, for
            example, wouldn’t require an instance of the subject class
            (indeed, its whole point is to remove the instance from the
            call).</p>
<p>The moral of this story, though, is that if you want your
            decorators to work on both simple functions and class methods,
            you’re better off using the nested-function-based coding pattern
            outlined here instead of a class with <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e98264"></a>call interception.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Timing Calls"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="timing_calls"></a>Timing Calls</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To <a id="ch3834fundeccodtimcalls"></a>sample the fuller flavor of what function decorators
          are capable of, let’s turn to a different use case. Our next
          decorator times calls made to a decorated function—both the time for
          one call, and the total time among all calls. The decorator is
          applied to two functions, in order to compare the time requirements
          of list comprehensions and the <code class="epub__literal">map</code> built-in call (for comparison, also
          see Chapter 20 for
          another nondecorator example that times iteration alternatives like
          these):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e98285"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import time

class timer:
    def __init__(self, func):
        self.func    = func
        self.alltime = 0
    def __call__(self, *args, **kargs):
        start   = time.clock()
        result  = self.func(*args, **kargs)
        elapsed = time.clock() - start
        self.alltime += elapsed
        print('%s: %.5f, %.5f' % (self.func.__name__, elapsed, self.alltime))
        return result

@timer
def listcomp(N):
    return [x * 2 for x in range(N)]

@timer
def mapcall(N):
    return map((lambda x: x * 2), range(N))

result = listcomp(5)                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Time for this call, all calls, return value</span></em>
listcomp(50000)
listcomp(500000)
listcomp(1000000)
print(result)
print('allTime = %s' % listcomp.alltime)      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Total time for all listcomp calls</span></em>

print('')
result = mapcall(5)
mapcall(50000)
mapcall(500000)
mapcall(1000000)
print(result)
print('allTime = %s' % mapcall.alltime)       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Total time for all mapcall calls</span></em>

print('map/comp = %s' % round(mapcall.alltime / listcomp.alltime, 3))</pre>
<p>In this case, a nondecorator approach would allow the subject
          functions to be used with or without timing, but it would also
          complicate the call signature when timing is desired (we’d need to
          add code at every call instead of once at the <code class="epub__literal">def</code>), and there would be no direct way to
          guarantee that all list builder calls in a program are routed
          through timer logic, short of finding and potentially changing them
          all.</p>
<p>When run in Python 2.6, the output of this file’s self-test
          code is as follows:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e98303"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">listcomp: 0.00002, 0.00002
listcomp: 0.00910, 0.00912
listcomp: 0.09105, 0.10017
listcomp: 0.17605, 0.27622
[0, 2, 4, 6, 8]
allTime = 0.276223304917

mapcall: 0.00003, 0.00003
mapcall: 0.01363, 0.01366
mapcall: 0.13579, 0.14945
mapcall: 0.27648, 0.42593
[0, 2, 4, 6, 8]
allTime = 0.425933533452
map/comp = 1.542</pre>
<p>Testing subtlety: I didn’t run this under Python 3.0 because,
          as described in Chapter 14, the <code class="epub__literal">map</code> built-in returns an
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>iterator</em></span> in 3.0, instead of an actual list as
          in 2.6. Hence, 3.0’s <code class="epub__literal">map</code> doesn’t
          quite compare directly to a list comprehension’s work (as is, the
          <code class="epub__literal">map</code> test takes virtually no time
          at all in 3.0!).</p>
<p>If you wish to run this under 3.0, too, use <code class="epub__literal">list(map())</code> to force it to build a list
          like the list comprehension does, or else you’re not really
          comparing apples to apples. Don’t do so in 2.6, though—if you do,
          the <code class="epub__literal">map</code> test will be charged for
          building two lists, not one.</p>
<p>The following sort of code would pick fairly for 2.6 and 3.0;
          note, though, that while this makes the comparison between list
          comprehensions and <code class="epub__literal">map</code> more fair
          in either 2.6 or 3.0, because <code class="epub__literal">range</code> is also an iterator in 3.0, the
          results for 2.6 and 3.0 won’t compare directly:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e98337"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">...
import sys

@timer
def listcomp(N):
    return [x * 2 for x in range(N)]

if sys.version_info[0] == 2:
    @timer
    def mapcall(N):
        return map((lambda x: x * 2), range(N))
else:
    @timer
    def mapcall(N):
        return list(map((lambda x: x * 2), range(N)))
    ...</pre>
<p>Finally, as we learned in the modules part of this book if you
          want to be able to reuse this decorator in other modules, you should
          indent the self-test code at the bottom of the file under a <code class="epub__literal">__name__ == '__main__'</code> test so it runs
          only when the file is run, not when it’s imported. We won’t do this,
          though, because we’re about to add another feature to our <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e98344"></a>code.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Adding Decorator Arguments"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="adding_decorator_arguments"></a>Adding Decorator Arguments</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <a id="ch3835fundeccodaddargs"></a>timer decorator of the prior section works, but it
          would be nice if it was more configurable—providing an output label
          and turning trace messages on and off, for instance, might be useful
          in a general-purpose tool like this. Decorator arguments come in
          handy here: when they’re coded properly, we can use them to specify
          configuration options that can vary for each decorated function. A
          label, for instance, might be added as follows:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e98360"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def timer(label=''):
    def decorator(func):
        def onCall(*args):          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># args passed to function</span></em>
            ...                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># func retained in enclosing scope</span></em>
            print(label, ...        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># label retained in enclosing scope</span></em>
        return onCall
    return decorator                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Returns that actual decorator</span></em>

@timer('==&gt;')                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Like listcomp = timer('==&gt;')(listcomp)</span></em>
def listcomp(N): ...                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># listcomp is rebound to decorator</span></em>

listcomp(...)                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Really calls decorator</span></em></pre>
<p>This code adds an enclosing scope to retain a decorator
          argument for use on a later actual call. When the <code class="epub__literal">listcomp</code> function is defined, it really
          invokes <code class="epub__literal">decorator</code> (the result of
          <code class="epub__literal">timer</code>, run before decoration
          actually occurs), with the <code class="epub__literal">label</code>
          value available in its enclosing scope. That is, <code class="epub__literal">timer</code> <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>returns</em></span> the
          decorator, which remembers both the decorator argument and the original
          function and returns a callable which invokes the original function
          on later calls.</p>
<p>We can put this structure to use in our timer to allow a label
          and a trace control flag to be passed in at decoration time. Here’s
          an example that does just that, coded in a module file named
          <em class="epub__filename">mytools.py</em> so it can be
          imported as a general tool:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e98412"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import time

def timer(label='', trace=True):                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On decorator args: retain args</span></em>
    class Timer:
        def __init__(self, func):                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On @: retain decorated func</span></em>
            self.func    = func
            self.alltime = 0
        def __call__(self, *args, **kargs):       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># On calls: call original</span></em>
            start   = time.clock()
            result  = self.func(*args, **kargs)
            elapsed = time.clock() - start
            self.alltime += elapsed
            if trace:
                format = '%s %s: %.5f, %.5f'
                values = (label, self.func.__name__, elapsed, self.alltime)
                print(format % values)
            return result
    return Timer</pre>
<p>Mostly all we’ve done here is embed the original <code class="epub__literal">Timer</code> class in an enclosing function, in
          order to create a scope that retains the decorator arguments. The
          outer <code class="epub__literal">timer</code> function is called
          before decoration occurs, and it simply returns the <code class="epub__literal">Timer</code> class to serve as the actual
          decorator. On decoration, an instance of <code class="epub__literal">Timer</code> is made that remembers the decorated
          function itself, but also has access to the decorator arguments in
          the enclosing function scope.</p>
<p>This time, rather than embedding self-test code in this file,
          we’ll run the decorator in a different file. Here’s a client of our
          timer decorator, the module file <em class="epub__filename">testseqs.py</em>, applying it to sequence
          iteration alternatives again:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e98442"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from mytools import timer

@timer(label='[CCC]==&gt;')
def listcomp(N):                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Like listcomp = timer(...)(listcomp)</span></em>
    return [x * 2 for x in range(N)]       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># listcomp(...) triggers Timer.__call__</span></em>

@timer(trace=True, label='[MMM]==&gt;')
def mapcall(N):
    return map((lambda x: x * 2), range(N))

for func in (listcomp, mapcall):
    print('')
    result = func(5)        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Time for this call, all calls, return value</span></em>
    func(50000)
    func(500000)
    func(1000000)
    print(result)
    print('allTime = %s' % func.alltime)   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Total time for all calls</span></em>

print('map/comp = %s' % round(mapcall.alltime / listcomp.alltime, 3))</pre>
<p>Again, if you wish to run this fairly in 3.0, wrap the
          <code class="epub__literal">map</code> function in a <code class="epub__literal">list</code> call. When run as-is in 2.6, this
          file prints the following output—each decorated function now has a
          label of its own, defined by decorator arguments:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e98464"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">[CCC]==&gt; listcomp: 0.00003, 0.00003
[CCC]==&gt; listcomp: 0.00640, 0.00643
[CCC]==&gt; listcomp: 0.08687, 0.09330
[CCC]==&gt; listcomp: 0.17911, 0.27241
[0, 2, 4, 6, 8]
allTime = 0.272407666337

[MMM]==&gt; mapcall: 0.00004, 0.00004
[MMM]==&gt; mapcall: 0.01340, 0.01343
[MMM]==&gt; mapcall: 0.13907, 0.15250
[MMM]==&gt; mapcall: 0.27907, 0.43157
[0, 2, 4, 6, 8]
allTime = 0.431572169089
map/comp = 1.584</pre>
<p>As usual, we can also test this interactively to see how the
          configuration arguments come into play:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e98469"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from mytools import timer</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>@timer(trace=False)</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># No tracing, collect total time</span></em>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def listcomp(N):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return [x * 2 for x in range(N)]</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = listcomp(5000)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = listcomp(5000)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = listcomp(5000)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>listcomp</code></strong>
&lt;mytools.Timer instance at 0x025C77B0&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>listcomp.alltime</code></strong>
0.0051938863738243413

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>@timer(trace=True, label='\t=&gt;')</code></strong>       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Turn on tracing</span></em>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def listcomp(N):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return [x * 2 for x in range(N)]</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = listcomp(5000)</code></strong>
        =&gt; listcomp: 0.00155, 0.00155
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = listcomp(5000)</code></strong>
        =&gt; listcomp: 0.00156, 0.00311
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = listcomp(5000)</code></strong>
        =&gt; listcomp: 0.00174, 0.00486
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>listcomp.alltime</code></strong>
0.0048562736325408196</pre>
<p>This timing function decorator can be used for any function,
          both in modules and interactively. In other words, it automatically
          qualifies as a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>general-purpose tool</em></span> for timing
          code in our scripts. Watch for another example of decorator
          arguments in the section Implementing Private Attributes, and again in A Basic Range-Testing Decorator for Positional
          Arguments.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3 class="epub__title">Note</h3>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Timing methods</em></span>: This section’s timer
            decorator works on any function, but a minor rewrite is required
            to be able to apply it to <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>class methods</em></span> too.
            In short, as our earlier section Class Blunders I: Decorating Class Methods illustrated,
            it must avoid using a nested class. Because this mutation will be
            a subject of one of our end-of-chapter quiz questions, though,
            I’ll avoid giving away the answer completely <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e98547"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e98549"></a><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e98551"></a>here.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Coding Class Decorators"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
