<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Managing Functions and Classes Directly</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="managing_functions_and_classes_directly"></a>Managing Functions and Classes Directly</h1>
<p>Most <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e99362"></a>of our examples in this chapter have been designed to
        intercept function and instance creation calls. Although this is
        typical for decorators, they are not limited to this role. Because
        decorators work by running new functions and classes through decorator
        code, they can also be used to manage function and class objects
        themselves, not just later calls made to them.</p>
<p>Imagine, for example, that you require methods or classes used
        by an application to be registered to an API for later processing
        (perhaps that API will call the objects later, in response to events).
        Although you could provide a registration function to be called
        manually after the objects are defined, decorators make your intent
        more explicit.</p>
<p>The following simple implementation of this idea defines a
        decorator that can be applied to both functions and classes, to add
        the object to a dictionary-based registry. Because it returns the
        object itself instead of a wrapper, it does not intercept later
        calls:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e99372"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Registering decorated objects to an API</span></em>

registry = {}
def register(obj):                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Both class and func decorator</span></em>
    registry[obj.__name__] = obj            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Add to registry</span></em>
    return obj                              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Return obj itself, not a wrapper</span></em>

@register
def spam(x):
    return(x ** 2)                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># spam = register(spam)</span></em>

@register
def ham(x):
    return(x ** 3)

@register
class Eggs:                                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Eggs = register(Eggs)</span></em>
    def __init__(self, x):
        self.data = x ** 4
    def __str__(self):
        return str(self.data)

print('Registry:')
for name in registry:
    print(name, '=&gt;', registry[name], type(registry[name]))

print('\nManual calls:')
print(spam(2))                              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Invoke objects manually</span></em>
print(ham(2))                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Later calls not intercepted</span></em>
X = Eggs(2)
print(X)

print('\nRegistry calls:')
for name in registry:
    print(name, '=&gt;', registry[name](3))    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Invoke from registry</span></em></pre>
<p>When this code is run the decorated objects are added to the
        registry by name, but they still work as originally coded when they’re
        called later, without being routed through a wrapper layer. In fact,
        our objects can be run both manually and from inside the registry
        table:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e99402"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">Registry:
Eggs =&gt; &lt;class '__main__.Eggs'&gt; &lt;class 'type'&gt;
ham =&gt; &lt;function ham at 0x02CFB738&gt; &lt;class 'function'&gt;
spam =&gt; &lt;function spam at 0x02CFB6F0&gt; &lt;class 'function'&gt;

Manual calls:
4
8
16

Registry calls:
Eggs =&gt; 81
ham =&gt; 27
spam =&gt; 9</pre>
<p>A user interface might use this technique, for example, to
        register callback handlers for user actions. Handlers might be
        registered by function or class name, as done here, or decorator
        arguments could be used to specify the subject event; an extra
        <code class="epub__literal">def</code> statement enclosing our
        decorator could be used to retain such arguments for use on
        decoration.</p>
<p>This example is artificial, but its technique is very general.
        For example, function decorators might also be used to process
        function attributes, and class decorators might insert new class
        attributes, or even new methods, dynamically. Consider the following
        function decorators—they assign function attributes to record
        information for later use by an API, but they do not insert a wrapper
        layer to intercept later calls:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e99411"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Augmenting decorated objects directly</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def decorate(func):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>func.marked = True</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Assign function attribute for later use</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return func</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>@decorate</code></strong>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def spam(a, b):</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return a + b</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>spam.marked</code></strong>
True

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def annotate(text):</code></strong>             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same, but value is decorator argument</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def decorate(func):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>func.label = text</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return func</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return decorate</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>@annotate('spam data')</code></strong>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def spam(a, b):</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># spam = annotate(...)(spam)</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return a + b</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>spam(1, 2), spam.label</code></strong>
(3, 'spam data')</pre>
<p>Such decorators augment functions and classes directly, without
        catching later calls to them. We’ll see more examples of class
        decorations managing classes directly in the next chapter, because
        this turns out to encroach on the domain of
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>metaclasses</em></span>; for the remainder of this chapter,
        let’s turn to two larger case studies of decorators at work.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Example: “Private” and “Public” Attributes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
