<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Example: “Private” and “Public” Attributes</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="example_colon_quotation_mark_private"></a>Example: “Private” and “Public” Attributes</h1>
<p><a id="I_indexterm3_d1e101620"></a>The <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e99485"></a>final two sections of this chapter present larger
        examples of decorator use. Both are presented with minimal
        description, partly because this chapter has exceeded its size limits,
        but mostly because you should already understand decorator basics well
        enough to study these on your own. Being general-purpose tools, these
        examples give us a chance to see how decorator concepts come together
        in more useful code.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Implementing Private Attributes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="implementing_private_attributes"></a>Implementing Private Attributes</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The following <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="ch3861clssdecprivattimplem"></a>class decorator</em></span> implements a <code class="epub__literal">Private</code> declaration for class instance
          attributes—that is, attributes stored on an instance, or inherited
          from one of its classes. It disallows fetch and change access to
          such attributes from <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>outside</em></span> the decorated
          class, but still allows the class itself to access those names
          freely within its methods. It’s not exactly C++ or Java, but it
          provides similar access control as an option in Python.</p>
<p>We saw an incomplete first-cut implementation of instance
          attribute privacy for changes only in Chapter 29. The version here extends this
          concept to validate attribute fetches too, and it uses delegation
          instead of inheritance to implement the model. In fact, in a sense
          this is just an extension to the attribute tracer class decorator we
          met earlier.</p>
<p>Although this example utilizes the new syntactic sugar of
          class decorators to code attribute privacy, its attribute
          interception is ultimately still based upon the <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> and
          <code class="epub__literal">__setattr__</code> operator overloading
          methods we met in prior chapters. When a private attribute access is
          detected, this version uses the <code class="epub__literal">raise</code> statement to raise an exception,
          along with an error message; the exception may be caught in a
          <code class="epub__literal">try</code> or allowed to terminate the
          script.</p>
<p>Here is the code, along with a self test at the bottom of the
          file. It will work under both Python 2.6 and 3.0 because it employs
          3.0 <code class="epub__literal">print</code> and <code class="epub__literal">raise</code> syntax, though it catches operator
          overloading method attributes in 2.6 only (more on this in a
          moment):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e99538"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
Privacy for attributes fetched from class instances.
See self-test code at end of file for a usage example.
Decorator same as: Doubler = Private('data', 'size')(Doubler).
Private returns onDecorator, onDecorator returns onInstance,
and each onInstance instance embeds a Doubler instance.
"""

traceMe = False
def trace(*args):
    if traceMe: print('[' + ' '.join(map(str, args)) + ']')

def Private(*privates):                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># privates in enclosing scope</span></em>
    def onDecorator(aClass):                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># aClass in enclosing scope</span></em>
        class onInstance:                        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># wrapped in instance attribute</span></em>
            def __init__(self, *args, **kargs):
                self.wrapped = aClass(*args, **kargs)
            def __getattr__(self, attr):         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># My attrs don't call getattr</span></em>
                trace('get:', attr)              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Others assumed in wrapped</span></em>
                if attr in privates:
                    raise TypeError('private attribute fetch: ' + attr)
                else:
                    return getattr(self.wrapped, attr)
            def __setattr__(self, attr, value):             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Outside accesses</span></em>
                trace('set:', attr, value)                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Others run normally</span></em>
                if attr == 'wrapped':                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Allow my attrs</span></em>
                    self.__dict__[attr] = value             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Avoid looping</span></em>
                elif attr in privates:
                    raise TypeError('private attribute change: ' + attr)
                else:
                    setattr(self.wrapped, attr, value)      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Wrapped obj attrs</span></em>
        return onInstance                                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Or use __dict__</span></em>
    return onDecorator


if __name__ == '__main__':
    traceMe = True

    @Private('data', 'size')                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Doubler = Private(...)(Doubler)</span></em>
    class Doubler:
        def __init__(self, label, start):
            self.label = label                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Accesses inside the subject class</span></em>
            self.data  = start                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Not intercepted: run normally</span></em>
        def size(self):
            return len(self.data)              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Methods run with no checking</span></em>
        def double(self):                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Because privacy not inherited</span></em>
            for i in range(self.size()):
                self.data[i] = self.data[i] * 2
        def display(self):
            print('%s =&gt; %s' % (self.label, self.data))

    X = Doubler('X is', [1, 2, 3])
    Y = Doubler('Y is', [−10, −20, −30])

    # The followng all succeed
    print(X.label)                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Accesses outside subject class</span></em>
    X.display(); X.double(); X.display()       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Intercepted: validated, delegated</span></em>
    print(Y.label)
    Y.display(); Y.double()
    Y.label = 'Spam'
    Y.display()

    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># The following all fail properly</span></em>
    """
    print(X.size())          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># prints "TypeError: private attribute fetch: size"</span></em>
    print(X.data)
    X.data = [1, 1, 1]
    X.size = lambda S: 0
    print(Y.data)
    print(Y.size())
    """</pre>
<p>When <code class="epub__literal">traceMe</code> is <code class="epub__literal">True</code>, the module file’s self-test code
          produces the following output. Notice how the decorator catches and
          validates both attribute fetches and assignments run outside of the
          wrapped class, but does not catch attribute accesses inside the
          class itself:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e99611"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">[set: wrapped &lt;__main__.Doubler object at 0x02B2AAF0&gt;]
[set: wrapped &lt;__main__.Doubler object at 0x02B2AE70&gt;]
[get: label]
X is
[get: display]
X is =&gt; [1, 2, 3]
[get: double]
[get: display]
X is =&gt; [2, 4, 6]
[get: label]
Y is
[get: display]
Y is =&gt; [−10, −20, −30]
[get: double]
[set: label Spam]
[get: display]
Spam =&gt; [−20, −40, −60]</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Implementation Details I"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="implementation_details_i"></a>Implementation Details I</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>This code is a bit complex, and you’re probably best off
          tracing through it on your own to see how it works. To help you
          study, though, here are a few highlights worth mentioning.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Inheritance versus delegation"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="inheritance_versus_delegation"></a>Inheritance versus delegation</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The first-cut privacy example shown in Chapter 29 used
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>inheritance</em></span> to mix in a <code class="epub__literal">__setattr__</code> to catch accesses.
            Inheritance makes this difficult, however, because differentiating
            between accesses from inside or outside the class is not
            straightforward (inside access should be allowed to run normally,
            and outside access should be restricted). To work around this, the
            Chapter 29 example requires
            inheriting classes to use <code class="epub__literal">__dict__</code> assignments to set
            attributes—an incomplete solution at best.</p>
<p>The version here uses <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>delegation</em></span>
            (embedding one object inside another) instead of inheritance; this
            pattern is better suited to our task, as it makes it much easier
            to distinguish between accesses inside and outside of the subject
            class. Attribute accesses from outside the subject class are
            intercepted by the wrapper layer’s overloading methods and
            delegated to the class if valid; accesses inside the class itself
            (i.e., through <code class="epub__literal">self</code> inside its
            methods’ code) are not intercepted and are allowed to run normally
            without checks, because privacy is not inherited here.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Decorator arguments"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="decorator_arguments_I"></a>Decorator arguments</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The class decorator used here accepts any number of
            arguments, to name private attributes. What really happens,
            though, is that the arguments are passed to the <code class="epub__literal">Private</code> function, and <code class="epub__literal">Private</code> returns the decorator function
            to be applied to the subject class. So, the arguments are used
            before decoration ever occurs; <code class="epub__literal">Private</code> returns the decorator, which in
            turn “remembers” the privates list as an enclosing scope
            reference.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="State retention and enclosing scopes"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="state_retention_and_enclosing_scopes"></a>State retention and enclosing scopes</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Speaking of enclosing scopes, there are actually three
            levels of state retention at work in this code:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The arguments to <code class="epub__literal">Private</code> are used before decoration
                occurs and are retained as an enclosing scope reference for
                use in both <code class="epub__literal">onDecorator</code> and
                <code class="epub__literal">onInstance</code>.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The class argument to <code class="epub__literal">onDecorator</code> is used at decoration
                time and is retained as an enclosing scope reference for use
                at instance construction time.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>The wrapped instance object is retained as an instance
                attribute in <code class="epub__literal">onInstance</code>,
                for use when attributes are later accessed from outside the
                class.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>This all works fairly naturally, given Python’s scope and
            namespace rules.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Using __dict__ and __slots__"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="using_underscore_underscore_dict_unders"></a>Using __dict__ and __slots__</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">__setattr__</code> in this
            code relies on an instance object’s <code class="epub__literal">__dict__</code> attribute namespace dictionary
            in order to set <code class="epub__literal">onInstance</code>’s
            own <code class="epub__literal">wrapped</code> attribute. As we
            learned in the prior chapter, it cannot assign an attribute
            directly without looping. However, it uses the <code class="epub__literal">setattr</code> built-in instead of <code class="epub__literal">__dict__</code> to set attributes in the
            wrapped object itself. Moreover, <code class="epub__literal">getattr</code> is used to fetch attributes in
            the wrapped object, since they may be stored in the object itself
            or inherited by it.</p>
<p>Because of that, this code will work for most classes. You
            may recall from Chapter 31 that
            new-style classes with <code class="epub__literal">__slots__</code> <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e99727"></a>may not store attributes in a <code class="epub__literal">__dict__</code>. However, because we only rely
            on a <code class="epub__literal">__dict__</code> at the <code class="epub__literal">onInstance</code> level here, not in the
            wrapped instance, and because <code class="epub__literal">setattr</code> and <code class="epub__literal">getattr</code> apply to attributes based on
            both <code class="epub__literal">__dict__</code> and <code class="epub__literal">__slots__</code>, our decorator applies to
            classes using either storage <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e99755"></a>scheme.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Generalizing for Public Declarations, Too"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="generalizing_for_public_declarations_to"></a>Generalizing for Public Declarations, Too</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Now <a id="ch3863clssdecpubattimpl"></a>that we have a <code class="epub__literal">Private</code> implementation, it’s
          straightforward to generalize the code to allow for <code class="epub__literal">Public</code> declarations too—they are
          essentially the inverse of <code class="epub__literal">Private</code> declarations, so we need only
          negate the inner test. The example listed in this section allows a
          class to use decorators to define a set of either <code class="epub__literal">Private</code> or <code class="epub__literal">Public</code> instance attributes (attributes
          stored on an instance or inherited from its classes), with the
          following semantics:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">Private</code> declares
              attributes of a class’s instances that cannot be fetched or
              assigned, except from within the code of the class’s methods.
              That is, any name declared <code class="epub__literal">Private</code> cannot be accessed from
              outside the class, while any name not declared <code class="epub__literal">Private</code> can be freely fetched or
              assigned from outside the class.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">Public</code> declares
              attributes of a class’s instances that can be fetched or
              assigned from both outside the class and within the class’s
              methods. That is, any name declared <code class="epub__literal">Public</code> can be freely accessed
              anywhere, while any name not declared <code class="epub__literal">Public</code> cannot be accessed from outside
              the class.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p><code class="epub__literal">Private</code> and <code class="epub__literal">Public</code> declarations are intended to be
          mutually exclusive: when using <code class="epub__literal">Private</code>, all undeclared names are
          considered <code class="epub__literal">Public</code>, and when using
          <code class="epub__literal">Public</code>, all undeclared names are
          considered <code class="epub__literal">Private</code>. They are
          essentially inverses, though undeclared names not created by class
          methods behave slightly differently—they can be assigned and thus
          created outside the class under <code class="epub__literal">Private</code> (all undeclared names are
          accessible), but not under <code class="epub__literal">Public</code>
          (all undeclared names are inaccessible).</p>
<p>Again, study this code on your own to get a feel for how this
          works. Notice that this scheme adds an additional <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>fourth
          level of state retention</em></span> at the top, beyond that
          described in the preceding section: the test functions used by the
          <code class="epub__literal">lambda</code>s are saved in an extra
          enclosing scope. This example is coded to run under either Python
          2.6 or 3.0, though it comes with a caveat when run under 3.0
          (explained briefly in the file’s docstring and expanded on after the
          code):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e99845"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">"""
Class decorator with Private and Public attribute declarations.
Controls access to attributes stored on an instance, or inherited
by it from its classes. Private declares attribute names that
cannot be fetched or assigned outside the decorated class, and
Public declares all the names that can. Caveat: this works in
3.0 for normally named attributes only: __X__ operator overloading
methods implicitly run for built-in operations do not trigger
either __getattr__ or __getattribute__ in new-style classes.
Add __X__ methods here to intercept and delegate built-ins.
"""

traceMe = False
def trace(*args):
    if traceMe: print('[' + ' '.join(map(str, args)) + ']')

def accessControl(failIf):
    def onDecorator(aClass):
        class onInstance:
            def __init__(self, *args, **kargs):
                self.__wrapped = aClass(*args, **kargs)
            def __getattr__(self, attr):
                trace('get:', attr)
                if failIf(attr):
                    raise TypeError('private attribute fetch: ' + attr)
                else:
                    return getattr(self.__wrapped, attr)
            def __setattr__(self, attr, value):
                trace('set:', attr, value)
                if attr == '_onInstance__wrapped':
                    self.__dict__[attr] = value
                elif failIf(attr):
                    raise TypeError('private attribute change: ' + attr)
                else:
                    setattr(self.__wrapped, attr, value)
        return onInstance
    return onDecorator

def Private(*attributes):
    return accessControl(failIf=(lambda attr: attr in attributes))

def Public(*attributes):
    return accessControl(failIf=(lambda attr: attr not in attributes))</pre>
<p>See the prior example’s self-test code for a usage example.
          Here’s a quick look at these class decorators in action at the
          interactive prompt (they work the same in 2.6 and 3.0); as
          advertised, non-<code class="epub__literal">Private</code> or
          <code class="epub__literal">Public</code> names can be fetched and
          changed from outside the subject class, but <code class="epub__literal">Private</code> or non-<code class="epub__literal">Public</code> names cannot:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e99861"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from access import Private, Public</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>@Private('age')</code></strong>                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Person = Private('age')(Person)</span></em>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class Person:</code></strong>                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Person = onInstance with state</span></em>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __init__(self, name, age):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>self.name = name</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>self.age  = age</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Inside accesses run normally</span></em>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = Person('Bob', 40)</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.name</code></strong>                                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Outside accesses validated</span></em>
'Bob'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.name = 'Sue'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.name</code></strong>
'Sue'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.age</code></strong>
TypeError: private attribute fetch: age
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.age = 'Tom'</code></strong>
TypeError: private attribute change: age

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>@Public('name')</code></strong>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class Person:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __init__(self, name, age):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>self.name = name</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>self.age  = age</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = Person('bob', 40)</code></strong>                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># X is an onInstance</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.name</code></strong>                                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># onInstance embeds Person</span></em>
'bob'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.name = 'Sue'</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.name</code></strong>
'Sue'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.age</code></strong>
TypeError: private attribute fetch: age
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.age = 'Tom'</code></strong>
TypeError: private attribute change: age</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Implementation Details II"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="implementation_details_ii"></a>Implementation Details II</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>To help you analyze the code, here are a few final notes on
          this version. Since this is just a generalization of the preceding
          section’s example, most of the notes there apply here as
          well.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Using __X pseudoprivate names"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="using_underscore_underscore_x_pseudopri"></a>Using __X pseudoprivate names</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Besides generalizing, this version also makes use of
            Python’s <code class="epub__literal">__</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>X</code></em>
            pseudoprivate name mangling feature (which we met in Chapter 30) to localize the <code class="epub__literal">wrapped</code> attribute to the control class,
            by automatically prefixing it with the class name. This avoids the
            prior version’s risk for collisions with a <code class="epub__literal">wrapped</code> attribute that may be used by
            the real, wrapped class, and it’s useful in a general tool like
            this. It’s not quite “privacy,” though, because the mangled name
            can be used freely outside the class. Notice that we also have to
            use the fully expanded name string (<code class="epub__literal">'_onInstance__wrapped'</code>) in <code class="epub__literal">__setattr__</code>, because that’s what Python
            changes it to.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Breaking privacy"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="breaking_privacy"></a>Breaking privacy</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Although this example does implement access controls for
            attributes of an instance and its classes, it is possible to
            subvert these controls in various ways—for instance, by going
            through the expanded version of the <code class="epub__literal">wrapped</code> attribute explicitly (<code class="epub__literal">bob.pay</code> might not work, but the fully
            mangled <code class="epub__literal">bob._onInstance__wrapped.pay</code> could!). If
            you have to explicitly try to do so, though, these controls are
            probably sufficient for normal intended use. Of course, privacy
            controls can generally be subverted in any language if you try
            hard enough (<code class="epub__literal">#define private
            public</code> may work in some C++ implementations, too).
            Although access controls can reduce accidental changes, much of
            this is up to programmers in any language; whenever source code
            may be changed, access control will always be a bit of a pipe
            dream.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Decorator tradeoffs"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="decorator_tradeoffs"></a>Decorator tradeoffs</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>We could again achieve the same results without decorators,
            by using manager functions or coding the name rebinding of
            decorators manually; the decorator syntax, however, makes this
            consistent and a bit more obvious in the code. The chief potential
            downsides of this and any other wrapper-based approach are that
            attribute access incurs an extra call, and instances of decorated
            classes are not really instances of the original decorated
            class—if you test their type with <code class="epub__literal">X.__class__</code> or <code class="epub__literal">isinstance(X, C)</code>, for example, you’ll
            find that they are instances of the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>wrapper</em></span>
            class. Unless you plan to do introspection on objects’ types,
            though, the type issue is probably <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e100018"></a>irrelevant.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Open Issues"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="open_issues"></a>Open Issues</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>As is, <a id="ch3865decfunanclsssmanopeniss"></a>this example works as planned under Python 2.6 and 3.0
          (provided operator overloading methods to be delegated are redefined
          in the wrapper). As with most software, though, there is always room
          for improvement.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Caveat: operator overloading methods fail to delegate under 3.0"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="caveat_colon_operator_overloading_metho"></a>Caveat: operator overloading methods fail to delegate under
            3.0</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Like all delegation-based classes that use <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code>, this decorator works
            cross-version for normally
            named attributes only; operator overloading methods like <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> and <code class="epub__literal">__add__</code> work differently for new-style
            classes and so fail to reach the embedded object if defined there
            when this runs under 3.0.</p>
<p>As we learned in the prior chapter, classic classes look up
            operator overloading names in instances at runtime normally, but
            new-style classes do not—they skip the instance entirely and look
            up such methods in classes. Hence, the <code class="epub__literal">__</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>X</code></em><code class="epub__literal">__</code> operator overloading methods
            implicitly run for built-in operations do <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>not</em></span>
            trigger either <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> or
            <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> in new-style
            classes in 2.6 and all classes in 3.0; such attribute fetches skip
            our <code class="epub__literal">onInstance.__getattr__</code>
            altogether, so they cannot be validated or delegated.</p>
<p>Our decorator’s class is not coded as new-style (by deriving
            from <code class="epub__literal">object</code>), so it will catch
            operator overloading methods if run under 2.6. Since all classes
            are new-style automatically in 3.0, though, such methods will
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>fail</em></span> if they are coded on the embedded
            object. The simplest workaround in 3.0 is to redefine redundantly
            in <code class="epub__literal">onInstance</code> all the operator
            overloading methods that can possibly be used in wrapped objects.
            Such extra methods can be added by hand, by tools that partly
            automate the task (e.g., with class decorators or the metaclasses
            discussed in the next chapter), or by definition in superclasses.</p>
<p>To see the difference yourself, try applying the decorator
            to a class that uses operator overloading methods under 2.6;
            validations work as before, and both the <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> method used by printing and the
            <code class="epub__literal">__add__</code> method run for <code class="epub__literal">+</code> invoke the decorator’s <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> and hence wind up being
            validated and delegated to the subject <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> object correctly:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e100104"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python26\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from access import Private</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>@Private('age')</code></strong>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class Person:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __init__(self):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>self.age = 42</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __str__(self):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return 'Person: ' + str(self.age)</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __add__(self, yrs):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>self.age += yrs</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = Person()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.age</code></strong>                                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Name validations fail correctly</span></em>
TypeError: private attribute fetch: age
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(X)</code></strong>                                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># __getattr__ =&gt; runs Person.__str__</span></em>
Person: 42
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X + 10</code></strong>                                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># __getattr__ =&gt; runs Person.__add__</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(X)</code></strong>                                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># __getattr__ =&gt; runs Person.__str__</span></em>
Person: 52</pre>
<p>When the same code is run under Python 3.0, though, the
            implicitly invoked <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> and
            <code class="epub__literal">__add__</code> skip the decorator’s
            <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> and look for
            definitions in or above the decorator class itself; <code class="epub__literal">print</code> winds up finding the default
            display inherited from the class type (technically, from the
            implied <code class="epub__literal">object</code> superclass in
            3.0), and <code class="epub__literal">+</code> generates an error
            because no default is inherited:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e100187"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python30\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from access import Private</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>@Private('age')</code></strong>
... <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class Person:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __init__(self):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>self.age = 42</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __str__(self):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return 'Person: ' + str(self.age)</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __add__(self, yrs):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>self.age += yrs</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = Person()</code></strong>                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Name validations still work</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.age</code></strong>                                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># But 3.0 fails to delegate built-ins!</span></em>
TypeError: private attribute fetch: age
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(X)</code></strong>
&lt;access.onInstance object at 0x025E0790&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X + 10</code></strong>
TypeError: unsupported operand type(s) for +: 'onInstance' and 'int'
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print(X)</code></strong>
&lt;access.onInstance object at 0x025E0790&gt;</pre>
<p>Using the alternative <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> method won’t help
            here—although it is defined to catch every attribute reference
            (not just undefined names), it is also not run by built-in
            operations. Python’s <code class="epub__literal">property</code>
            feature, which we met in Chapter 37,
            won’t help here either; recall that properties are automatically
            run code associated with <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>specific</em></span> attributes defined when a class is
            written, and are not designed to handle arbitrary attributes in
            wrapped objects.</p>
<p>As mentioned earlier, the most straightforward solution
            under 3.0 is to redundantly redefine operator overloading names
            that may appear in embedded objects in delegation-based classes like our
            decorator. This isn’t ideal because it creates some code
            redundancy, especially compared to 2.6 solutions. However, it
            isn’t too major a coding effort, can be automated to some extent
            with tools or superclasses, suffices to make our decorator work in
            3.0, and allows operator overloading names to be declared <code class="epub__literal">Private</code> or <code class="epub__literal">Public</code> too (assuming each overloading
            method runs the <code class="epub__literal">failIf</code> test
            internally):</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e100275"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def accessControl(failIf):
    def onDecorator(aClass):
        class onInstance:
            def __init__(self, *args, **kargs):
                self.__wrapped = aClass(*args, **kargs)

            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Intercept and delegate operator overloading methods</span></em>
            <span class="epub__strong"><strong>def __str__(self):</strong></span>
                <span class="epub__strong"><strong>return str(self.__wrapped)</strong></span>
            <span class="epub__strong"><strong>def __add__(self, other):</strong></span>
                <span class="epub__strong"><strong>return self.__wrapped + other</strong></span>
            <span class="epub__strong"><strong>def __getitem__(self, index):</strong></span>
                <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return self.__wrapped[index]</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># If needed</span></em>
            <span class="epub__strong"><strong>def __call__(self, *args, **kargs):</strong></span>
                <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>return self.__wrapped(*arg, *kargs)</code></strong>  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># If needed</span></em>
            <span class="epub__strong"><strong>...plus any others needed...</strong></span>

            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Intercept and delegate named attributes</span></em>
            def __getattr__(self, attr):
                ...
            def __setattr__(self, attr, value):
                ...
        return onInstance
    return onDecorator</pre>
<p>With such operator overloading methods added, the prior
            example with <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> and
            <code class="epub__literal">__add__</code> works the same under
            2.6 and 3.0, although a substantial amount of extra code may be
            required to accommodate 3.0—in principle,
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>every</em></span> operator overloading method that is not
            run automatically will need to be defined redundantly for 3.0 in a
            general tool class like this (which is why this extension is
            omitted in our code). Since every class is new-style in 3.0,
            delegation-based code is more difficult (though not impossible) in
            this release.</p>
<p>On the other hand, delegation wrappers could simply inherit
            from a common superclass that redefines operator overloading
            methods once, with standard delegation code. Moreover, tools such
            as additional class decorators or metaclasses might automate some
            of the work of adding such methods to delegation classes (see the
            class augmentation examples in Chapter 39
            for details). Though still not as simple as the 2.6 solution, such
            techniques might help make 3.0 delegation classes more
            general.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Implementation alternatives: __getattribute__ inserts, call stack inspection"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="implementation_alternatives_colon_under"></a>Implementation alternatives: __getattribute__ inserts, call
            stack inspection</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Although redundantly defining operator overloading methods
            in wrappers is probably the most straightforward workaround to
            Python 3.0 dilemma outlined in the prior section, it’s not
            necessarily the only one. We don’t have space to explore this
            issue much further here, so investigating other potential
            solutions is relegated to a suggested exercise. Because one
            dead-end alternative underscores class concepts well, though, it
            merits a brief mention.</p>
<p>One downside of this example is that instance objects are
            not truly instances of the original class—they are instances of
            the wrapper instead. In some programs that rely on type testing,
            this might matter. To support such cases, we might try to achieve
            similar effects by <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>inserting</em></span> a <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> method into the
            original class, to catch <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>every</em></span> attribute
            reference made on its instances. This inserted method would pass
            valid requests up to its
            superclass to avoid loops, using the techniques we studied in the
            prior chapter. Here is the potential change to our class
            decorator’s code:</p><a id="I_programlisting3_d1e100353"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># trace support as before</span></em>

def accessControl(failIf):
    def onDecorator(aClass):
        def getattributes(self, attr):
            trace('get:', attr)
            if failIf(attr):
                raise TypeError('private attribute fetch: ' + attr)
            else:
                return object.__getattribute__(self, attr)
        aClass.__getattribute__ = getattributes
        return aClass
    return onDecorator

def Private(*attributes):
    return accessControl(failIf=(lambda attr: attr in attributes))

def Public(*attributes):
    return accessControl(failIf=(lambda attr: attr not in attributes))</pre>
<p>This alternative addresses the type-testing issue but
            suffers from others. For example, it handles only attribute
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>fetches</em></span>—as is, this version allows private
            names to be <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>assigned</em></span> freely. Intercepting
            assignments would still have to use <code class="epub__literal">__setattr__</code>, and either an instance
            wrapper object or another class method insertion. Adding an
            instance wrapper to catch assignments would change the type again,
            and inserting methods fails if the original class is using a
            <code class="epub__literal">__setattr__</code> of its own (or a
            <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code>, for that
            matter!). An inserted <code class="epub__literal">__setattr__</code> would also have to allow for
            a <code class="epub__literal">__slots__</code> in the client
            class.</p>
<p>In addition, this scheme does not address the
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>built-in</em></span> operation attributes issue described in the prior section, since
            <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> is not run in
            these contexts, either. In our case, if <code class="epub__literal">Person</code> had a <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> it would be run by print
            operations, but only because it was actually present in that
            class. As before, the <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code>
            attribute would <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>not</em></span> be routed to the inserted
            <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> method
            generically—printing would bypass this method altogether and call
            the class’s <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code>
            directly.</p>
<p>Although this is probably better than not supporting
            operator overloading methods in a wrapped object at all (barring
            redefinition, at least), this scheme still cannot intercept and
            validate <code class="epub__literal">__</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>X</code></em><code class="epub__literal">__</code> methods, making it impossible for any
            of them to be <code class="epub__literal">Private</code>. Although
            most operator overloading methods are meant to be public, some
            might not be.</p>
<p>Much worse, because this nonwrapper approach works by adding
            a <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> to the decorated
            class, it also intercepts attribute accesses made <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>by the
            class itself</em></span> and validates them the same as accesses
            made from outside—this means the class’s method won’t be able to
            use <code class="epub__literal">Private</code> names,
            either!</p>
<p>In fact, inserting methods this way is functionally
            equivalent to <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>inheriting</em></span> them, and implies
            the same constraints as our original Chapter 29 privacy code. To know whether an
            attribute access originated inside or outside the class, our
            method might need to inspect frame objects on the Python
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>call stack</em></span>. This might ultimately yield a
            solution (replace private attributes with properties or
            descriptors that check the stack, for example), but it would slow
            access further and is far too dark a magic for us to explore
            here.</p>
<p>While interesting, and possibly relevant for some other use
            cases, this method insertion technique doesn’t meet our goals. We
            won’t explore this option’s coding pattern further here because we
            will study class augmentation techniques in the next chapter, in
            conjunction with metaclasses. As we’ll see there, metaclasses are
            not strictly required for changing classes this way, because class
            decorators can often serve the same <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e100446"></a>role.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Python Isn’t About Control"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="python_isn_apostrophy_t_about_control"></a>Python Isn’t About Control</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Now that I’ve gone to such great lengths to add <code class="epub__literal">Private</code> and <code class="epub__literal">Public</code> attribute declarations for Python
          code, I must again remind you that it is not entirely
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Pythonic</em></span> to add access controls to your classes
          like this. In fact, most Python programmers will probably find this
          example to be largely or totally irrelevant, apart from serving as a
          demonstration of decorators in action. Most large Python programs
          get by successfully without any such controls at all. If you do wish
          to regulate attribute access in order to eliminate coding mistakes,
          though, or happen to be a soon-to-be-ex-C++-or-Java programmer, most
          things are possible with Python’s operator overloading and
          introspection tools.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Example: Validating Function Arguments"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
