<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="chapter_summary-id37"></a>Chapter Summary</h1>
<p>In this chapter, we explored decorators—both the function and
        class varieties. As we learned, decorators are a way to insert code to
        be run automatically when a function or class is defined. When a
        decorator is used, Python rebinds a function or class name to the
        callable object it returns. This hook allows us to add a layer of
        wrapper logic to function calls and class instance creation calls, in
        order to manage functions and instances. As we also saw, manager
        functions and manual name rebinding can achieve the same effect, but
        decorators provide a more explicit and uniform solution.</p>
<p>As we’ll see in the next chapter, class decorators can also be
        used to manage classes themselves, rather than just their instances.
        Because this functionality overlaps with metaclasses, the topic of the
        next chapter, you’ll have to read ahead for the rest of this story.
        First, though, work through the following quiz. Because this chapter
        was mostly focused on its larger examples, its quiz will ask you to
        modify some of its code in order to <a id="I_indexterm3_d1e101225"></a>review.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Test Your Knowledge: Quiz"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
