<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 39. Metaclasses</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 39. Metaclasses"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h1 class="epub__title"><a id="metaclasses-id1"></a>Chapter 39. Metaclasses</h1>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>In the <a id="ch391metaclsss"></a>prior chapter, we explored decorators and studied various
      examples of their use. In this final chapter of the book, we’re going
      continue our tool-builders focus and investigate another advanced topic:
      <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>metaclasses</em></span>.</p>
<p>In a sense, metaclasses simply extend the code-insertion model of
      decorators. As we learned in the prior chapter, function and class
      decorators allow us to intercept and augment function calls and class
      instance creation calls. In a similar sprit, metaclasses allow us to
      intercept and augment <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>class creation</em></span>—they provide
      an API for inserting extra logic to be run at the conclusion of a
      <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement, albeit in different
      ways than decorators. As such, they provide a general protocol for
      managing class objects in a program.</p>
<p>Like all the subjects dealt with in this part of the book, this is
      an <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>advanced topic</em></span> that can be investigated on an
      as-needed basis. In practice, metaclasses allow us to gain a high level
      of control over how a set of classes work. This is a powerful concept,
      and metaclasses are not intended for most application programmers (nor,
      frankly, the faint of heart!).</p>
<p>On the other hand, metaclasses open the door to a variety of
      coding patterns that may be difficult or impossible to achieve
      otherwise, and they are especially of interest to programmers seeking to
      write flexible APIs or programming tools for others to use. Even if you
      don’t fall into that category, metaclasses can teach you much about
      Python’s class model in general.</p>
<p>As in the prior chapter, part of our goal here is also to show
      more realistic code examples than we did earlier in this book. Although
      metaclasses are a core language topic and not themselves an application
      domain, part of this chapter’s goal is to spark your interest in
      exploring larger application-programming examples after you finish this
      book.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="To Metaclass or Not to Metaclass"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
