<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>To Metaclass or Not to Metaclass</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="to_metaclass_or_not_to_metaclass"></a>To Metaclass or Not to Metaclass</h1>
<p>Metaclasses <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e101436"></a>are perhaps the most advanced topic in this book, if not
        the Python language as a whole. To borrow a quote from the
        <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>comp.lang.python</em></span> newsgroup by veteran Python core
        developer <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e101445"></a>Tim Peters (who is also the author of the famous “import
        this” Python motto):</p><div class="epub__blockquote"><blockquote class="epub__blockquote">
<p>[Metaclasses] are deeper magic than 99% of users should ever
          worry about. If you wonder whether you need them, you don’t (the
          people who actually need them know with certainty that they need
          them, and don’t need an explanation about why).</p></blockquote>
</div>
<p>In other words, metaclasses are primarily intended for
        programmers building APIs and tools for others to use. In many (if not
        most) cases, they are probably not the best choice in applications
        work. This is especially true if you’re developing code that other
        people will use in the future. Coding something “because it seems
        cool” is not generally a reasonable justification, unless you are
        experimenting or learning.</p>
<p>Still, <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e101456"></a>metaclasses have a wide variety of potential roles, and
        it’s important to know when they can be useful. For example, they can
        be used to enhance classes with features like tracing, object
        persistence, exception logging, and more. They can also be used to
        construct portions of a class at runtime based upon configuration
        files, apply function decorators to every method of a class
        generically, verify conformance to expected interfaces, and so on.</p>
<p>In their more grandiose incarnations, metaclasses can even be
        used to implement alternative coding patterns such as aspect-oriented
        programming, object/relational mappers (ORMs) for databases, and more.
        Although there are often alternative ways to achieve such results (as
        we’ll see, the roles of class decorators and metaclasses often
        intersect), metaclasses provide a formal model tailored to those
        tasks. We don’t have space to explore all such applications first-hand
        in this chapter but you should feel free to search the Web for
        additional use cases after studying the basics here.</p>
<p>Probably the reason for studying metaclasses most relevant to
        this book is that this topic can help demystify Python’s class
        mechanics in general. Although you may or may not code or reuse them
        in your work, a cursory understanding of metaclasses can impart a
        deeper understanding of Python at large.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Increasing Levels of Magic"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="increasing_levels_of_magic"></a>Increasing Levels of Magic</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Most of this book has focused on straightforward
          application-coding techniques, as most programmers spend their time
          writing modules, functions, and classes to achieve real-world goals.
          They may use classes and make instances, and might even do a bit of
          operator overloading, but they probably won’t get too deep into the
          details of how their classes actually work.</p>
<p>However, in this book we’ve also seen a variety of tools that
          allow us to control Python’s behavior in generic ways, and that
          often have more to do with Python internals or tool building than
          with application-programming domains:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Introspection attributes</span></dt><dd>
<p>Special <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e101483"></a>attributes like <code class="epub__literal">__class__</code> and <code class="epub__literal">__dict__</code> allow us to inspect
                internal implementation aspects of Python objects, in order to
                process them generically—to list all attributes of an object,
                display a class’s name, and so on.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Operator overloading methods</span></dt><dd>
<p>Specially <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e101499"></a>named methods such as <code class="epub__literal">__str__</code> and <code class="epub__literal">__add__</code> coded in classes intercept
                and provide behavior for built-in operations applied to class
                instances, such as printing, expression operators, and so on.
                They are run automatically in response to built-in operations
                and allow classes to conform to expected interfaces.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Attribute interception methods</span></dt><dd>
<p>A <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e101517"></a>special category of operator overloading methods
                provide a way to intercept attribute accesses on instances
                generically: <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code>,
                <code class="epub__literal">__setattr__</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">__getattribute__</code> allow wrapper
                classes to insert automatically run code that may validate
                attribute requests and delegate them to embedded objects. They
                allow any number of attributes of an object—either selected
                attributes, or all of them—to be computed when
                accessed.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Class properties</span></dt><dd>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">property</code>
<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e101539"></a>built-in allows us to associate code with a
                specific class attribute that is automatically run when the
                attribute is fetched, assigned, or deleted. Though not as
                generic as the prior paragraph’s tools, properties allow for
                automatic code invocation on access to specific
                attributes.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Class attribute descriptors</span></dt><dd>
<p>Really, <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e101550"></a>property</code> is a succinct way to define
                an attribute descriptor that runs functions on access
                automatically. Descriptors allow us to code in a separate
                class <code class="epub__literal">__get__</code>, <code class="epub__literal">__set__</code>, and <code class="epub__literal">__delete__</code> handler methods that are
                run automatically when an attribute assigned to an instance of
                that class is accessed. They provide a general way to insert
                automatically run code when a specific attribute is accessed,
                and they are triggered after an attribute is looked up
                normally.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Function and class decorators</span></dt><dd>
<p>As we <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e101570"></a>saw in Chapter 38, the
                special <code class="epub__literal">@callable</code> syntax
                for decorators allows us to add logic to be automatically run
                when a function is called or a class instance is created. This
                wrapper logic can trace or time calls, validate arguments,
                manage all instances of a class, augment instances with extra
                behavior such as attribute fetch validation, and more.
                Decorator syntax inserts name-rebinding logic to be run at the
                end of function and class definition statements—decorated
                function and class names are rebound to callable objects that
                intercept later calls.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>As mentioned in this chapter’s
          introduction, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>metaclasses</em></span> are a continuation of
          this story—they allow us to
          insert logic to be run automatically when a class object is created,
          at the end of a <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement.
          This logic doesn’t rebind the class name to a decorator callable,
          but rather routes creation of the class itself to specialized
          logic.</p>
<p>In other words, metaclasses are ultimately just another way to
          define <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>automatically run code</em></span>. Via metaclasses
          and the other tools just listed, Python provides ways for us to
          interject logic in a variety of contexts—at operator evaluation,
          attribute access, function calls, class instance creation, and now
          class object creation.</p>
<p>Unlike class decorators, which usually add logic to be run at
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>instance</em></span> creation time, metaclasses run at
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>class</em></span> creation time; as such, they are hooks
          generally used for managing or augmenting classes, instead of their
          instances.</p>
<p>For example, metaclasses can be used to add decoration to all
          methods of classes automatically, register all classes in
          use to an API, add user-interface logic to classes automatically,
          create or extend classes from simplified specifications in text
          files, and so on. Because we can control how classes are made (and
          by proxy the behavior their instances acquire), their applicability
          is potentially very wide.</p>
<p>As we’ve also seen, many of these advanced Python tools have
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>intersecting roles</em></span>. For example, attributes can
          often be managed with properties, descriptors, or attribute
          interception methods. As we’ll see in this chapter, class decorators
          and metaclasses can often be used interchangeably as well. Although
          class decorators are often used to manage instances, they can be
          used to manage classes instead; similarly, while metaclasses are
          designed to augment class construction, they can often insert code
          to manage instances, too. Since the choice of which technique to use
          is sometimes purely subjective, knowledge of the alternatives can
          help you pick the right tool for a given task.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The Downside of “Helper” Functions"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="the_downside_of_quotation_mark_helper"></a>The Downside of “Helper” Functions</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Also like the decorators of the prior chapter, metaclasses are
          often optional, from a theoretical perspective. We can usually
          achieve the same effect by passing class objects through
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e101620"></a>manager functions</em></span>
<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e101624"></a> (sometimes known as “helper” functions), much as we
          can achieve the goals of decorators by passing functions and
          instances through manager code. Just like decorators, though,
          metaclasses:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Provide a more formal and explicit structure</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Help ensure that application programmers won’t forget to
              augment their classes according to an API’s requirements</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Avoid code redundancy and its associated maintenance costs
              by factoring class customization logic into a single location,
              the metaclass</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>To illustrate, suppose we want to automatically insert a
          method into a set of classes. Of course, we could do this with
          simple <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>inheritance</em></span>, if the subject method is
          known when we code the classes. In that case, we can simply code the
          method in a superclass and have all the classes in question inherit
          from it:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e101643"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Extras:
    def extra(self, args):              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Normal inheritance: too static</span></em>
        ...

class Client1(Extras): ...              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Clients inherit extra methods</span></em>
class Client2(Extras): ...
class Client3(Extras): ...

X = Client1()                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Make an instance</span></em>
X.extra()                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Run the extra methods</span></em></pre>
<p>Sometimes, though, it’s impossible to predict such
          augmentation when classes are coded. Consider the case where classes
          are augmented in response to choices made in a user interface at
          runtime, or to specifications typed in a configuration file.
          Although we could code every class in our imaginary set to
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>manually</em></span> check these, too, it’s a lot to ask of
          clients (<code class="epub__literal">required</code> is abstract
          here—it’s something to be filled in):</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e101664"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def extra(self, arg): ...

class Client1: ...                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Client augments: too distributed</span></em>
if required():
    Client1.extra = extra

class Client2: ...
if required():
    Client2.extra = extra

class Client3: ...
if required():
    Client3.extra = extra

X = Client1()
X.extra()</pre>
<p>We can add methods to a class after the <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement like this because a class
          method is just a function that is associated with a class and has a
          first argument to receive the <code class="epub__literal">self</code> instance. Although this works, it
          puts all the burden of augmentation on client classes (and assumes
          they’ll remember to do this at all!).</p>
<p>It would be better from a maintenance perspective to isolate
          the choice logic in a single place. We might encapsulate some of
          this extra work by routing classes though a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>manager
          function</em></span>—such a manager function would extend the class
          as required and handle all the work of runtime testing and
          configuration:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e101682"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def extra(self, arg): ...

def extras(Class):                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Manager function: too manual</span></em>
    if required():
        Class.extra = extra

class Client1: ...
extras(Client1)

class Client2: ...
extras(Client2)

class Client3: ...
extras(Client3)

X = Client1()
X.extra()</pre>
<p>This code runs the class through a manager function
          immediately after it is created. Although manager functions like
          this one can achieve our goal here, they still put a fairly heavy
          burden on class coders, who must understand the requirements and
          adhere to them in their code. It would be better if there were a
          simple way to enforce the augmentation in the subject classes, so
          that they don’t need to deal with and can’t forget to use the
          augmentation. In other words, we’d like to be able to insert some
          code to run <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>automatically</em></span> at the end of a
          <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement, to augment the
          class.</p>
<p>This is exactly what <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>metaclasses</em></span> do—by
          declaring a metaclass, we tell Python to route the creation of the
          class object to another class we provide:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e101701"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def extra(self, arg): ...

class Extras(type):
    def __init__(Class, classname, superclasses, attributedict):
        if required():
            Class.extra = extra

class Client1(metaclass=Extras): ...    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Metaclass declaration only</span></em>
class Client2(metaclass=Extras): ...    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Client class is instance of meta</span></em>
class Client3(metaclass=Extras): ...

X = Client1()                           <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># X is instance of Client1</span></em>
X.extra()</pre>
<p>Because Python invokes the metaclass automatically at the end
          of the <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement when the
          new class is created, it can augment, register, or otherwise manage
          the class as needed. Moreover, the only requirement for the client
          classes is that they declare the metaclass; every class that does so
          will automatically acquire whatever augmentation the metaclass
          provides, both now and in the future if the metaclass changes.
          Although it may be difficult to see in this small example,
          metaclasses generally handle such tasks better than other <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e101717"></a>approaches.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Metaclasses Versus Class Decorators: Round 1"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="metaclasses_versus_class_decorators_col"></a>Metaclasses Versus Class Decorators: Round 1</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Having <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e101725"></a><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e101730"></a>said that, it’s also interesting to note that the
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>class decorators</em></span> described in the preceding
          chapter sometimes overlap with metaclasses in terms of
          functionality. Although they are typically used for managing or
          augmenting instances, class decorators can also augment classes,
          independent of any created instances.</p>
<p>For example, suppose we coded our manager function to return
          the augmented class, instead of simply modifying it in-place. This
          would allow a greater degree of flexibility, because the manager
          would be free to return any type of object that implements the
          class’s expected interface:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e101741"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def extra(self, arg): ...

def extras(Class):
    if required():
        Class.extra = extra
    return Class

class Client1: ...
Client1 = extras(Client1)

class Client2: ...
Client2 = extras(Client2)

class Client3: ...
Client3 = extras(Client3)

X = Client1()
X.extra()</pre>
<p>If you think this is starting to look reminiscent of class
          decorators, you’re right. In the prior chapter we presented class
          decorators as a tool for augmenting <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>instance</em></span>
          creation calls. Because they work by automatically rebinding a class
          name to the result of a function, though, there’s no reason that we
          can’t use them to augment the class before any instances are ever
          created. That is, class decorators can apply extra logic to
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>classes</em></span>, not just
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>instances</em></span>, at creation time:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e101754"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">def extra(self, arg): ...

def extras(Class):
    if required():
        Class.extra = extra
    return Class

@extras
class Client1: ...             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Client1 = extras(Client1)</span></em>

@extras
class Client2: ...             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Rebinds class independent of instances</span></em>

@extras
class Client3: ...

X = Client1()                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Makes instance of augmented class</span></em>
X.extra()                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># X is instance of original Client1</span></em></pre>
<p>Decorators essentially automate the prior example’s manual
          name rebinding here. Just like with metaclasses, because the
          decorator returns the original class, instances are made from it,
          not from a wrapper object. In fact, instance creation is not
          intercepted at all.</p>
<p>In this specific case—adding methods to a class when it’s
          created—the choice between metaclasses and decorators is somewhat
          arbitrary. Decorators can be used to manage
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>both</em></span> instances and classes, and they intersect
          with metaclasses in the second of these roles.</p>
<p>However, this really addresses only one operational mode of
          metaclasses. As we’ll see, decorators correspond to metaclass
          <code class="epub__literal">__init__</code> methods in this role,
          but metaclasses have additional customization hooks. As we’ll also
          see, in addition to class initialization, metaclasses can perform
          arbitrary construction tasks that might be more difficult with
          decorators.</p>
<p>Moreover, although decorators can manage both instances and
          classes, the converse is not as direct—metaclasses are designed to
          manage classes, and applying them to managing
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>instances</em></span> is less straightforward. We’ll
          explore this difference in code later in this chapter.</p>
<p>Much of this section’s code has been abstract, but we’ll flesh
          it out into a real working example later in this chapter. To fully
          understand how metaclasses work, though, we first need to get a
          clearer picture of their underlying model.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="The Metaclass Model"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
