<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>The Metaclass Model</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="the_metaclass_model"></a>The Metaclass Model</h1>
<p>To <a id="ch392metaclassmodel"></a>really <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e101795"></a>understand how metaclasses do their work, you need to
        understand a bit more about Python’s type model and what happens at
        the end of a <code class="epub__literal">class</code>
        statement.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Classes Are Instances of type"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="classes_are_instances_of_type"></a>Classes Are Instances of type</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>So <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e101809"></a>far <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e101815"></a>in this book, we’ve done most of our work by making
          instances of built-in types like lists and strings, as well as
          instances of classes we code ourselves. As we’ve seen, instances of
          classes have some state information attributes of their own, but
          they also inherit behavioral attributes from the classes from which
          they are made. The same holds true for built-in types; list
          instances, for example, have values of their own, but they inherit
          methods from the list type.</p>
<p>While we can get a lot done with such instance objects,
          Python’s type model turns out to be a bit richer than I’ve formally
          described. Really, there’s a hole in the model we’ve seen thus far:
          if instances are created from classes, what is it that creates our
          classes? It turns out that classes are instances of something,
          too:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Python 3.0</em></span>, user-defined class
              objects are instances of the <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e101830"></a>object named <code class="epub__literal">type</code>, which is itself a class.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Python 2.6</em></span>, new-style classes
              inherit from <code class="epub__literal">object</code>, which is
              a subclass of <code class="epub__literal">type</code>; classic
              classes are instances of <code class="epub__literal">type</code>
              and are not created from a class.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>We explored the notion of types in Chapter 9 and the
          relationship of classes to types in Chapter 31, but let’s review the basics here
          so we can see how they apply to metaclasses.</p>
<p>Recall that the <code class="epub__literal">type</code>
          built-in returns the type of any object (which is itself an object).
          For built-in types like lists, the type of the instance is the
          built-in list type, but the type of the list type is the type
          <code class="epub__literal">type</code> itself—the <code class="epub__literal">type</code> object at the top of the hierarchy
          creates specific types, and specific types create instances. You can
          see this for yourself at the interactive prompt. In Python 3.0, for
          example:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e101872"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python30\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type([])</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># In 3.0 list is instance of list type</span></em>
&lt;class 'list'&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type(type([]))</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Type of list is type class</span></em>
&lt;class 'type'&gt;

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type(list)</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same, but with type names</span></em>
&lt;class 'type'&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type(type)</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Type of type is type: top of hierarchy</span></em>
&lt;class 'type'&gt;</pre>
<p>As we learned when studying new-style class changes in Chapter 31, the same is generally true in
          Python 2.6 (and older), but types are not quite the same as
          classes—<code class="epub__literal">type</code> is a unique kind of
          built-in object that caps the type hierarchy and is used to
          construct types:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e101909"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python26\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type([])</code></strong>                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># In 2.6, type is a bit different</span></em>
&lt;type 'list'&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type(type([]))</code></strong>
&lt;type 'type'&gt;

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type(list)</code></strong>
&lt;type 'type'&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type(type)</code></strong>
&lt;type 'type'&gt;</pre>
<p>It turns out that the type/instance relationship holds true
          for classes as well: instances are created from classes, and classes
          are created from <code class="epub__literal">type</code>. In Python
          3.0, though, the notion of a “type” is merged with the notion of a
          “class.” In fact, the two are essentially synonyms—<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>classes
          are types, and types are classes</em></span>. That is:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Types are defined by classes that derive from <code class="epub__literal">type</code>.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>User-defined classes are instances of type classes.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>User-defined classes are types that generate instances of
              their own.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>As we saw earlier, this equivalence effects code that tests
          the type of instances: the type of an instance is the class from
          which it was generated. It also has implications for the way that
          classes are created that turn out to be the key to this chapter’s
          subject. Because classes are normally created from a root type class
          by default, most programmers don’t need to think about this
          type/class equivalence. However, it opens up new possibilities for
          customizing both classes and their instances.</p>
<p>For example, classes in 3.0 (and new-style classes in 2.6) are
          instances of the <code class="epub__literal">type</code> class, and
          instance objects are instances of their classes; in fact, classes
          now have a <code class="epub__literal">__class__</code> that links
          to <code class="epub__literal">type</code>, just as an instance has
          a <code class="epub__literal">__class__</code> that links to the
          class from which it was made:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e101968"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python30\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class C: pass</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># 3.0 class object (new-style)</span></em>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = C()</code></strong>                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Class instance object</span></em>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type(X)</code></strong>                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Instance is instance of class</span></em>
&lt;class '__main__.C'&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.__class__</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Instance's class</span></em>
&lt;class '__main__.C'&gt;

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type(C)</code></strong>                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Class is instance of type</span></em>
&lt;class 'type'&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>C.__class__</code></strong>                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Class's class is type</span></em>
&lt;class 'type'&gt;</pre>
<p>Notice especially the last two lines here—classes are
          instances of the <code class="epub__literal">type</code> class, just
          as normal instances are instances of a class. This works the same
          for both built-ins and user-defined class types in 3.0. In fact,
          classes are not really a separate concept at all: they are simply
          user-defined types, and <code class="epub__literal">type</code>
          itself is defined by a class.</p>
<p>In Python 2.6, things work similarly for new-style classes
          derived from <code class="epub__literal">object</code>, because this
          enables 3.0 class behavior:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e102024"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python26\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class C(object): pass</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># In 2.6 new-style classes,</span></em>
...                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># classes have a class too</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = C()</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type(X)</code></strong>
&lt;class '__main__.C'&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type(C)</code></strong>
&lt;type 'type'&gt;

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.__class__</code></strong>
&lt;class '__main__.C'&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>C.__class__</code></strong>
&lt;type 'type'&gt;</pre>
<p>Classic classes in 2.6 are a bit different, though—because
          they reflect the class model in older Python releases, they do not
          have a <code class="epub__literal">__class__</code> link, and like
          built-in types in 2.6 they are instances of <code class="epub__literal">type</code>, not a type class:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e102062"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>c:\python26\python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class C: pass</code></strong>                 <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># In 2.6 classic classes,</span></em>
...                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># classes have no class themselves</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X = C()</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type(X)</code></strong>
&lt;type 'instance'&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>type(C)</code></strong>
&lt;type 'classobj'&gt;

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>X.__class__</code></strong>
&lt;class __main__.C at 0x005F85A0&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>C.__class__</code></strong>
AttributeError: class C has no attribute '__class__'</pre>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Metaclasses Are Subclasses of Type"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="metaclasses_are_subclasses_of_type"></a>Metaclasses Are Subclasses of Type</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>So <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e102097"></a>why do we care that classes are instances of a
          <code class="epub__literal">type</code> class in 3.0? It turns out
          that this is the hook that allows us to code metaclasses. Because
          the notion of <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>type</em></span> is the same as
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>class</em></span> today, we can subclass <code class="epub__literal">type</code> with normal object-oriented
          techniques and class syntax to customize it. And because classes are
          really instances of the <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm4_d1e102117"></a>type</code> class, creating classes from customized subclasses
          of <code class="epub__literal">type</code> allows us to implement
          custom kinds of classes. In full detail, this all works out quite
          naturally—in 3.0, and in 2.6 new-style classes:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><code class="epub__literal">type</code> is a class that
              generates user-defined classes.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Metaclasses are subclasses of the <code class="epub__literal">type</code> class.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Class objects are instances of the <code class="epub__literal">type</code> class, or a subclass
              thereof.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Instance objects are generated from a class.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>In other words, to control the way classes are created and
          augment their behavior, all we need to do is specify that a
          user-defined class be created from a user-defined metaclass instead
          of the normal <code class="epub__literal">type</code> class.</p>
<p>Notice that this <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>type instance</em></span>
          relationship is not quite the same as
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>inheritance</em></span>: user-defined classes may also have
          superclasses from which they and their instances inherit attributes
          (inheritance superclasses are listed in parentheses in the <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement and show up in a class’s
          <code class="epub__literal">__bases__</code> tuple). The type from
          which a class is created, and of which it is an instance, is a
          different relationship. The next section describes the procedure
          Python follows to implement this instance-of type
          relationship.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Class Statement Protocol"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="class_statement_protocol"></a>Class Statement Protocol</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Subclassing <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e102173"></a>the <code class="epub__literal">type</code> class to
          customize it is really only half of the magic behind metaclasses. We
          still need to somehow route a class’s creation to the metaclass,
          instead of the default <code class="epub__literal">type</code>. To
          fully understand how this is arranged, we also need to know how
          class statements do their business.</p>
<p>We’ve already learned that when Python reaches a <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e102187"></a><code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement, it
          runs its nested block of code to create its attributes—all the names
          assigned at the top level of the nested code block generate
          attributes in the resulting class object. These names are usually
          method functions created by nested <code class="epub__literal">def</code>s, but they can also be arbitrary
          attributes assigned to create
          class data shared by all instances.</p>
<p>Technically speaking, Python follows a standard protocol to
          make this happen: at the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>end of a</em></span>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>class</code></em> <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>statement</em></span>, and
          after running all its nested code in a namespace dictionary, it
          calls the <code class="epub__literal">type</code> object to create
          the <code class="epub__literal">class</code> object:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e102216"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class = type(classname, superclasses, attributedict)</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">type</code> object in turn
          defines a <code class="epub__literal">__call__</code> operator
          overloading method that runs two other methods when the <code class="epub__literal">type</code> object is called:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e102229"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">type.__new__(typeclass, classname, superclasses, attributedict)
type.__init__(class, classname, superclasses, attributedict)</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">__new__</code> method creates
          and returns the new <code class="epub__literal">class</code> object,
          and then the <code class="epub__literal">__init__</code> method
          initializes the newly created object. As we’ll see in a moment,
          these are the hooks that metaclass subclasses of <code class="epub__literal">type</code> generally use to customize
          classes.</p>
<p>For example, given a class definition like the
          following:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e102247"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Spam(Eggs):                <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Inherits from Eggs</span></em>
    data = 1                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Class data attribute</span></em>
    def meth(self, arg):         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Class method attribute</span></em>
        pass</pre>
<p>Python will internally run the nested code block to create two
          attributes of the class (<code class="epub__literal">data</code> and
          <code class="epub__literal">meth</code>), and then call the <code class="epub__literal">type</code> object to generate the <code class="epub__literal">class</code> object at the end of the <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement:</p><a id="I_programlisting4_d1e102276"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">Spam = type('Spam', (Eggs,), {'data': 1, 'meth': meth, '__module__': '__main__'})</pre>
<p>Because this call is made at the end of the <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement, it’s an ideal hook for
          augmenting or otherwise processing a class. The trick lies in
          replacing <code class="epub__literal">type</code> with a custom
          subclass that will intercept this call. The next section shows
          <a id="I_indexterm4_d1e102286"></a>how.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Declaring Metaclasses"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
