<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="chapter_summary-id38"></a>Chapter Summary</h1>
<p>In this chapter, we studied metaclasses and explored examples of
        them in action. Metaclasses
        allow us to tap into the class creation protocol of Python, in order
        to manage or augment user-defined classes. Because they automate this
        process, they can provide better solutions for API writers then manual
        code or helper functions; because they encapsulate such code, they can
        minimize maintenance costs better than some other approaches.</p>
<p>Along the way, we also saw how the roles of class decorators and
        metaclasses often intersect: because both run at the conclusion of a
        <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement, they can sometimes
        be used interchangeably. Class decorators can be used to manage both
        class and instance objects; metaclasses can, too, although they are
        more directly targeted toward classes.</p>
<p>Since this chapter covered an advanced topic, we’ll work through
        just a few quiz questions to review the basics (if you’ve made it this
        far in a chapter on metaclasses, you probably already deserve extra
        credit!). Because this is the last part of the book, we’ll forego the
        end-of-part exercises. Be sure to see the appendixes that follow for
        pointers on installation steps, and the solutions to the prior parts’
        exercises.</p>
<p>Once you finish the quiz, you’ve officially reached the end of
        this book. Now that you know Python inside and out, your next step,
        should you choose to take it, is to explore the libraries, techniques,
        and tools available in the application domains in which you work.
        Because Python is so widely used, you’ll find ample resources for
        using it in almost any application you can think of—from GUIs, the
        Web, and databases to numeric programming, robotics, and system
        administration.</p>
<p>This is where Python starts to become truly fun, but this is
        also where this book’s story ends, and others’ begin. For pointers on
        where to turn after this book, see the list of recommended follow-up
        texts in the Preface. Good luck with your journey. And of
        course<a id="I_indexterm4_d1e103466"></a>, “Always look on the bright side of Life!”</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Test Your Knowledge: Quiz"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
