<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="test_your_knowledge_colon_answers-id38"></a>Test Your Knowledge: Answers</h1>
<div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>A metaclass is a class used to create a class. Normal
            classes are instances of the <code class="epub__literal">type</code> class by default. Metaclasses are
            usually subclasses of the <code class="epub__literal">type</code>
            class, which redefines class creation protocol methods in order to
            customize the class creation call issued at the end of a <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement; they typically redefine
            the methods <code class="epub__literal">__new__</code> and
            <code class="epub__literal">__init__</code> to tap into the class
            creation protocol. Metaclasses can also be coded other ways—as
            simple functions, for example—but they are responsible for making
            and returning an object for the new class.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>In Python 3.0 and later, use a keyword argument in the
            <code class="epub__literal">class</code> header line: <code class="epub__literal">class
            C(metaclass=</code><em class="epub__replaceable"><code>M</code></em><code class="epub__literal">)</code>. In Python 2.X, use a class attribute
            instead: <code class="epub__literal">__metaclass__ =</code>
<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>M</code></em>. In 3.0, the <code class="epub__literal">class</code> header line can also name normal
            superclasses (a.k.a. base classes) before the <code class="epub__literal">metaclass</code> keyword argument.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Because both are automatically triggered at the end of a
            <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement, class
            decorators and metaclasses can both be used to manage classes.
            Decorators rebind a class name to a callable’s result and
            metaclasses route class creation through a callable, but both
            hooks can be used for similar purposes. To manage classes,
            decorators simply augment and return the original class objects.
            Metaclasses augment a class after they create it.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Because both are automatically triggered at the end of a
            <code class="epub__literal">class</code> statement, class
            decorators and metaclasses can both be used to manage class
            instances, by inserting a wrapper object to catch instance
            creation calls. Decorators may rebind the class name to a callable
            run on instance creation that retains the original class object.
            Metaclasses can do the same, but they must also create the class
            object, so their usage is somewhat more complex in this
            role.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>Our chief weapon is decorators...decorators and
            metaclasses...metaclasses and decorators.... Our two weapons are
            metaclasses and decorators...and ruthless efficiency.... Our
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>three</em></span> weapons are metaclasses, decorators,
            and ruthless efficiency...and an almost fanatical devotion to
            Guido.... Our
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>four</em></span>...no....<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Amongst</em></span> our
            weapons.... Amongst our weaponry...are such elements as
            metaclasses, decorators.... I’ll come in again....</p></li></ol>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
