<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Installing the Python Interpreter</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="installing_the_python_interpreter"></a>Installing the Python Interpreter</h1>
<p>Because <a id="I_indexterm_d1e103579"></a>you need the Python interpreter to run Python scripts,
        the first step in using Python is usually installing Python. Unless
        one is already available on your machine, you’ll need to fetch,
        install, and possibly configure a recent version of Python on your
        computer. You’ll only need to do this once per machine, and if you
        will be running a frozen binary (described in Chapter 2) or self-installing system, you
        may not need to do much more.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Is Python Already Present?"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="is_python_already_present_question"></a>Is Python Already Present?</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Before you do anything else, check whether you already have a
          recent Python on your machine. If you are working on Linux, Mac OS
          X, or some Unix systems, Python is probably already installed on
          your computer, though it may be one or two releases behind the
          cutting edge. Here’s how to check:</p><div class="epub__itemizedlist">
<ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p>On Windows, check whether there is a Python entry in the
              Start button’s All Programs menu (at the bottom left of the
              screen).</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>On Mac OS X, open a Terminal window
              (Applications→Utilities→Terminal) and type <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong> at the prompt.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p>On Linux and Unix, type <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong> at a shell prompt (a.k.a.
              terminal window), and see what happens. Alternatively, try
              searching for “python” in the usual places—<em class="epub__filename">/usr/bin</em>, <em class="epub__filename">/usr/local/bin</em>, etc.</p></li></ul>
</div>
<p>If you find a Python, make sure it’s a recent version.
          Although any recent Python will do for most of this text, this
          edition focuses on Python 3.0 and 2.6 specifically, so you may want
          to install one of these to run some of the examples in this
          book.</p>
<p>Speaking of versions, I recommend starting out with Python 3.0
          or later if you’re learning Python anew and don’t need to deal with
          existing 2.X code; otherwise, you should generally use Python 2.6.
          Some popular Python-based systems still use older releases, though
          (2.5 is still widespread), so if you’re working with existing
          systems be sure to use a version relevant to your needs; the next
          section describes locations where you can fetch a variety of Python
          versions.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Where to Get Python"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="where_to_get_python"></a>Where to Get Python</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>If <a id="I_indexterm_d1e103625"></a>there is no Python on your machine, you will need to
          install one yourself. The good news is that Python is an open source
          system that is freely available on the Web and very easy to install
          on most platforms.</p>
<p>You can always fetch the latest and greatest standard Python
          release from http://www.python.org, Python’s
          official website. Look for the Downloads link on that page, and
          choose a release for the platform on which you will be working.
          You’ll find prebuilt self-installer files for Windows (run to
          install), Installer Disk Images for Mac OS X (installed per Mac
          conventions), the full source code distribution (typically compiled
          on Linux, Unix, or OS X machines to generate an interpreter), and
          more.</p>
<p>Although Python is standard on Linux these days, you can also
          find RPMs for Linux on the Web (unpack them with
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>rpm</em></span>). Python’s website also has links to pages
          where versions for other platforms are maintained, either at Python.org itself
          or offsite. A Google web search is another great way to find Python
          packages. Among other platforms, you can find Python pre-built for
          iPods, Palm handhelds, Nokia cell phones, PlayStation and PSP,
          Solaris, AS/400, and Windows Mobile.</p>
<p>If you find yourself pining for a Unix environment on a
          Windows machine, you might also be interested in installing
          <a id="I_indexterm_d1e103645"></a><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Cygwin</em></span> and its version of Python
          (see http://www.cygwin.com). Cygwin is a
          GPL-licensed library and toolset that provides full Unix
          functionality on Windows machines, and it includes a prebuilt Python
          that makes use of the all the Unix tools provided.</p>
<p>You can also find Python on CD-ROMs supplied with Linux
          distributions, included with some products and computer systems, and
          enclosed with some other Python books. These tend to lag behind the
          current release somewhat, but usually not seriously so.</p>
<p>In addition, you can find Python in some free and commercial
          development bundles. For example, ActiveState distributes Python as
          part of its <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm_d1e103658"></a>ActivePython</em></span>, a package that combines
          standard Python with extensions for Windows development such as
          PyWin32, an IDE called
          <a id="I_indexterm_d1e103666"></a>PythonWin (described in Chapter 3), and other commonly used
          extensions. Python can also be had today in the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm_d1e103673"></a>Enthought</em></span> Python Distribution—a package aimed at
          scientific computing needs—as well as in <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm_d1e103683"></a>Portable Python</em></span>, preconfigured to run
          directly from a portable device. Search the Web for
          details<a id="I_indexterm_d1e103688"></a>.</p>
<p>Finally, if you are interested in alternative Python
          implementations, run a web search to check out <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm_d1e103695"></a>Jython</em></span> (the Python port to the Java
          environment) and <span class="epub__emphasis"><em><a id="I_indexterm_d1e103701"></a>IronPython</em></span> (Python for the C#/.NET world),
          both of which are described in Chapter 2. Installation of these systems
          is beyond the scope of this book.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Installation Steps"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="installation_steps"></a>Installation Steps</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Once <a id="I_indexterm_d1e103713"></a>you’ve downloaded Python, you need to install it.
          Installation steps are very platform-specific, but here are a few
          pointers for the major Python platforms:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">Windows</span></dt><dd>
<p>On Windows, Python comes as a self-installer MSI program
                file—simply double-click on its file icon, and answer Yes or
                Next at every prompt to perform a default install. The default
                install includes Python’s documentation set and support for
                <code class="epub__literal">tkinter</code> (<code class="epub__literal">Tkinter</code> in Python 2.6) GUIs, shelve
                databases, and the IDLE development GUI. Python 3.0 and 2.6
                are normally installed in the directories <em class="epub__filename">C:\Python30</em> and <em class="epub__filename">C:\Python26</em>, though this can be
                changed at install time.</p>
<p>For convenience, after the install Python shows up in
                the Start button’s All Programs menu. Python’s menu there has
                five entries that give quick access to common tasks: starting
                the IDLE user interface, reading module documentation,
                starting an interactive session, reading Python’s standard
                manuals in a web browser, and uninstalling. Most of these
                options involve concepts explored in detail elsewhere in this
                text.</p>
<p>When installed on Windows, Python also by default
                automatically registers itself to be the program that opens
                Python files when their icons are clicked (a program launch
                technique described in Chapter 3). It is also possible to
                build Python from its source code on Windows, but this is not
                commonly done.</p>
<p>One note for Windows Vista users: security features of
                the some versions of Vista change some of the rules for using
                MSI installer files. Although this may be a nonissue by the time you read
                these words, see the sidebar The Python MSI Installer on Windows Vista in this
                appendix for assistance if the current Python installer does
                not work, or does not place Python in the correct place on
                your machine.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Linux</span></dt><dd>
<p>On <a id="I_indexterm_d1e103759"></a>Linux, Python is available as one or more RPM
                files, which you unpack in the usual way (consult the RPM
                manpage for details). Depending on which RPMs you download,
                there may be one for Python itself, and another that adds
                support for <code class="epub__literal">tkinter</code> GUIs
                and the IDLE environment. Because Linux is a Unix-like system,
                the next paragraph applies as well.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">Unix</span></dt><dd>
<p>On <a id="I_indexterm_d1e103776"></a>Unix systems, Python is usually compiled from
                its full C source code distribution. This usually only
                requires you to unpack the file and run simple <code class="epub__literal">config</code> and <code class="epub__literal">make</code> commands; Python configures its
                own build procedure automatically, according to the system on which
                it is being compiled. However, be sure to see the package’s
                <em class="epub__filename">README</em> file for more
                details on this process. Because Python is open source, its
                source code may be used and distributed free of charge.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>On <a id="I_indexterm_d1e103798"></a>other platforms the installation details can differ
          widely, but they generally follow the platform’s normal conventions.
          Installing the “Pippy” port of Python for PalmOS, for example,
          requires a hotsync operation with your PDA, and Python for the Sharp
          Zaurus Linux-based PDA comes as one or more <em class="epub__filename">.ipk</em> files, which you simply run to
          install it. Because additional install procedures for both
          executable and source forms are well documented, though, we’ll skip
          further details here.</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="the_python_msi_installer_on_windows_vis"></a>
<p class="epub__title">The Python MSI Installer on Windows Vista</p>
<p>As I write this, the <a id="I_indexterm_d1e103814"></a>Python self-installer for Windows is an <em class="epub__filename">.msi</em> installation file. This format
            works fine on Windows XP (simply double-click on the file, and it
            runs), but it can have issues on some versions of Windows Vista.
            In particular, running the MSI installer by clicking on it may
            cause Python to be installed at the root of the <em class="epub__filename">C:</em> drive, instead of in the correct
            <em class="epub__filename">C:\PythonXX</em> directory. Python
            still works in the root directory, but this is not the correct
            place to install it.</p>
<p>This is a Vista security-related issue; in short, MSI files
            are not true executables, so they do not correctly inherit
            administrator permissions, even if run by the administrator user.
            Instead, MSI files are run via the Windows Registry—their
            filenames are associated with the MSI installer program.</p>
<p>This problem seems to be either Python- or Vista-version
            specific. On a recent laptop, for example, Python 2.6 and 3.0
            installed without issue. To install Python 2.5.2 on my Vista-based
            OQO handheld, though, I had to use a command-line approach to
            force the required administrator permissions.</p>
<p>If Python doesn’t install in the right place for you, here’s
            the workaround: go to your Start button, select the All Programs
            entry, choose Accessories, right-click on the Command Prompt entry
            there, choose “Run as administrator,” and select Continue in the
            access control dialog. Now, within the Command Prompt window,
            issue a <em class="epub__filename">cd</em> command to change
            to the directory where your Python MSI installer file resides
            (e.g., <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>cd
            C:\user\downloads</code></strong>), and then run the MSI installer
            manually by typing a command line of the form <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>msiexec /i python-2.5.1.msi</code></strong>. Finally,
            follow the usual GUI interactions to complete the install.</p>
<p>Naturally, this behavior may change over time. This
            procedure may not be required in every version of Vista, and
            additional workarounds may be possible (such as disabling Vista
            security, if you dare). It’s also possible that the Python
            self-installer may eventually be provided in a different format
            that obviates this problem—as a true executable, for instance. Be
            sure to try your installer by simply clicking its icon to see if
            it works properly before attempting any workarounds.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Configuring Python"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
