<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Configuring Python</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="configuring_python"></a>Configuring Python</h1>
<p>After <a id="I_indexterm_d1e103853"></a>you’ve installed Python, you may want to configure some
        system settings that impact the way Python runs your code. (If you are
        just getting started with the language, you can probably skip this
        section completely; there is usually no need to specify any system
        settings for basic programs.)</p>
<p>Generally speaking, parts of the Python interpreter’s behavior
        can be configured with environment variable settings and command-line
        options. In this section, we’ll take a brief look at both, but be sure
        to see other documentation sources for more details on the topics we
        introduce here.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Python Environment Variables"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="python_environment_variables"></a>Python Environment Variables</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p><a id="I_indexterm_d1e106004"></a>Environment variables—<a id="I_indexterm_d1e103866"></a>known to some as shell variables, or DOS variables—are
          system-wide settings that live
          outside Python and thus can be used to customize the interpreter’s
          behavior each time it is run on a given computer. Python recognizes
          a handful of environment variable settings, but only a few are used
          often enough to warrant explanation here. Table A-1 summarizes the main
          Python-related environment variable settings.</p><div class="epub__table"><a id="important_environment_variables"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Table A-1. Important environment variables</p><div class="epub__table-contents">
<table style="border-collapse: collapse;border-top: 0.5pt solid ; border-bottom: 0.5pt solid ; border-left: 0.5pt solid ; border-right: 0.5pt solid ; " summary="Important environment variables">
<colgroup><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Variable</p></th><th style="text-align: left" valign="bottom">
<p>Role</p></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">PATH</code> (or <code class="epub__literal">path</code>)</p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>System shell search
                  path (for finding “python”)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Python module search
                  path (for imports)</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">PYTHONSTARTUP</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>Path to Python
                  interactive startup file</p></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p><code class="epub__literal">TCL_LIBRARY</code>, <code class="epub__literal">TK_LIBRARY</code></p></td><td style="text-align: left" valign="top">
<p>GUI extension
                  variables (<code class="epub__literal">tkinter</code>)</p></td></tr></tbody>
</table>
</div>
</div>
<p>These variables are straightforward to use, but here are a few
          pointers:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">PATH</code></span>
</dt><dd>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm_d1e103947"></a>PATH</code> setting lists a set of
                directories that the operating system searches for executable
                programs. It should normally include the directory where your
                Python interpreter lives (the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>python</em></span>
                program on Unix, or the <em class="epub__filename">python.exe</em> file on Windows).</p>
<p>You don’t need to set this variable at all if you are
                willing to work in the directory where Python resides, or type
                the full path to Python in command lines. On Windows, for
                instance, the <code class="epub__literal">PATH</code> is
                irrelevant if you run a <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>cd
                C:\Python30</code></strong> before running any code (to change to
                the directory where Python lives), or always type <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>C:\Python30\python</code></strong> instead of just
                <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong> (giving a full
                path). Also, note that <code class="epub__literal">PATH</code>
                settings are mostly for launching programs from command lines;
                they are usually irrelevant when launching via icon clicks and
                IDEs.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code></span>
</dt><dd>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm_d1e103983"></a>PYTHONPATH</code> setting serves a role
                similar to <code class="epub__literal">PATH</code>: the Python
                interpreter consults the <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code> variable to locate module
                files when you import them in a program. If used, this
                variable is set to a platform-dependent list of directory
                names, separated by colons on Unix and semicolons on Windows.
                This list normally includes just your own source code
                directories. Its content is merged into the <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code> module import search path,
                along with the script’s directory, any path file settings, and
                standard library directories.</p>
<p>You don’t need to set this variable unless you will be
                performing cross-directory imports—because Python always
                searches the home directory of the program’s top-level file
                automatically, this setting is required only if a module needs
                to import another module that lives in a different directory.
                See also the discussion of <em class="epub__filename">.pth</em> path files later in this
                appendix for an alternative to <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code>. For more on the module
                search path, refer to Chapter 21.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">PYTHONSTARTUP</code></span>
</dt><dd>
<p>If <code class="epub__literal"><a id="I_indexterm_d1e104015"></a>PYTHONSTARTUP</code> is set to the pathname
                of a file of Python code, Python executes the file’s code
                automatically whenever you start the interactive interpreter,
                as though you had typed it at the interactive command line.
                This is a rarely used but handy way to make sure you always
                load certain utilities when working interactively; it saves an
                import.</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term"><code class="epub__literal">tkinter</code> settings</span></dt><dd>
<p>If <a id="I_indexterm_d1e104028"></a>you wish to use the <code class="epub__literal">tkinter</code> GUI toolkit (named <code class="epub__literal">Tkinter</code> in 2.6), you might have to
                set the two GUI variables in the last line of Table A-1 to the names of
                the source library directories of the Tcl and Tk systems (much
                like <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code>). However,
                these settings are not required on Windows systems (where
                <code class="epub__literal">tkinter</code> support is
                installed alongside Python), and they’re usually not required
                elsewhere if Tcl and Tk reside in standard directories.</p></dd></dl>
</div>
<p>Note that because these environment settings are external to
          Python itself, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>when</em></span> you set them is usually
          irrelevant: this can be done before or after Python is installed, as
          long as they are set the way you require before Python is actually
          <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>run</em></span>.</p><div class="epub__sidebar"><a id="getting_tkinter_open_parenthesis_and_id"></a>
<p class="epub__title">Getting tkinter (and IDLE) GUI Support on Linux</p>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm_d1e104062"></a>IDLE interface described in Chapter 2 is a Python <a id="I_indexterm_d1e104070"></a><code class="epub__literal">tkinter</code> GUI
            program. The <code class="epub__literal">tkinter</code> module
            (named <code class="epub__literal">Tkinter</code> in 2.6) is a GUI
            toolkit, and it’s a complete, standard component of Python on
            Windows and some other platforms. On some Linux systems, though,
            the underlying GUI library may not be a standard installed
            component. To add GUI support to your Python on Linux if needed,
            try running a command line of the form <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>yum tkinter</code></strong> to automatically install
            <code class="epub__literal">tkinter</code>’s underlying libraries.
            This should work on Linux distributions (and some other systems)
            on which the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>yum</em></span> installation program is
            available.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="How to Set Configuration Options"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="how_to_set_configuration_options"></a>How to Set Configuration Options</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>The <a id="I_indexterm_d1e104099"></a>way to set Python-related environment variables, and
          what to set them to, depends on the type of computer you’re working
          on. And again, remember that you won’t necessarily have to set these
          at all right away; especially if you’re working in IDLE (described
          in Chapter 3), configuration is not
          required up front.</p>
<p>But suppose, for illustration, that you have generally useful
          module files in directories called <em class="epub__filename">utilities</em> and <em class="epub__filename">package1</em> somewhere on your machine, and
          you want to be able to import these modules from files located in
          other directories. That is, to load a file called <em class="epub__filename">spam.py</em> from the <em class="epub__filename">utilities</em> directory, you want to be able
          to say:</p><a id="I_programlisting_d1e104123"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">import spam</pre>
<p>from another file located anywhere on your computer. To make
          this work, you’ll have to configure your module search path one way
          or another to include the directory containing <em class="epub__filename">spam.py</em>. Here are a few tips on this
          process.</p>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Unix/Linux shell variables"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="unix_solidus_linux_shell_variables"></a>Unix/Linux shell variables</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>On <a id="I_indexterm_d1e104135"></a>Unix systems, the way to set environment variables
            depends on the shell you use. Under the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>csh</em></span>
            shell, you might add a line like the following in your <em class="epub__filename">.cshrc</em> or <em class="epub__filename">.login</em> file to set the Python module
            search path:</p><a id="I_programlisting_d1e104152"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">setenv PYTHONPATH /usr/home/pycode/utilities:/usr/lib/pycode/package1</pre>
<p>This tells Python to look for imported modules in two
            user-defined directories. Alternatively, if you’re using the
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>ksh</em></span> shell, the setting might instead appear
            in your <em class="epub__filename">.kshrc</em> file and look
            like this:</p><a id="I_programlisting_d1e104162"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">export PYTHONPATH="/usr/home/pycode/utilities:/usr/lib/pycode/package1"</pre>
<p>Other shells may use different (but analogous)
            syntax.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="DOS variables (Windows)"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="dos_variables_open_parenthesis_windows"></a>DOS variables (Windows)</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>If <a id="I_indexterm_d1e104171"></a>you are using MS-DOS, or some older flavors of
            Windows, you may need to add an environment variable configuration
            command to your <em class="epub__filename">C:\autoexec.bat</em> file, and reboot your
            machine for the changes to take effect. The configuration command
            on such machines has a syntax unique to DOS:</p><a id="I_programlisting_d1e104182"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">set PYTHONPATH=c:\pycode\utilities;d:\pycode\package1</pre>
<p>You can type such a command in a DOS console window, too,
            but the setting will then be active only for that one console
            window. Changing your <em class="epub__filename">.bat</em>
            file makes the change permanent and global to all programs.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Windows environment variable GUI"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="windows_environment_variable_gui"></a>Windows environment variable GUI</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>On <a id="I_indexterm_d1e104194"></a>more recent versions of Windows, including XP and
            Vista, you can instead set <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code> and other variables via the
            system environment variable GUI without having to edit files or
            reboot. On XP, select the Control Panel, choose the System icon,
            pick the Advanced tab, and click the Environment Variables button
            to edit or add new variables (<code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code> is usually a user variable).
            Use the same variable name and values syntax shown in the DOS
            <code class="epub__literal">set</code> command earlier. The
            procedure is similar on Vista, but you may have to verify
            operations along the way.</p>
<p>You do not need to reboot your machine, but be sure to
            restart Python if it’s open so that it picks up your changes—it
            configures its path at startup time only. If you’re working in a
            Windows Command Prompt window, you’ll probably need to restart
            that to pick up your changes as well.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Windows registry"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="windows_registry"></a>Windows registry</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>If you <a id="I_indexterm_d1e104218"></a>are an experienced Windows user, you may also be
            able to configure the module search path by using the Windows
            Registry Editor. Go to Start→Run... and type <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>regedit</code></strong>. Assuming the typical registry
            tool is on your machine, you can then navigate to Python’s entries
            and make your changes. This is a delicate and error-prone
            procedure, though, so unless you’re familiar with the registry, I
            suggest using other options (indeed, this is akin to performing
            brain surgery on your computer, so be careful!).</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect3" title="Path files"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3 class="epub__title"><a id="path_files"></a>Path files</h3>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>Finally, <a id="I_indexterm_d1e104234"></a>if you choose to extend the module search path with
            a <em class="epub__filename"><a id="I_indexterm_d1e104243"></a>.pth</em> file instead of the <code class="epub__literal">PYTHONPATH</code> variable, you might instead
            code a text file that looks like the following on Windows (e.g.,
            file <em class="epub__filename">C:\Python30\mypath.pth</em>):</p><a id="I_programlisting_d1e104254"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">c:\pycode\utilities
d:\pycode\package1</pre>
<p>Its contents will differ per platform, and its container
            directory may differ per both platform and Python release. Python
            locates this file automatically when it starts up.</p>
<p>Directory names in path files may be absolute, or relative
            to the directory containing the path file; multiple <em class="epub__filename">.pth</em> files can be used (all their
            directories are added), and <em class="epub__filename">.pth</em> files may appear in various
            automatically checked directories that are platform- and
            version-specific. In general, a Python release numbered Python
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>N.M</em></span> typically looks for path files in
            <em class="epub__filename">C:\PythonNM</em> and <em class="epub__filename">C:\PythonNM\Lib\site-packages</em> on
            Windows, and in <em class="epub__filename">/usr/local/lib/pythonN.M/site-packages</em>
            and <em class="epub__filename">/usr/local/lib/site-python</em> on Unix and
            Linux. See Chapter 21 for more on using path
            files to configure the <code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code>
            import search path.</p>
<p>Because environment settings are often optional, and because
            this isn’t a book on operating system shells, I’ll defer to other
            sources for further details. Consult your system shell’s manpages
            or other documentation for more information, and if you have
            trouble figuring out what your settings should be, ask your system
            administrator or another local expert for help.</p>
</div>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Python Command-Line Options"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2 class="epub__title"><a id="python_command-line_options"></a>Python Command-Line Options</h2>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<p>When you start <a id="appaPythcomlineopt"></a>Python from a system command line (a.k.a. a shell
          prompt), you can pass in a variety of option flags to control how
          Python runs. Unlike system-wide environment variables, command-line
          options can be different each time you run a script. The complete
          form of a Python command-line invocation in 3.0 looks like this (2.6
          is roughly the same, with a few option differences):</p><a id="I_programlisting_d1e104304"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">python [-bBdEhiOsSuvVWx?] [-c <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>command</code></em> | -m <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>module-name</code></em> | <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>script</code></em> | - ] [<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>args</code></em>]</pre>
<p>Most command lines only make use of the
          <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>script</code></em> and
          <em class="epub__replaceable"><code>args</code></em> parts of this format, to run a
          program’s source file with arguments to be used by the program
          itself. To illustrate, consider the following script file, <em class="epub__filename">main,py</em>, which prints the command-line
          arguments list made available to the script as <code class="epub__literal">sys.argv</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting_d1e104332"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># File main.py</span></em>
import sys
print(sys.argv)</pre>
<p>In the following command line, both <code class="epub__literal">python</code> and <code class="epub__literal">main.py</code> can also be complete directory
          paths, and the three arguments (<code class="epub__literal">a b
          –c</code>) meant for the script show up in the <code class="epub__literal">sys.argv</code> list. The first item in <code class="epub__literal">sys.argv</code> is always the script file’s name,
          when it is known:</p><a id="I_programlisting_d1e104353"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">c:\Python30&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python main.py a b –c</code></strong>            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Most common: run a script file</span></em>
['main.py', 'a', 'b', '-c']</pre>
<p>Other code format specification options allow you to specify
          Python code to be run on the command line itself (<code class="epub__literal">-c</code>), to accept code to run from the
          standard input stream (a <code class="epub__literal">–</code> means
          read from a pipe or redirected input stream file), and so on:</p><a id="I_programlisting_d1e104369"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">c:\Python30&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python -c "print(2 ** 100)"</code></strong>      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Read code from command argument</span></em>
1267650600228229401496703205376

c:\Python30&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python -c "import main"</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Import a file to run its code</span></em>
['-c']

c:\Python30&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python - &lt; main.py a b –c</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Read code from standard input</span></em>
['-', 'a', 'b', '-c']

c:\Python30&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python - a b -c &lt; main.py</code></strong>        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Same effect as prior line</span></em>
['-', 'a', 'b', '-c']</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">–m</code> code specification
          locates a module on Python’s module search path (<code class="epub__literal">sys.path</code>) and runs it as a top-level
          script (as module <code class="epub__literal">__main__</code>).
          Leave off the “.py” suffix here, since the filename is a
          module:</p><a id="I_programlisting_d1e104407"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">c:\Python30&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python -m main a b –c</code></strong>            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Locate/run module as script</span></em>
['c:\\Python30\\main.py', 'a', 'b', '-c']</pre>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">–m</code> option also supports
          running modules in packages with relative import syntax, as well as
          modules located in <em class="epub__filename">.zip</em>
          archives. This switch is commonly used to run the <code class="epub__literal">pdb</code> debugger and <code class="epub__literal">profile</code> profiler modules from a command
          line for a script invocation rather than interactively, though this
          usage mode seems to have changed somewhat in 3.0 (<code class="epub__literal">profile</code> appears to have been affected by
          the removal of <code class="epub__literal">execfile</code> in 3.0,
          and <code class="epub__literal">pdb</code> steps into superfluous
          input/output code in the new 3.0 <code class="epub__literal">io</code> module):</p><a id="I_programlisting_d1e104443"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">c:\Python30&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python -m pdb main.py a b -c</code></strong>              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Debug a script</span></em>
--Return--
&gt; c:\python30\lib\io.py(762)closed()-&gt;False
-&gt; return self.raw.closed
(Pdb) c

c:\Python30&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>C:\python26\python -m pdb main.py a b -c</code></strong>  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Better in 2.6?</span></em>
&gt; c:\python30\main.py(1)&lt;module&gt;()
-&gt; import sys
(Pdb) c

c:\Python30&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python -m profile main.py a b -c</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Profile a script</span></em>

c:\Python30&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python -m cProfile main.py a b -c</code></strong>         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Low-overhead profiler</span></em></pre>
<p>Immediately after the “python” and before the designation of
          code to be run, Python accepts additional arguments that control its
          own behavior. These arguments are consumed by Python itself and are
          not meant for the script being run. For example, <code class="epub__literal">-O</code> runs Python in optimized mode, <code class="epub__literal">-u</code> forces standard streams to be
          unbuffered, and <code class="epub__literal">–i</code> enters
          interactive mode after running a script:</p><a id="I_programlisting_d1e104480"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">c:\Python30&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python –u main.py a b -c</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Unbuffered output streams</span></em></pre>
<p>Python 2.6 supports additional options that promote 3.0
          compatibility (<code class="epub__literal">−3</code>, <code class="epub__literal">-Q</code>) and detecting inconsistent tab
          indentation usage, which is always detected and reported in 3.0
          (<code class="epub__literal">-t</code>; see Chapter 12). See the Python manuals or
          reference texts for more details on available command-line options.
          Or better yet, ask Python itself—run a command-line form like
          this:</p><a id="I_programlisting_d1e104500"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">c:\Python30&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python -?</code></strong></pre>
<p>to request Python’s help display, which documents available
          command-line options. If you deal with complex command lines, be
          sure to also check out the standard library modules <code class="epub__literal">getopt</code> and <code class="epub__literal">optparse</code>, which support more sophisticated
          command-line processing<a id="I_indexterm_d1e104514"></a>.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="For More Help"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
