<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Part VI, Classes and OOP</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><div><h1 class="epub__title"><a id="part_vi_comma_classes_and_oop"></a>Part VI, Classes and OOP</h1>
<p>See Test Your Knowledge: Part VI Exercises
        in Chapter 31 for the exercises.</p><div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Inheritance</em></span>. Here’s the solution code
            for this exercise (file <em class="epub__filename">adder.py</em>), along with some interactive
            tests. The <code class="epub__literal">__add__</code> overload has
            to appear only once, in the superclass, as it invokes
            type-specific <code class="epub__literal">add</code> methods in
            subclasses:</p><a id="I_programlisting_d1e106435"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Adder:
    def add(self, x, y):
        print('not implemented!')
    def __init__(self, start=[]):
        self.data = start
    def __add__(self, other):                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Or in subclasses?</span></em>
        return self.add(self.data, other)        <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Or return type?</span></em>

class ListAdder(Adder):
    def add(self, x, y):
        return x + y

class DictAdder(Adder):
    def add(self, x, y):
        new = {}
        for k in x.keys(): new[k] = x[k]
        for k in y.keys(): new[k] = y[k]
        return new

% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from adder import *</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = Adder()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.add(1, 2)</code></strong>
not implemented!
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = ListAdder()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.add([1], [2])</code></strong>
[1, 2]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = DictAdder()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.add({1:1}, {2:2})</code></strong>
{1: 1, 2: 2}

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = Adder([1])</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x + [2]</code></strong>
not implemented!
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = ListAdder([1])</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x + [2]</code></strong>
[1, 2]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>[2] + x</code></strong>
Traceback (innermost last):
  File "&lt;stdin&gt;", line 1, in ?
TypeError: __add__ nor __radd__ defined for these operands</pre>
<p>Notice in the last test that you get an error for
            expressions where a class instance appears on the right of a
            <code class="epub__literal">+</code>; if you want to fix this, use
            <code class="epub__literal">__radd__</code> methods, as described
            in “Operator Overloading” in Chapter 29.</p>
<p>If you are saving a value in the instance anyhow, you might
            as well rewrite the <code class="epub__literal">add</code> method
            to take just one argument, in the spirit of other examples in this
            part of the book:</p><a id="I_programlisting_d1e106499"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Adder:
    def __init__(self, start=[]):
        self.data = start
    def __add__(self, other):              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Pass a single argument</span></em>
        return self.add(other)             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># The left side is in self</span></em>
    def add(self, y):
        print('not implemented!')

class ListAdder(Adder):
    def add(self, y):
        return self.data + y

class DictAdder(Adder):
    def add(self, y):
        pass                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Change to use self.data instead of x</span></em>

x = ListAdder([1, 2, 3])
y = x + [4, 5, 6]
print(y)                                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Prints [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]</span></em></pre>
<p>Because values are attached to objects rather than passed
            around, this version is arguably more object-oriented. And, once
            you’ve gotten to this point, you’ll probably find that you can get
            rid of <code class="epub__literal">add</code> altogether and
            simply define type-specific <code class="epub__literal">__add__</code> methods in the two
            subclasses.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Operator overloading</em></span>. The solution code
            (file <em class="epub__filename">mylist.py</em>) uses a few
            operator overloading methods that the text didn’t say much about,
            but they should be straightforward to understand. Copying the
            initial value in the constructor is important because it may be
            mutable; you don’t want to change or have a reference to an object
            that’s possibly shared somewhere outside the class. The <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> method routes calls to the
            wrapped list. For hints on an easier way to code this in Python
            2.2 and later, see Extending Types by Subclassing in Chapter 31:</p><a id="I_programlisting_d1e106535"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class MyList:
    def __init__(self, start):
        #self.wrapped = start[:]       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Copy start: no side effects</span></em>
        self.wrapped = []              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Make sure it's a list here</span></em>
        for x in start: self.wrapped.append(x)
    def __add__(self, other):
        return MyList(self.wrapped + other)
    def __mul__(self, time):
        return MyList(self.wrapped * time)
    def __getitem__(self, offset):
        return self.wrapped[offset]
    def __len__(self):
        return len(self.wrapped)
    def __getslice__(self, low, high):
        return MyList(self.wrapped[low:high])
    def append(self, node):
        self.wrapped.append(node)
    def __getattr__(self, name):       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Other methods: sort/reverse/etc</span></em>
        return getattr(self.wrapped, name)
    def __repr__(self):
        return repr(self.wrapped)

if __name__ == '__main__':
    x = MyList('spam')
    print(x)
    print(x[2])
    print(x[1:])
    print(x + ['eggs'])
    print(x * 3)
    x.append('a')
    x.sort()
    for c in x: print(c, end=' ')

% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python mylist.py</code></strong>
['s', 'p', 'a', 'm']
a
['p', 'a', 'm']
['s', 'p', 'a', 'm', 'eggs']
['s', 'p', 'a', 'm', 's', 'p', 'a', 'm', 's', 'p', 'a', 'm']
a a m p s</pre>
<p>Note that it’s important to copy the start value by
            appending instead of slicing here, because otherwise the result
            may not be a true list and so will not respond to expected list
            methods, such as <code class="epub__literal">append</code> (e.g.,
            slicing a string returns another string, not a list). You would be
            able to copy a <code class="epub__literal">MyList</code> start
            value by slicing because its class overloads the slicing operation
            and provides the expected list interface; however, you need to
            avoid slice-based copying for objects such as strings.</p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Subclassing</em></span>. My solution (<em class="epub__filename">mysub.py</em>) appears below. Your solution
            should be similar:</p><a id="I_programlisting_d1e106570"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from mylist import MyList

class MyListSub(MyList):
    calls = 0                                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Shared by instances</span></em>

    def __init__(self, start):
        self.adds = 0                              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Varies in each instance</span></em>
        MyList.__init__(self, start)

    def __add__(self, other):
        MyListSub.calls += 1                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Class-wide counter</span></em>
        self.adds += 1                             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Per-instance counts</span></em>
        return MyList.__add__(self, other)

    def stats(self):
        return self.calls, self.adds               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># All adds, my adds</span></em>

if __name__ == '__main__':
    x = MyListSub('spam')
    y = MyListSub('foo')
    print(x[2])
    print(x[1:])
    print(x + ['eggs'])
    print(x + ['toast'])
    print(y + ['bar'])
    print(x.stats())

% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python mysub.py</code></strong>
a
['p', 'a', 'm']
['s', 'p', 'a', 'm', 'eggs']
['s', 'p', 'a', 'm', 'toast']
['f', 'o', 'o', 'bar']
(3, 2)</pre></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Attribute methods</em></span>. I worked through
            this exercise as follows. Notice that in Python 2.6, operators try
            to fetch attributes through <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code>, too; you need to return a
            value to make them work. Caveat: as noted in Chapter 30, <code class="epub__literal">__getattr__</code> is <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>not</em></span>
            called for built-in operations in Python 3.0, so the following
            expression won’t work as shown; in 3.0, a class like this must
            redefine <code class="epub__literal">__X__</code> operator
            overloading methods explicitly. More on this in Chapters 30, 37,
            and 38.</p><a id="I_programlisting_d1e106617"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>class Meta:</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __getattr__(self, name):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('get', name)</code></strong>
...     <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>def __setattr__(self, name, value):</code></strong>
...         <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>print('set', name, value)</code></strong>
...
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = Meta()</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.append</code></strong>
get append
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.spam = "pork"</code></strong>
set spam pork
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x + 2</code></strong>
get __coerce__
Traceback (innermost last):
  File "&lt;stdin&gt;", line 1, in ?
TypeError: call of non-function
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x[1]</code></strong>
get __getitem__
Traceback (innermost last):
  File "&lt;stdin&gt;", line 1, in ?
TypeError: call of non-function

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x[1:5]</code></strong>
get __len__
Traceback (innermost last):
  File "&lt;stdin&gt;", line 1, in ?
TypeError: call of non-function</pre></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Set objects</em></span>. Here’s the sort of
            interaction you should get. Comments explain which methods are
            called. Also, note that sets are a built-in type in Python today,
            so this is largely just a coding exercise (see Chapter 5 for more on sets).</p><a id="I_programlisting_d1e106658"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from setwrapper import Set</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = Set([1, 2, 3, 4])</code></strong>          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Runs __init__</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y = Set([3, 4, 5])</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x &amp; y</code></strong>                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># __and__, intersect, then __repr__</span></em>
Set:[3, 4]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x | y</code></strong>                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># __or__, union, then __repr__</span></em>
Set:[1, 2, 3, 4, 5]

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>z = Set("hello")</code></strong>               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># __init__ removes duplicates</span></em>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>z[0], z[-1]</code></strong>                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># __getitem__</span></em>
('h', 'o')

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>for c in z: print(c, end=' ')</code></strong>  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># __getitem__</span></em>
...
h e l o
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>len(z), z</code></strong>                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># __len__, __repr__</span></em>
(4, Set:['h', 'e', 'l', 'o'])

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>z &amp; "mello", z | "mello"</code></strong>
(Set:['e', 'l', 'o'], Set:['h', 'e', 'l', 'o', 'm'])</pre>
<p>My solution to the multiple-operand extension subclass looks
            like the following class (file <em class="epub__filename">multiset.py</em>). It only needs to replace
            two methods in the original set. The class’s documentation string
            explains how it works:</p><a id="I_programlisting_d1e106722"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">from setwrapper import Set

class MultiSet(Set):
    """
    Inherits all Set names, but extends intersect
    and union to support multiple operands; note
    that "self" is still the first argument (stored
    in the *args argument now); also note that the
    inherited &amp; and | operators call the new methods
    here with 2 arguments, but processing more than
    2 requires a method call, not an expression:
    """

    def intersect(self, *others):
        res = []
        for x in self:                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Scan first sequence</span></em>
            for other in others:               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># For all other args</span></em>
                if x not in other: break       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Item in each one?</span></em>
            else:                              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># No: break out of loop</span></em>
                res.append(x)                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Yes: add item to end</span></em>
        return Set(res)

    def union(*args):                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># self is args[0]</span></em>
        res = []
        for seq in args:                       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># For all args</span></em>
            for x in seq:                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># For all nodes</span></em>
                if not x in res:
                    res.append(x)              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Add new items to result</span></em>
        return Set(res)</pre>
<p>Your interaction with the extension will look something like
            the following. Note that you can intersect by using <code class="epub__literal">&amp;</code> or calling <code class="epub__literal">intersect</code>, but you must call <code class="epub__literal">intersect</code> for three
            or more operands; <code class="epub__literal">&amp;</code> is a
            binary (two-sided) operator. Also, note that we could have called
            <code class="epub__literal">MultiSet</code> simply <code class="epub__literal">Set</code> to make this change more transparent
            if we used <code class="epub__literal">setwrapper.Set</code> to
            refer to the original within <code class="epub__literal">multiset</code>:</p><a id="I_programlisting_d1e106779"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>from multiset import *</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x = MultiSet([1,2,3,4])</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>y = MultiSet([3,4,5])</code></strong>
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>z = MultiSet([0,1,2])</code></strong>

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x &amp; y, x | y</code></strong>                               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Two operands</span></em>
(Set:[3, 4], Set:[1, 2, 3, 4, 5])

&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.intersect(y, z)</code></strong>                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Three operands</span></em>
Set:[]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.union(y, z)</code></strong>
Set:[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 0]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.intersect([1,2,3], [2,3,4], [1,2,3])</code></strong>     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Four operands</span></em>
Set:[2, 3]
&gt;&gt;&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>x.union(range(10))</code></strong>                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Non-MultiSets work, too</span></em>
Set:[1, 2, 3, 4, 0, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]</pre></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Class tree links</em></span>. Here is the way I
            changed the lister classes, and a rerun of the test to show its
            format. Do the same for the <code class="epub__literal">dir</code>-based version, and also do this when
            formatting class objects in the tree climber variant:</p><a id="I_programlisting_d1e106830"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class ListInstance:
    def __str__(self):
        return '&lt;Instance of %s(%s), address %s:\n%s&gt;' % (
                           self.__class__.__name__,       <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># My class's name</span></em>
                           self.__supers(),               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># My class's own supers</span></em>
                           id(self),                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># My address</span></em>
                           self.__attrnames()) )          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># name=value list</span></em>
    def __attrnames(self):
        ...<em class="epub__replaceable"><code>unchanged</code></em>...
    def __supers(self):
        names = []
        for super in self.__class__.__bases__:            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># One level up from class</span></em>
            names.append(super.__name__)                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># name, not str(super)</span></em>
        return ', '.join(names)

C:\misc&gt; <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python testmixin.py</code></strong>
&lt;Instance of Sub(Super, ListInstance), address 7841200:
        name data1=spam
        name data2=eggs
        name data3=42
&gt;</pre></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Composition</em></span>. My solution is below (file
            <em class="epub__filename">lunch.py</em>), with comments from
            the description mixed in with the code. This is one case where
            it’s probably easier to express a problem in Python than it is in
            English:</p><a id="I_programlisting_d1e106865"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Lunch:
    def __init__(self):                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Make/embed Customer, Employee</span></em>
        self.cust = Customer()
        self.empl = Employee()
    def order(self, foodName):                   <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Start Customer order simulation</span></em>
        self.cust.placeOrder(foodName, self.empl)
    def result(self):                            <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Ask the Customer about its Food</span></em>
        self.cust.printFood()

class Customer:
    def __init__(self):                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Initialize my food to None</span></em>
        self.food = None
    def placeOrder(self, foodName, employee):    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Place order with Employee</span></em>
        self.food = employee.takeOrder(foodName)
    def printFood(self):                         <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Print the name of my food</span></em>
        print(self.food.name)

class Employee:
    def takeOrder(self, foodName):               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Return Food, with desired name</span></em>
        return Food(foodName)

class Food:
    def __init__(self, name):                    <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Store food name</span></em>
        self.name = name

if __name__ == '__main__':
    x = Lunch()                                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Self-test code</span></em>
    x.order('burritos')                          <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># If run, not imported</span></em>
    x.result()
    x.order('pizza')
    x.result()

% <strong class="epub__userinput"><code>python lunch.py</code></strong>
burritos
pizza</pre></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Zoo animal hierarchy</em></span>. Here is the way I
            coded the taxonomy in Python (file <em class="epub__filename">zoo.py</em>); it’s artificial, but the
            general coding pattern applies to many real structures, from GUIs
            to employee databases. Notice that the <code class="epub__literal">self.speak</code> reference in <code class="epub__literal">Animal</code> triggers an independent
            inheritance search, which finds <code class="epub__literal">speak</code> in a subclass. Test this
            interactively per the exercise description. Try extending this
            hierarchy with new classes, and making instances of various
            classes in the tree:</p><a id="I_programlisting_d1e106918"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Animal:
    def reply(self):   self.speak()              <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Back to subclass</span></em>
    def speak(self):   print('spam')             <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Custom message</span></em>

class Mammal(Animal):
    def speak(self):   print('huh?')

class Cat(Mammal):
    def speak(self):   print('meow')

class Dog(Mammal):
    def speak(self):   print('bark')

class Primate(Mammal):
    def speak(self):   print('Hello world!')

class Hacker(Primate): pass                      <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Inherit from Primate</span></em></pre></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>The Dead Parrot Sketch</em></span>. Here’s how I
            implemented this one (file <em class="epub__filename">parrot.py</em>). Notice how the <code class="epub__literal">line</code> method in the <code class="epub__literal">Actor</code> superclass works: by accessing
            <code class="epub__literal">self</code> attributes twice, it sends
            Python back to the instance twice, and hence invokes
            <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>two</em></span> inheritance searches—<code class="epub__literal">self.name</code> and <code class="epub__literal">self.says()</code> find information in the
            specific subclasses:</p><a id="I_programlisting_d1e106956"></a>
<pre class="epub__programlisting">class Actor:
    def line(self): print(self.name + ':', repr(self.says()))

class Customer(Actor):
    name = 'customer'
    def says(self): return "that's one ex-bird!"

class Clerk(Actor):
    name = 'clerk'
    def says(self): return "no it isn't..."

class Parrot(Actor):
    name = 'parrot'
    def says(self): return None

class Scene:
    def __init__(self):
        self.clerk    = Clerk()                  <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Embed some instances</span></em>
        self.customer = Customer()               <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Scene is a composite</span></em>
        self.subject  = Parrot()

    def action(self):
        self.customer.line()                     <em class="epub__lineannotation"><span class="epub__lineannotation"># Delegate to embedded</span></em>
        self.clerk.line()
        self.subject.line()</pre></li></ol>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Part VII, Exceptions and Tools"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</body>
</html>
