<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 1.2. Building a Simple "Hello, World" Application from the Command Line</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 1.2. Building a Simple "Hello, World" Application from the Command Line</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E4DAE">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You want to 

build a
simple "Hello, World" program, such
as that in Example 1-4.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E5EAE">Example 1-4. A simple "Hello, World" program</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre><tt><i>hello.cpp</i></tt>

#include &lt;iostream&gt;

int main( )
{
    std::cout &lt;&lt; "Hello, World!\n";
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EJFAE">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Follow these steps:</p>
<div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Set any environment variables required by your toolset.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Enter a command telling your compiler to compile and link your
program.</p></div></li></ol></div>
<p class="docText">Scripts for setting environment variables are listed in Table 1-5; these scripts are located in the same
directory as your command-line tools (Table 1-3).
If your toolset does not appear in Table 1-5, you
can skip the first step. Otherwise, run the appropriate script from
the command line, if you are using Windows, or source the script, if
you are using Unix.</p>
<p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 1-5. Scripts for setting 




environment variables required by your command-line tools</h5></caption><colgroup span="2"><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Toolset
								</th><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Script
								</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Visual C++
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>vcvars32.bat</i>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Intel (Windows)
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>iclvars.bat</i><sup class="docFootnote">[2]</sup>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Intel (Linux)
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>iccvars.sh </i>or <i>iccvars.csh</i>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Metrowerks (Mac OS X)
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>mwvars.sh</i> or <i>mwvars.csh<sup class="docFootnote">[3]</sup></i>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Metrowerks (Windows)
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>cwenv.bat</i>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Comeau
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Same as the backend toolset
								</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<blockquote><p class="docFootnote"><sup><a name="cplusplusckbk-CHP-1-FNOTE-2">[2]</a></sup> With earlier version
of the Intel compiler, this script was named
<i>iccvars.bat</i>.</p></blockquote>
<blockquote><p class="docFootnote"><sup><a name="cplusplusckbk-CHP-1-FNOTE-3">[3]</a></sup> In versions of CodeWarrior prior to 10.0, there was a single
<i>csh</i> script named mwvars.</p></blockquote>
<p class="docText">Commands for compiling and linking <i>hello.cpp</i> are
given in Table 1-6. To work properly, these
commands require that your current directory is the directory
containing <i>hello.cpp </i>and that the directory
containing the command-line compiler appears in your
<tt>PATH</tt> environment variable. If you ran a script in
step 1, the latter condition will be satisfied automatically.
It's also possible that when you installed your
toolset, the setup utility added the directory containing the
command-line tools to your <tt>PATH</tt>. Otherwise, you
can either add the directory to your <tt>PATH</tt>, as
shown in Table 1-7, or specify the full file
pathname on the command line.</p>
<p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 1-6. Commands for compiling and linking hello.cpp in a single step</h5></caption><colgroup span="2"><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Toolset
								</th><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Command Line
								</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									GCC
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>g++ -o hello hello.cpp</i>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Visual C++
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>cl -nologo -EHsc -GR -Zc:forScope -Zc:wchar_t -Fehello
hello.cpp</i>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Intel (Windows)
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>icl -nologo -EHsc -GR -Zc:forScope -Zc:wchar_t -Fehello
hello.cpp</i>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Intel (Linux)
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>icpc -o hello hello.cpp</i>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Metrowerks
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>mwcc -wchar_t on -cwd include -o hello hello.cpp</i>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Comeau
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>como -o hello hello.cpp</i>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Borland
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>bcc32 -q -ehello hello.cpp</i>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Digital Mars
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>dmc -Ae -Ar
-</i>I<tt>&lt;dmcroot&gt;</tt><i>/stlport/stlport
-o hello hello.cpp</i>
</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 1-7. Adding a directory to



 your PATH environment variable for the duration of a command-line session</h5></caption><colgroup span="2"><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Shell
								</th><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Command line
								</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<i>bash, sh, ksh </i>(Unix)
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>export PATH=&lt;directory&gt;:$PATH</i>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<i>csh, tsch </i>(Unix)
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>setenv PATH &lt;directory&gt;:$PATH</i>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<i>cmd.exe</i> (Windows)
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>set PATH=&lt;directory&gt;;%PATH%</i>
</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">For example, if you use Microsoft Visual Studio .NET 2003, and if it
is installed in the standard location on the <i>C</i>
drive, change to the directory containing
<i>hello.cpp</i> and enter the commands shown below:</p>
<pre>&gt; <b>"C:\Program Files\Microsoft Visual Studio .NET 2003\Vc7\bin\</b>
					<b>vcvars32.bat"</b>
Setting environment for using Microsoft Visual Studio .NET 2003 tools.
(If you have another version of Visual Studio or Visual C++ installed 
and wish to use its tools from the command line, run vcvars32.bat for 
that version.)
&gt; <b>cl -nologo -EHsc -GR -Zc:forScope -Zc:wchar_t -Fehello </b>
					<b>hello.cpp</b>
hello</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">You can now run your program:</p>
<pre>&gt; <b>hello</b>
Hello, World!</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Similarly, if you are using Intel 9.0 for Linux, and if it is
installed in the standard location
<i>/opt/intel/cc/9.0</i>, open a
<i>bash</i> shell, change to the directory containing
<i>hello.cpp</i> and enter the commands:</p>
<pre>$ <b>. /opt/intel/cc/9.0/bin/iccvars.sh</b>
$  <b>icpc -o hello hello.cpp</b>
$ <b>./hello</b>
Hello, World!</pre><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EWVAE">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">Environment variables are pairs of strings maintained by your system
and accessible to running applications. Command-line tools frequently
refer to environment variables to learn details about your system and
to obtain configuration information that otherwise would have to be
entered on the command line. The environment variable you will
encounter most often is <tt>PATH</tt>, which stores a list
of directories that are searched by the operating system when the
name of an executable is entered on the command line using its simple
name rather than its full pathname. On Windows, the directories in
<tt>PATH</tt> are also searched when a dynamic library is
loaded.</p>
<p class="docText">Command-line tools make use of environment variables on both

Unix and Windows, but on Unix there
is typically a dominant C++ compiler and the environment variables it
requires are set by default to correct values. On Windows, however,
there have traditionally been a number of competing C++ compilers;
two different compilers will almost certainly have to look in
different locations to find their standard headers and their compiled
runtime support libraries, for example. It's,
therefore, common for Windows toolsets to provide scripts that set a
number of environment variables to record the locations of headers
and libraries and other information.</p>
<p class="docText">One way to use such a script is to run it from the command line
before invoking any of the command-line tools, as I demonstrated for
Visual C++ and Intel 9.0 for Linux. It's also
possible to make the environment variable settings permanent so that
you don't have to run the script each time you start
a command-line session; how this is done, depends on your operating
system and on your shell. Changing your environment variables
permanently is not always a good idea, however, since several
toolsets may contain tools with the same name, causing the wrong tool
to be invoked during the build process. For example, if you have
multiple versions of Visual C++ installed, you must make sure to run
the correct version of <i>vcvars32.bat</i> before using
the command-line tools. As another example, the toolsets Visual C++
and Digital Mars both contain tools named
<i>link.exe</i> and <i>lib.exe</i>.</p>
<p class="docText">Now let's look at the command lines in Table 1-7. Remember that you only need to be concerned
with the row corresponding to your toolset. In general, the
information passed to the compiler

falls into four categories:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">The name(s) of the input files</p></li><li><p class="docList">The name(s) of the output files</p></li><li><p class="docList">The locations to search for files</p></li><li><p class="docList">General configuration information</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">In Table 1-6, there is just a single input file,
<i>hello.cpp</i>, and it is passed to the compiler
simply by writing the name of the file on the command line. It
doesn't matter where you place the name of the input
file, as long as it doesn't appear in the middle of
another command-line option. In Table 1-7, I placed
<i>hello.cpp</i> at the very end of the command line.</p>
<p class="docText">There is also a single output file, <i>hello.exe</i> or
<i>hello</i>, depending on the operating system. In
this case, however, the way the file name is passed to the compiler
depends on the toolset. Most toolsets use <i>-o</i>
<i>&lt;file&gt; </i>to specify an output executable,
but Visual C++ and Intel for Windows use
<i>-Fe&lt;file&gt;</i> and Borland uses
<i>-e&lt;file&gt;</i>. Note that it's
not necessary to specify the extension of an executable.</p>
<p class="docText">The only information in Table 1-7 that falls into
the third category, locations to search for files, appears in the
command line for Digital Mars. Since the STLPort library is not
Digital Mars's built-in standard library, the
compiler must be told, using the <i>-I</i> option,
where to search for the STLPort headers. The STLPort headers are
located in the <i>/stlport/stlport</i> subdirectory of
the Digital Mars installation; I specified this directory in Table 1-7 using the notation
<i>&lt;dmcroot&gt;/stlport/stlport.</i> For more
information on <i>-I</i> option, see Recipe 1.5.</p>
<p class="docText">Most of the command-line options in Table 1-7 fall
into the fourth category: general configuration information. These
options don't apply to any particular file; instead
they enable or disable
particular

compiler features.</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">The options <i>-nologo</i> (Visual C++ and Intel for Windows) and
<i>-q</i> (Borland) tell the compiler not to print
its name and version to the console. This makes the
compiler's output easier to read.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The options <i>-EHsc</i> (Visual C++ and Intel for Windows) and
<i>-Ae</i> (Digital Mars) tell the compiler to
enable C++ exception handling.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The options

<i>-GR</i> (Visual C++ and Intel for Windows) and
<i>-Ar</i> (Digital Mars) tell the compiler to enable
runtime type information (RTTI).</p></li><li><p class="docList">The options
<i>-Zc:wchar_t</i> (Visual C++ and Intel for Windows) and
<i>-wchar_t</i> on (Metrowerks) tell the compiler to
recognize <tt>wchar_t</tt> as a built-in type.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The option
<i>-Zc:forScope</i>
(Visual C++ and Intel for Windows) tells the compiler to enforce
modern <tt>for</tt>-scoping rules.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The option <i>-cwd</i> include (Metrowerks) tells the compiler
to begin searching for an included header in the directory of the
source file that contains the <tt>include</tt> directive.
This is the default behavior for all the toolsets but Metrowerks.</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">Next, let's consider a second solution to the
original problem. Instead of compiling and linking with a single
command, you can split the second step into two parts:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">Enter a command telling your compiler to compile your program to an
object file without linking.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Enter a command telling your linker to create an executable from the
object file created in step 2a.</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">In this simple case, there's no reason to compile
and link separately. Separate compilation and linking is frequently
necessary, however, so it's important to know how to
do it. For example, when creating a static library, you must compile
without linking and then pass the resulting object files to the
archiver.</p>
<p class="docText">The commands for compiling and linking in two steps are presented in
Table 1-8 and Table 1-9.
In several cases I've given an object file the
extension <span class="docEmphasis">o[bj]</span> to indicate that a single
command line is valid for Windows and Unix except for the extension
of the object file.</p>
<p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 1-8. Commands for 

compiling hello.cpp without linking</h5></caption><colgroup span="2"><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Toolset
								</th><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Command line
								</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									GCC
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>g++ -c -o hello.o hello.cpp</i>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Visual C++
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>cl -c -nologo -EHsc -GR -Zc:forScope -Zc:wchar_t -Fohello
hello.cpp</i>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Intel (Windows)
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>icl -c -nologo -EHsc -GR -Zc:forScope -Zc:wchar_t -Fohello
hello.cpp</i>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Intel (Linux)
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>icpc -c -o hello.o hello.cpp</i>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Metrowerks
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>mwcc -c -wchar_t on -cwd include -o
hello.o[bj]hello.cpp</i>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Comeau
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>como -c  -o hello.o[bj] hello.cpp</i>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Borland
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>bcc32 -c -q -o hello.obj hello.cpp</i>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Digital Mars
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>dmc -c -Ae -Ar -I&lt;dmcroot&gt;/stlport/stlport -o
hello.obj hello.cpp</i>
</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 1-9. Commands for linking 
hello.exe or hello</h5></caption><colgroup span="2"><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Toolset
								</th><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Command line
								</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									GCC
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>g++ -o hello hello.o</i>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Visual C++
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>link -nologo -out:hello.exe  hello.obj</i>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Intel (Windows)
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>xilink -nologo -out:hello.exe  hello.obj</i>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Intel (Linux)
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>icpc -o hello hello.o</i>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Metrowerks
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>mwld -o hello hello.o[bj]</i>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Comeau
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>como —no_prelink_verbose -o hello
hello.o[bj]</i>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Borland
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>bcc32 -q -ehello hello.cpp</i>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Digital Mars
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>link -noi hello.obj, hello.exe,NUL,user32.lib
kernel32.lib,,</i>
</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">For example, to build the executable hello with the GCC toolset,
change to the directory containing <i>hello.cpp</i> and
enter the following commands:</p>
<pre>$ <b>g++ -c -o hello.o hello.cpp</b>
$ <b>g++ -o hello hello.o</b></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">You can now run your program as follows:</p>
<pre>$ <b>./hello</b>
  Hello, World!</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Table 1-9 is almost identical to Table 1-6. There are just two differences. First, the
option -<i>c</i> is used to tell the compiler to
compile without linking. Second, the output file is specified to be
an object file <i>hello.obj</i> or
<i>hello.o</i> rather than an executable. Most
compilers use the option -<i>o &lt;file&gt; </i>to
specify the output file, but Visual C++ and Intel for Windows use the
option <i>-Fo&lt;file&gt;</i>. In addition, all the
compilers except for Visual C++ and Intel for Windows require that
the extension of the object file be specified.</p>
<p class="docText">By now, most of the command lines in Table 1-9
should be pretty easy to understand, so I'll just
make two observations:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">The Digital Mars linker has an unusual command-line syntax,
consisting of six comma-separated fields used for specifying
different types of input files. For now you just need to know that
the first field is for object files and the second is for the output
file. The option <i>-noi</i> tells the linker to
perform case-sensitive linking, which is necessary for C++ programs.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The Borland linker, <i>ilink32.exe</i>, uses a syntax
similar to that of Digital Mars. To simplify the command line,
I've used the compiler,
<i>bcc32.exe</i>, to perform the link step. Behind the
scenes,


<i>bcc32.exe
</i>calls<i> ilink32.exe</i>.</p></li></ul>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EKKAG">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 1.7 and Recipe 1.15</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
