<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 1.6. Installing Boost.Build</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 1.6. Installing Boost.Build</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EBNAE">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You want to
obtain



and install Boost.Build.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E6NAE">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Consult the Boost.Build documentation at www.boost.org/boost-build2 or follow these
steps:</p>
<div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Go to the Boost homepage, www.boost.org, and
follow the Download link to Boost's
SourceForge download area.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Download and unpack either the latest release of the package
<i>boost</i> or the latest release of the package
<i>boost-build</i>. The former includes the full
collection of Boost libraries, while the latter is a standalone
release of Boost.Build. Place the unpacked files in a suitable
permanent location.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Download and unpack the latest version of the package
<i>boost-jam</i> for your platform; this package
includes a prebuilt <i>bjam</i> executable. If the
package<i> boost-jam</i> is not available for your
platform, follow the instructions provided with the package you
downloaded in step 2 to build the executable from the source.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Copy <i>bjam</i> to a location in your
<tt>PATH</tt> environment variable.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Permanently set the environment variable
<tt>BOOST_BUILD_PATH</tt> to the Boost. Build root
directory. If you downloaded the package <i>boost</i>
in step 1, the root directory is the subdirectory
<i>tools/build/v2 </i>of your Boost installation;
otherwise, it is the directory <i>boost-build</i>.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Configure Boost.Build for your toolsets and libraries by editing the
configuration file <i>user-config.jam</i>, located in
the Boost.Build root directory. The file
<i>user-config.jam</i> contains comments explaining how
to do this.</p></div></li></ol></div>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EIQAE">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">The most difficult part of using Boost.Build is downloading and
installing it. Eventually Boost may provide a graphical installation
utility, but for the time being, you must follow the above steps.</p>
<p class="docText">The purpose of step five is to help the build tool,
<i>bjam</i>, find the root directory of the build
system. This step is not strictly necessary, however, since there is
another way to accomplish the same thing: simply create a file called
<i>boost-build.jam</i>, with the single line:</p>
<pre>boost-build <tt><i>boost-build-root</i></tt> ;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">and place it in the root directory of your project or in any of its
parent directories. The second method may be preferable if you wish
to distribute Boost.Build with your source code, since it makes the
installation process easier for end users.</p>
<p class="docText">The sixth step is potentially the most complex, but in practice it is
usually simple. If you have just a single version of your toolset
installed, and if it's installed in a standard
location, it's sufficient for
<i>user-config.jam </i>to consist of a single line of
the form:</p>
<pre>using <tt><i>&lt;toolset&gt;</i></tt> ;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">For example, if you use Visual C++, the following will usually
suffice:</p>
<pre>using msvc ;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">And if you use GCC, you can simply write:</p>
<pre>using gcc ;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Things are slightly more complicated if you have more than one
version of a toolset installed, or if your toolset is installed in an
unusual location. If your toolset is installed in an unusual
location, you tell Boost.Build where to find it by passing the
command to invoke the toolset's compiler as the
third argument to <tt>using</tt>. For example:</p>
<pre>using msvc : : "C:/Tools/Compilers/Visual Studio/Vc7/bin/cl" ;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">If you have several versions of a toolset installed, you can invoke
the <tt>using</tt> rule several times with a single toolset
name, passing a version identifier as the second argument and the
compiler command as the third argument. For example, you might
configure two versions of the Intel toolset as follows:</p>
<pre>using intel : 7.1 : "C:/Program Files/Intel/Compiler70/IA32/Bin/icl" ;
using intel : 8.0 : "C:/Program Files/Intel/CPP/Compiler80/IA32/Bin/icl" ;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The names used by Boost.Build for the seven toolsets covered in this
chapter are given in Table 1-14.</p>
<p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 1-14. Boost.Build toolset names</h5></caption><colgroup span="2"><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Toolset
								</th><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Name
								</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									GCC
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>gcc</tt>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Visual C++
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>msvc</tt>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Intel
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>intel</tt>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Metrowerks
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>cw</tt>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Comeau
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>como</tt>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Borland
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>borland</tt>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Digital Mars
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>dmc</tt>
</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
