<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 1.8. Building a Static Library Using Boost.Build</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 1.8. Building a Static Library Using Boost.Build</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EDQAE">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You want to use
Boost.Build


 to build a static library from a
collection of C++ source files, such as those listed in Example 1-1.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EGRAE">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Create a <i>Jamroot</i> file in the directory where you
wish the static library to be created. In the file
<i>Jamroot</i>, invoke the <tt>lib</tt> rule
to declare a library target, specifying your
<i>.cpp</i> files as sources and the property
<tt>&lt;link&gt;static</tt> as a requirement. Add a usage
requirement of the form
<tt>&lt;include&gt;</tt><tt><i>path</i></tt> to
specify the library's include directory, i.e., the
directory with respect to which <tt>include</tt> directives
for library headers should be resolved. You may need to add one or
more requirements of the form
<tt>&lt;include&gt;</tt><tt><i>path</i></tt> to
tell the compiler where to search for included headers. Finally, run
<i>bjam</i> from the directory containing
<i>Jamroot</i>, as described in Recipe 1.7.</p>
<p class="docText">For example, to build a static library from the source files listed
in Example 1-1, your <i>Jamroot</i>
might look like Example 1-11.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EYSAE">Example 1-11. A Jamfile to build the static library libjohnpaul.lib or libjohnpaul.a</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre># Jamfile for project libjohnpaul

lib libjohnpaul
    : # sources
      john.cpp paul.cpp johnpaul.cpp
    : # requirements 
      &lt;link&gt;static
    : # default-build
    : # usage-requirements
      &lt;include&gt;..
    ;</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">To build the library, enter:</p>
<pre>&gt; <b>bjam libjohnpaul</b></pre><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EHTAE">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">The <tt>lib</tt> rule is used to declare a target
representing a static or dynamic library. It takes the same form as
the <tt>exe</tt> rule, as illustrated in Example 1-9. The usage requirement
<tt>&lt;include&gt;.</tt>. frees projects that depend on
your library from having to explicitly specify your
library's include directory in their requirements.
The requirement <tt>&lt;link&gt;static</tt> specifies that
your target should always be built as a static library. If you want
the freedom to build a library target either as static or as dynamic,
you can omit the requirement <tt>&lt;link&gt;static</tt>.
Whether the library is built as static or dynamic can then be
specified on the command line, or in the requirements of a target
that depends on the library target. For example, if the requirement
<tt>&lt;link&gt;static</tt> were omitted in Example 1-11, you could build the target
<tt>libjohnpaul</tt> as a static library by entering the
command:</p>
<pre>&gt; <b>bjam libjohnpaul link=static</b></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Writing source code for a library that can be built either as static
or dynamic is a bit tricky, however, as discussed in Recipe 1.9.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ETUAE">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 1.3, Recipe 1.11,
and Recipe 1.16</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
