<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 1.9. Building a Dynamic Library Using Boost.Build</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 1.9. Building a Dynamic Library Using Boost.Build</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EARAE">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You wish to use Boost.Build
to build a

dynamic library from a collection of
C++ source files, such as those listed in Example 1-2.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EESAE">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Create a <i>Jamroot</i> file in the directory where you
wish the dynamic library—and the import library, if
any—to be created. In the file <i>Jamroot</i>,
invoke the <tt>lib</tt><i>
</i>rule to
declare a library target, specifying your <i>.cpp</i>
files as sources and the properties <tt>&lt;link&gt;shared</tt>
as a requirement. Add a usage requirement of the form
<tt>&lt;include&gt;</tt><tt><i>path</i></tt> to
specify the library's include directory, i.e., the
directory with respect to which <tt>include</tt> directives
for library headers should be resolved. If your source files include
headers from other libraries, you may need to add several
requirements of the form
<tt>&lt;include&gt;</tt><tt><i>path</i></tt> to
tell the compiler where to search for included headers. You may also
need to add one or more requirements of the form
<tt>&lt;define&gt;</tt><tt><i>symbol</i></tt> to
ensure that your dynamic library's symbols will be
exported using <tt>_ _declspec(dllexport)</tt> on Windows.
Finally, run <i>bjam</i> from the directory containing
<i>Jamroot</i>, as described in Recipe 1.7.</p>
<p class="docText">For example, to build a dynamic library from the source files listed
in Example 1-2, create a file named
<i>Jamroot</i> in the directory
<i>georgeringo</i>, as shown in Example 1-12.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E6TAE">Example 1-12. A Jamfile to build the dynamic library georgeringo.so, georgeringo.dll, or georgeringo.dylib</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre># Jamfile for project georgringo

lib libgeorgeringo
    : # sources
      george.cpp ringo.cpp georgeringo.cpp
    : # requirements
      &lt;link&gt;shared
      &lt;define&gt;GEORGERINGO_DLL
    : # default-build
    : # usage-requirements
      &lt;include&gt;..
    ;</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">To build the library, enter:</p>
<pre>&gt; <b>bjam libgeorgeringo</b></pre><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EOUAE">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">As discussed in Recipe 1.8, the <tt>lib</tt> rule is used
to declare a target representing a static or dynamic library. The
usage requirement <tt>&lt;include&gt;.</tt>. frees projects
which depend on your library from having to explicitly specify your
library's include directory in their requirements.
The requirement <tt>&lt;link&gt;shared</tt> specifies that
the target should always be built as a dynamic library. If you want
the freedom to build a library target either as static or as dynamic,
you can omit the requirement <tt>&lt;link&gt;shared</tt>
and specify this property on the command line, or in the requirements
of a target that depends on the library target. Writing a library
which can be built as either static or dynamic requires some care,
however, because of the preprocessor directives necessary to ensure
that symbols are properly exported on Windows. Rewriting Example 1-2
so that it can be built as either static or dynamic makes a
good
exercise.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EEVAE">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 1.4, Recipe 1.12,
Recipe 1.16, and Recipe 1.19</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
