<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 1.10. Building a Complex application Using Boost.Build</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 1.10. Building a Complex application Using Boost.Build</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EVRAE">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You wish to use Boost.Build to build


 an executable that depends on
several static and dynamic libraries.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EXSAE">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Follow these steps:</p>
<div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">For each library on which the executable depends—unless it is
distributed as a prebuilt binary—create a Jamfile as described
in Recipe 1.8 and Recipe 1.9.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Create a <i>Jamroot</i> file in the directory where you
want the executable to be created.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">In the file <i>Jamroot</i>, invoke the
<tt>exe</tt> rule to declare an executable target. Specify
your <i>.cpp</i> files and the library targets on which
the executable depends as sources. Also, add properties of the form
<tt>&lt;include&gt;</tt><tt><i>path</i></tt> as
sources, if necessary, to tell the compiler where to search for
library headers.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">In the file <i>Jamroot</i>, invoke the
<tt>install</tt> rule, specifying the properties
<tt>&lt;install-dependencies&gt;on</tt>,
<tt>&lt;install-type&gt;EXE</tt>, and
<tt>&lt;install-type&gt;SHARED_LIB</tt> as requirements.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Run <i>bjam</i> from the directory containing
<i>Jamroot</i> as described in Recipe 1.7.</p></div></li></ol></div>
<p class="docText">For example, to build an executable from the source files listed in
Example 1-3, create a file named
<i>Jamroot</i> in the directory
<i>hellobeatles</i> as shown in Example 1-13.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ESVAE">Example 1-13. A Jamfile to build the executable hellobeatles.exe or hellobeatles</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre># Jamfile for project hellobeatles

exe hellobeatles
    : # sources
      ../johnpaul//libjohnpaul
      ../georgeringo//libgeorgeringo
      hellobeatles.cpp
    ;

install dist 
    : # sources
      hellobeatles
    : # requirements
      &lt;install-dependencies&gt;on
      &lt;install-type&gt;EXE
      &lt;install-type&gt;SHARED_LIB
      &lt;location&gt;.
    ;</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Now enter:</p>
<pre>&gt; <b>bjam hellobeatles</b></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">from the directory <i>hellobeatles</i>. This first
builds the two projects on which the target
<tt>hellobeatles</tt> depends, and then builds the target
<tt>hellobeatles</tt>. Finally, enter:</p>
<pre>&gt; <b>bjam dist</b></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This copies the executable <i>hellobeatles</i> and the
dynamic library <i>georgeringo</i> to the directory
containing <i>hellobeatles.cpp</i>.</p>
<p class="docText">As discussed in Recipe 1.5, before you can
run <i>hellobeatles</i>, you may need to place a copy
of your toolset's dynamic runtime library in a
location where it can be found by the operating system.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EBXAE">Discussion</h4>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EGXAE">Library targets</h5>
<p class="docText">The

library targets on which a target depends are specified as sources
using the notation
<tt><i>path</i></tt><tt>//</tt><tt><i>target-name</i></tt>.
In Recipe 1.8 and Recipe 1.9, I showed how to declare a target for a
library to be built from source code by Boost.Build. If a library is
available as a prebuilt binary, however, you can declare a target for
it as follows:</p>
<pre>lib <tt><i>target-name</i></tt>
    : 
    : &lt;file&gt;<tt><i>file-name</i></tt>
    ;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">As explained in Recipe 1.7, most main
targets correspond not to a single file but to collections of related
files, such as the debug and release build of an executable. To
declare a target for a prebuilt library that has several variants,
you can use the following notation:</p>
<pre>lib <tt><i>target-name</i></tt>
    : 
    : &lt;file&gt;<tt><i>file-name requirements</i></tt>
						<tt><i>
						</i></tt>;

lib <tt><i>target-name</i></tt>
    : 
    : &lt;file&gt;<tt><i>other-file-name other-requirements</i></tt>
						<tt><i>
						</i></tt>;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">For example, debug and release variants of a prebuilt library might
be declared as follows:</p>
<pre>lib cryptolib
    : 
    : &lt;file&gt; ../libraries/cryptolib/cryptolib_debug.lib<tt><i>
						</i></tt>
						<tt><i>
						</i></tt>&lt;variant&gt;debug
<tt><i>
						</i></tt>;

lib cryptolib
    : 
    : &lt;file&gt; ../libraries/cryptolib/cryptolib.lib
      &lt;variant&gt;release
<tt><i>
						</i></tt>;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">If a prebuilt library is located in one the directories that is
searched automatically by the linker, as described in Recipe 1.5, you can declare a target for it as follows:</p>
<pre>lib <tt><i>target-name</i></tt>
    : 
    : &lt;name&gt;<tt><i>library-name</i></tt> 
    ;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Here, <tt><i>library-name</i></tt> is the name that should
be passed to the linker, which may differ from the actual file name,
as discussed in Recipe 1.5. To tell the
linker to look in a particular directory, you can write</p>
<pre>lib <tt><i>target-name</i></tt>
    : 
    : &lt;name&gt;<tt><i>library-name</i></tt>
      &lt;search&gt;<tt><i>library-path</i></tt>
    ;</pre><br/>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0EZ1AE">Installation</h5>
<p class="docText">A complex application may need to be
installed together with a number of additional executables and
dynamic libraries on which it depends. Rather than specifying all
these files individually, you can use the
<tt>install-dependencies</tt> features, which allows you to
specify only the top-level executable target and the type of
dependencies that should be installed. In Example 1-13, the requirement
<tt>&lt;install-dependencies&gt;on</tt> turns on the
<tt>install-dependencies</tt> feature, and the requirements
<tt>&lt;install-type&gt;EXE</tt> and
<tt>&lt;install-type&gt;SHARED_LIB</tt> tells Boost.Build
to install all dependencies that are executables or shared libraries.
Other possible values of the <tt>install-type</tt> feature
include <tt>LIB</tt> and <tt>IMPORT_LIB</tt>.</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0E22AE">Project organization</h5>
<p class="docText">All
three
Jamfiles involved in building the executable
<i>hellobeatles</i> are named
<i>Jamroot</i>. This is fine in such a simple example,
but in general it's a good idea to organize a
collection of Jamfiles hierarchically, with a single top-level
Jamfile defining the project root. Arranging projects in this manner
allows you to take advantage of some of
Boost.Build's more sophisticated features, such as
allowing properties to be inherited by child projects. One way to
accomplish this in the present case is to change the names of the
Jamfiles in the directories <i>johnpaul</i>,
<i>georgeringo</i>, and <i>hellobeatles
</i>from <i>Jamroot</i> to
<i>Jamfile</i>, and add to a
<i>Jamroot</i> file in the parent directory with the
following content:</p>
<pre># jamfile for example application

build-project hellobeatles  ;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The rule <tt>build-project</tt> simply tells
<i>bjam</i> to build a given project, which can be
specified either by pathname or by a symbolic identifier. If you
change to the directory containing Jamroot and run
<i>bjam</i>, the three 


child projects will be built.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E14AE">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 1.5, Recipe 1.13,
and Recipe 1.18</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
