<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 1.17. Building a Dynamic Library with GNU Make</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 1.17. Building a Dynamic Library with GNU Make</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EPAAG">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You wish to use GNU <i>make</i> to
build a
dynamic library from a
collection of C++ source files, such as those listed in Example 1-2.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EJBAG">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">First, create a makefile in the directory where you want your dynamic
library to be created, and declare a phony target
<tt>all</tt> whose single prerequisite is the dynamic
library. Next, declare your dynamic library target. Its prerequisites
should be the object files from which the library will be built, and
its command script should be a command line to build the library from
the collection of object files, as demonstrated in Recipe 1.4. If you are using GCC or a compiler with
similar command-line syntax, customize the implicit patterns rules,
if necessary, by modifying one or more of the variables
<tt>CXX</tt>, <tt>CXXFLAGS</tt>,
<span class="docEmphasis">etc</span>. used in
<i>make's</i> database of implicit
rules, as shown in Recipe 1.15. Otherwise,
write a pattern rule telling <i>make</i> how to compile
<i>.cpp</i> files into object files, using the command
lines from Table 1-4 and the pattern rule syntax
explained in Recipe 1.16. Finally, add
<tt>install</tt> and <tt>clean</tt> targets, as
demonstrated in Recipe 1.15, and
machinery to automatically generate source file dependencies, as
demonstrated in Recipe 1.16.</p>
<p class="docText">For example, to build a dynamic library from the source files listed
Example 1-2 using GCC on Unix, create a makefile
in
 the
directory <i>georgeringo</i>, as shown in Example 1-22.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E1DAG">Example 1-22. Makefile for libgeorgeringo.so using GCC</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight"># Specify extensions of files to delete when cleaning
CLEANEXTS   = o so

# Specify the source files, the target files, 
# and the install directory 
SOURCES     = george.cpp ringo.cpp georgeringo.cpp
OUTPUTFILE  = libgeorgeringo.so
INSTALLDIR  = ../binaries

.PHONY: all
all: $(OUTPUTFILE)

# Build libgeorgeringo.so from george.o, ringo.o, 
# and georgeringo.o; subst is the search-and-replace 
# function demonstrated in Recipe 1.16
$(OUTPUTFILE): $(subst .cpp,.o,$(SOURCES)) 
    $(CXX) -shared -fPIC $(LDFLAGS) -o $@ $^

.PHONY: install
install:
    mkdir -p $(INSTALLDIR)
    cp -p $(OUTPUTFILE) $(INSTALLDIR)

.PHONY: clean 
clean:
    for file in $(CLEANEXTS); do rm -f *.$$file; done

# Generate dependencies of .ccp files on .hpp files
include $(subst .cpp,.d,$(SOURCES))

%.d: %.cpp
    $(CC) -M $(CPPFLAGS) $&lt; &gt; $@.$$$$; \
    sed 's,\($*\)\.o[ :]*,\1.o $@ : ,g' &lt; $@.$$$$ &gt; $@; \
rm -f $@.$$$$

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EDEAG">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">The makefile in Example 1-22 is a straightforward application of the
ideas from Recipe 1.4, Recipe 1.15, and Recipe 1.16. The main difference between Example 1-22 and Example 1-20 is the rule
for building <i>lingeorgeringo.so</i> from the object
files <span class="docEmphasis">george.o</span>, <i>ringo.o</i>,
and <i>georgeringo.o</i>:</p>
<pre>$(OUTPUTFILE): $(subst .cpp,.o,$(SOURCES)) 
    $(CXX) -shared -fPIC $(LDFLAGS) -o $@ $^</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Here <tt>$(OUTPUTFILE)</tt> expands to
<tt>lingeorgeringo.so</tt><i>
</i>and the
expression <tt>$(subst</tt>
<tt>.cpp,.o,$(SOURCES))</tt> expands to
<tt>george.o</tt>, <tt>ringo.o</tt>, <tt>and
georgeringo.o</tt>, as illustrated in Recipe 1.16. The command script <tt>$(CXX)</tt>
<tt>-shared</tt>
<tt>-fPIC</tt>
<tt>$(LDFLAGS)</tt>
<tt>-o</tt>
<tt>$@</tt>
<tt>$^</tt> is an adaptation of the
GCC command line presented in Table 1-7.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E4GAG">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 1.4, Recipe 1.9,
Recipe 1.12, Recipe 1.15, and Recipe 1.23</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
