<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 1.18. Building a Complex Application with GNU make</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 1.18. Building a Complex Application with GNU make</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E5AAG">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You wish to use GNU <i>make</i> to 


build an executable which depends on
several static and dynamic libraries.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EDCAG">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Follow these steps:</p>
<div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Create makefiles for the libraries used by your application, as
described in Recipe 1.16 and Recipe 1.17. These makefiles should reside in separate
directories.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Create a makefile in yet another directory. This makefile can be used
to build your application, but only after the makefiles in step 1
have been executed. Give this makefile a phony target
<tt>all</tt> whose prerequisite is your executable. Declare
a target for your executable with prerequisites consisting of the
libraries which your application uses, together with the object files
to be built from your application's
<i>.cpp</i> files. Write a command script to build the
executable from the collection libraries and object files, as
described in Recipe 1.5. If necessary, write
a pattern rule to generate object files from
<i>.cpp</i> files, as shown in Recipe 1.16. Add <tt>install</tt> and
<tt>clean</tt> targets, as shown in Recipe 1.15, and
machinery to automatically generate source file dependencies, as
shown in Recipe 1.16.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Create a makefile in a directory which is an ancestor of the
directories containing all the other makefiles —
let's call the new makefile the
<span class="docEmphasis">top-level</span>

makefile and the others the
<span class="docEmphasis">subordinate</span>

makefiles. Declare a default target <tt>all</tt> whose
prerequisite is the directory containing the makefile created in step
2. Declare a rule whose targets consists of the directories
containing the subordinate makefiles, and whose command script
invokes <i>make</i> in each target directory with a
target specified as the value of the variable
<tt>TARGET</tt>. Finally, declare targets specifying the
dependencies between the default targets of the subordinate
makefiles.</p></div></li></ol></div>
<p class="docText">For example, to build an executable from the source files listed in
Example 1-3 using GCC on Unix, create a makefile as
shown in Example 1-23.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EKFAG">Example 1-23. Makefile for hellobeatles.exe using GCC</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight"># Specify the source files, target files, the build directories, 
# and the install directory 
SOURCES         = hellobeatles.cpp
OUTPUTFILE     = hellobeatles
LIBJOHNPAUL     = libjohnpaul.a
LIBGEORGERINGO = libgeorgeringo.so
JOHNPAULDIR     = ../johnpaul
GEORGERINGODIR     = ../georgeringo
INSTALLDIR     = ../binaries

#
# Add the parent directory as an include path 
#
CPPFLAGS      += -I..

#
# Default target
#
.PHONY: all
all: $(HELLOBEATLES)

#
# Target to build the executable. 
#
$(OUTPUTFILE): $(subst .cpp,.o,$(SOURCES))  \
               $(JOHNPAULDIR)/$(LIBJOHNPAUL) \
               $(GEORGERINGODIR)/$(LIBGEORGERINGO)
    $(CXX) $(LDFLAGS) -o $@ $^

.PHONY: install
install:
    mkdir -p $(INSTALLDIR)
    cp -p $(OUTPUTFILE) $(INSTALLDIR) 

.PHONY: clean 
clean: 
    rm -f *.o
    rm -f $(OUTPUTFILE)

# Generate dependencies of .ccp files on .hpp files
include $(subst .cpp,.d,$(SOURCES))

%.d: %.cpp
    $(CC) -M $(CPPFLAGS) $&lt; &gt; $@.$$$$; \
    sed 's,\($*\)\.o[ :]*,\1.o $@ : ,g' &lt; $@.$$$$ &gt; $@; \
    rm -f $@.$$$$

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Next, create a top-level makefile in the directory containing
<i>johnpaul</i>, <i>georgeringo</i>,
<i>hellobeatles</i>, and <i>binaries</i>,
as shown in Example 1-24.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ECGAG">Example 1-24. Top level makefile for the source code from Example 1-1, Example 1-2, and Example 1-3</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre># All the targets in this makefile are phony
.PHONY: all johnpaul georgeringo hellobeatles

# Default target
all: hellobeatles

# The targets johnpaul, georgeringo, and hellobeatles represent
# directories; the command script invokes make in each directory
johnpaul georgeringo hellobeatles:
    $(MAKE) --directory=$@ $(TARGET) 

# This rule indicates that the default target of the makefile
# in directory hellobeatles depends on the default targets of 
# the makefiles in the directories johnpaul and georgeringo
.PHONY: hellobeatles
hellobeatles: johnpaul georgeringo</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">To build <i>hellobeatles</i>, change to the directory
containing the top-level makefile, and enter
<tt><b>make</b></tt>. To copy the files
<i>libjohnpaul.a</i>,
<i>libgeorgeringo.so</i>, and
<i>hellobeatles</i> to the directory
<i>binaries</i>, enter <tt><b>make</b></tt>
<tt><b>TARGET=install</b></tt>. To clean the project,
enter
<tt><b>make</b></tt>
<tt><b>TARGET=clean</b></tt>.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ERHAG">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">The approach to managing complex projects demonstrated in this recipe
is known as <span class="docEmphasis">recursive
make</span>. It allows you to organize a project into
a collection of modules, each with its own makefile, and to specify
the dependencies between the modules. It's not
limited to a single top-level makefile with a collection of child
makefiles: the technique can be extended to handle multi-level tree
structures. While recursive make was once the standard technique for
managing large projects with <i>make</i>, there are
other methods which are now considered superior. For details, refer
once again to <span class="docEmphasis">Managing Projects with GNU make</span>,
Third Edition, by Robert Mecklenburg (O'Reilly).</p>
<p class="docText">Example 1-23 is a straightforward application of the
techniques demonstrated in Recipe 1.15, Recipe 1.16, and Recipe 1.17.
There's really just one interesting point. As
illustrated in Recipe 1.15, when
compiling <i>hellobeatles.cpp</i> from the command line
it's necessary to use the option
<i>-I..</i> so that the compiler can find the headers
<i>johnpaul.hpp</i> and
<i>georgeringo.hpp</i>. One solution would be to write
an explicit rule for building <span class="docEmphasis">hellobeatles.o</span>
with a command script containing the option
<i>-I..</i>, like so:</p>
<pre>hellobeatles.o: hello.beatles.cpp
    g++ -c -I.. -o hellobeatles.o hellobeatles.cpp</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Instead, I've taken advantage of the customization
point <tt>CPPFLAGS</tt>, described in Recipe 1.15, to specify
that whenever an object file is compiled from a
<i>.cpp</i> file, the option <i>-I..
</i>should be added to the command-line:</p>
<pre>CPPFLAGS      += -I..</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">I've used the assignment operator
<tt>+=</tt>, instead of <tt>=</tt>, so that the
effect will be cumulative with whatever value of
<tt>CPPFLAGS</tt> may have been specified on the command
line or in the environment.</p>
<p class="docText">Now let's look at how Example 1-24
works. The most important rule is the one which causes make to be
invoked in each of the directories <i>johnpaul</i>,
<i>georgeringo</i>, and
<i>hellobeatles</i>:</p>
<pre>johnpaul georgeringo hellobeatles:
    $(MAKE) --directory=$@ $(TARGET)</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">To understand this rule, you need to know three things. First, the
variable <tt>MAKE</tt> expands to the name of the currently
running instance of <i>make</i>. Usually this will be
<tt>make</tt>, but on some systems it could be
<tt>gmake</tt>. Second, the command line option
<i>—directory=</i><tt><i>&lt;path&gt;</i></tt><i>
</i>causes <i>make</i> to be invoked with
<tt><i>&lt;path&gt;</i></tt><i>
</i>as its
current directory. Third, a rule with several targets is equivalent
to a collection of rules, each having one target, and having
identical command scripts. So the above rule is equivalent to:</p>
<pre>johnpaul:
    $(MAKE) --directory=$@ $(TARGET)

georgeringo:
    $(MAKE) --directory=$@ $(TARGET)

hellobeatles:
    $(MAKE) --directory=$@ $(TARGET)</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This in turn is equivalent to:</p>
<pre>johnpaul:
    $(MAKE) --directory=johnpaul $(TARGET)

georgeringo:
    $(MAKE) --directory=georgeringo $(TARGET)

hellobeatles:
    $(MAKE) --directory=hellobeatles $(TARGET)</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The effect of the rule, therefore, is to invoke the makefiles in each
of the directories <i>johnpaul</i>,
<i>georgeringo</i>, and
<i>hellobeatles</i>, with the value of the variable
<tt>TARGET</tt> tacked onto the command line. As a result,
you can build target <tt><i>xxx</i></tt> of each of the
subordinate

makefiles
by executing the top-level makefile with the option
<i>TARGET=</i><tt><i>xxx</i></tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">The final rule of the makefile ensures that the subordinate makefiles
are executed in the correct order; it simply declares that the target
<tt>hellobeatles</tt> depends on the targets
<tt>johnpaul</tt> and <tt>georgeringo</tt>:</p>
<pre>hellobeatles: johnpaul georgeringo</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In a more complex application, there might be many dependencies
between the executable and its component libraries. For each such
component, declare a rule indicating the other components on which it
directly depends.


</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ENNAG">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 1.5, Recipe 1.10,
and Recipe 1.13</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
