<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 1.20. Specifying a Command-Line Option from Your IDE</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 1.20. Specifying a Command-Line Option from Your IDE</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EAEAG">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You want to pass
a



 command-line option to your compiler
or linker, but it doesn't correspond to any of the
project settings available through your IDE.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EFFAG">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Many IDEs provide a way to pass command-line options directly to the
compiler or linker. This is summarized in Table 1-18 and Table 1-19.</p>
<p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 1-18. Specifying a compiler option from your IDE</h5></caption><colgroup span="2"><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									IDE
								</th><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Configuration
								</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Visual C++
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									From your project's property pages, go to
Configuration Properties →
C/C++ → Command<i>
</i>Line and enter the option under Additional options.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									CodeWarrior
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									n/a
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									C++Builder
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									n/a
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Dev-C++
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									From Project Options, select Parameters and enter the option under
C++ Compiler.
								</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 1-19. Specifying a linker option from your IDE</h5></caption><colgroup span="2"><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									IDE
								</th><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Configuration
								</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Visual C++
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									From your project's property pages, go to
Configuration Properties →
Linker → Command Line and
enter the option under Additional options.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Metrowerks
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									n/a
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									C++Builder
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									n/a
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Dev-C++
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									From Project Options, select Parameters and enter the option under
Linker.
								</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EOLAG">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">Visual C++ provides extensive configuration options through its
graphical interface, but it also allows you to specify command-line
options explicitly. CodeWarrior and C++Builder do not allow you to
set command-line options explicitly, but this is generally not a
problem, since like Visual C++ they both provide extensive
configuration options through their graphical interfaces. Some IDEs,
on the other hand, provide little means to configure your
command-line tools other than by explicitly typing command-line
options into a text field. Dev-C++ occupies a position somewhere in
the middle: while Dev-C++ offers more graphical configuration options
than some IDEs designed for the GCC toolset, it is still frequently
necessary to enter explicit command-line options when using Dev-C++.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
