<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 1.21. Producing a Debug Build</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 1.21. Producing a Debug Build</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EZEAG">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You want to build a version

 of your project that will be easy
to debug.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EUFAG">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">In general, to produce a debug build, you must;</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">Disable optimizations</p></li><li><p class="docList">Disable expansion of inline function</p></li><li><p class="docList">Enable generation of debugging information</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">Table 1-20 presents the compiler and linker options
to disable optimization and inlining; Table 1-21
presents the compiler and linker options to enable debugging
information.</p>
<p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 1-20. Disabling optimization and inlining from the command line</h5></caption><colgroup span="3"><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Toolset
								</th><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Optimization
								</th><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Inlining
								</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									GCC
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>-O0</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>-fno-inline</tt><sup class="docFootnote">[12]</sup>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Visual C++Intel (Windows)
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>-Od</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>-Ob0</tt>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Intel (Linux)
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>-O0</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>-Ob0</tt>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell"> </td><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>-opt off</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>-inline off</tt>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Comeau  (Unix)
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>-O0</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>--no_inlining</tt>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Comeau (Windows)
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Same as backend, but using a slash (<i>/</i>) instead
of a dash (<i>-</i>)
								</td><td class="docTableCell"> </td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Borland
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>-Od</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>-vi-</tt>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Digital Mars
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>-o+none -S</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>-C</tt>
</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<blockquote><p class="docFootnote"><sup><a name="cplusplusckbk-CHP-1-FNOTE-12">[12]</a></sup> It's
not necessary to specify this option unless -O3 has also been
specified.</p></blockquote>
<p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 1-21. Command-line options for enabling debug information</h5></caption><colgroup span="3"><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Toolset
								</th><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Compiler options
								</th><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Linker options
								</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Comeau (Unix) GCCIntel (Linux)Metrowerks
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>-g</i>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>-g</i>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Visual C++Intel (Windows)
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									See<i>
</i>Table 1-22.
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									See<i>
</i>Table 1-22.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Comeau (Windows)
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Same as backend, but using a slash (<i>/</i>) instead
of a dash (<i>-</i>).
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Same as backend <span class="docEmphasis">compiler</span> option, but using a
slash (<i>/</i>) instead of a dash
(<i>-</i>).
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Borland
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>-v</i>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>-v</i>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Digital Mars
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>-g</i>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>-co</i>
</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 1-22. Enabling debugging information with Visual C++ or Intel for Windows</h5></caption><colgroup span="4"><col></col><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Compiler options
								</th><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Linker options
								</th><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									IDE options<sup class="docFootnote">[13]</sup>
</th><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Description
								</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<i>-Z7</i>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>-debug</i>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>C7 Compatible</i>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Debug info is stored in <i>.obj</i> and
<i>.exe</i> files.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<i>-Zi [-Fd&lt;pdb-file-for-obj&gt;]</i>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>-debug[-pdb:&lt;pdb-file-for-exe&gt;]</i>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>Program Database</i>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Debug info is stored in <i>.pdb</i> files; use the
bracketed options to specify the <i>.pdb</i> files.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<i>-ZI [-Fd&lt;pdb-file-for-obj&gt;]</i>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>-debug [-pdb:&lt;pdb-file-for-exe&gt;]</i>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
<i>Program Database for Edit &amp; Continue</i>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Debug info is stored in <i>.pdb</i> files; use the
bracketed options to specify the <i>.pdb</i> files.
Your program can be recompiled during a debugging session.
								</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<blockquote><p class="docFootnote"><sup><a name="cplusplusckbk-CHP-1-FNOTE-13">[13]</a></sup> To access these options, go to
Configuration Properties→
C/C++→
General→ Debug Information
Format.</p></blockquote>
<p class="docText">Boost.Build provides a simple mechanism for producing a debug build:
simply add <tt>&lt;variant&gt;debug</tt> to your
target's requirements or use the command-line option
<i>variant=debug</i>, which can be abbreviated simply
as <i>debug</i>.</p>
<p class="docText">Some IDEs also provide a simple way to produce a debug build. For
instance, when you create a new project with Visual C++, the IDE
generates debug and release build configurations automatically. To
request a debug build, simply select Configuration Manager... from
the Build menu and select Debug as the active configuration. You can
also select Debug from the drop-down list of configurations on the
standard toolbar. The next time you build your project, it will
produce a debug build.</p>
<p class="docText">Similarly, when you create a new project with CodeWarrior using one
of Metrowerks's project templates, called
<i>stationery</i>, the IDE generates debug and release
targets automatically. The name of the debug target may vary, but it
should always contain the word
"debug". To request a debug build,
select Set Default Target from the Project menu, and then select the
menu item corresponding to the debug target. You can also select the
debug target from the drop-down list of targets on your
project's window.</p>
<p class="docText">C++Builder does not support multiple build configurations for a
single project, but it does provide an easy way produce a debug
build. To request a debug build, go to Project Options
→ Compiler and press Full
debug. This will disable optimization and inlining and enable
debugging information.</p>
<p class="docText">If you are using an IDE that doesn't provide preset
debug and release configurations, such as Dev-C++, or if you need
more control over your project's settings, refer to
Tables 1-23 through 1-25.</p>
<p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 1-23. Disabling optimization from your IDE</h5></caption><colgroup span="2"><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									IDE
								</th><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Configuration
								</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Visual C++
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									From your project's property pages, go to
Configuration Properties→
C/C++→ Optimization and set
Optimization to Disabled. Use the default settings for the other
properties on this page.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									CodeWarrior
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									From the Target Settings Window, go to Code
Generation→ Global
Optimizations and select Off.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									C++Builder
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									From Project Options, go to Compiler and select None under
Code<i>
</i>optimization.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Dev-C++
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									From Project Options, go to
Compiler→ Optimization and
set Perform a number of minor optimizations to No;<i>
</i> next, go to
Compiler→
Optimization→ Further
optimizations<i>
</i>and set Optimize, Optimize more,
and Best Optimization to No.
								</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 1-24. Disabling inlining from your IDE</h5></caption><colgroup span="2"><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									IDE
								</th><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Configuration
								</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Visual C++
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									From your project's property pages, go to
Configuration Properties→
C/C++→ Optimization and set
Inline Function Expansion to Default.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									CodeWarrior
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									From the Target Settings Window, go to Language
Settings→ C/C++ Language
and set Inline Depth to Don't Inline.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									C++Builder
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									From Project Options, go to Compiler and check Disable inline
expansions under Debugging.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Dev-C++
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									See the entry for GCC in Table 1-20 and refer to
Recipe 1.20.
								</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 1-25. Enabling debug information from your IDE</h5></caption><colgroup span="2"><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									IDE
								</th><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Configuration
								</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Visual C++
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									See<i>
</i>Table 1-22.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									CodeWarrior
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									From the Target Settings Window, go to Language
Settings→
Linker→ PPC Mac OS X Linker
and check Generate SYM File and Full Path in SYM Files.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									C++Builder
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									From Project Options, go to Compiler<i>
</i>and check
Debug Information<i>
</i>and Line Number Information.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Dev-C++
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									See the entry for GCC in Table 1-21 and refer to
Recipe 1.20.
								</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E3BBG">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">All toolsets provide an option to generate information in object
files and executables that allows debuggers to report useful
information as a program is executed step by step. This information
generally includes the sources file names and line numbers
corresponding to particular object or machine code instructions, as
well as information about C++ objects occupying particular memory
locations, including their names and types.</p>
<p class="docText">Most toolsets store debugging information directly in object files
and executables, but some, also provide options for generating
debugging information in separate database files. For example, with
Visual C++, the <i>-Z7 </i>compiler option specifies
that debug information should be placed in object files and
executables, while the <i>-Zi </i>and<i>
-ZI</i> options specify that debugging information should be
stored in <i>program database files</i> with the
extension <i>.pdb</i>. The <i>-ZI</i>
option enables a feature called <i>Edit and
Continue</i>, which allows IDE users to modify and recompile
their code without terminating a debugging session. Similarly,
CodeWarrior for Mac OS X by default generates debugging information
in <i>.SYM</i> files.</p>
<p class="docText">Most toolsets can generate debugging information even when
optimizations and inlining are enabled, although in some cases
debugging information may be incompatible with particular
optimizations. When optimizations are enabled, however, the compiler
has the freedom to improve efficiency by reordering statements or
completely reorganizing sections of code, as long as the observable
behavior remains the same. This makes debugging difficult, since
there may no longer be a close correspondence between locations in
the source code and locations in the object or machine code. The same
is true for inlining: when the compiler expands a function inline,
the object code corresponding to the function body is generated
within the body of the calling function. When this code is executed,
no stack frame is created for the expanded function; among other
things, this means that the debugger will not be able to display the
values of the function arguments and local variables. Typically,
debuggers do not even attempt to report the source code locations
corresponding to the bodies of functions expanded inline.</p>
<p class="docText">Because of these considerations, the

 usual practice is to disable
optimizations and inlining when producing a debug build.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ELDBG">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 1.22</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
