<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 1.22. Producing a Release Build</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 1.22. Producing a Release Build</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EWGAG">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You want to produce a 

small, fast executable or dynamic library
for distribution to your customers.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ESHAG">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">In general, to produce a release build you must</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">Enable optimizations</p></li><li><p class="docList">Enable the expansion of inline function</p></li><li><p class="docList">Disable the generation of debugging information</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">Table 1-26 presents the compiler and linker options
to enable optimization and inlining. There are no command-line
options for disabling the generation of debugging information: when
you build from the command line, debugging information is disabled by
default. If you use the GCC toolset, however, you can decrease the
size of executables and dynamics libraries by specifying the
<i>-s</i> option to the linker.</p>
<p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 1-26. Compiler options to enable optimization and inlining</h5></caption><colgroup span="3"><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Toolset
								</th><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Optimization
								</th><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Inlining
								</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									GCC
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>-O3</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>-finline-functions</tt><sup class="docFootnote">[14]</sup>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Visual C++Intel
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>-O2</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>-Ob1</tt>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Metrowerks
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>-opt full</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>-inline auto -inline level=8</tt>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Comeau (Unix)
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>-O3</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell"> </td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Comeau (Windows)
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Same as backend, but using a slash (<i>/</i>) instead
of a dash (<i>-</i>)
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<pre>—inlining</pre><br/>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Borland
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>-O2</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>-vi</tt>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Digital Mars
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>-o+time</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Enabled by default
								</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<blockquote><p class="docFootnote"><sup><a name="cplusplusckbk-CHP-1-FNOTE-14">[14]</a></sup> This option is
enabled automatically when <tt>-O3</tt> is
specified.</p></blockquote>
<p class="docText">Boost.Build provides a simple mechanism for producing a release
build: simply add <tt>&lt;variant&gt;release</tt> to your
target's requirements or use the command-line option
<i>variant=release</i>, which can be abbreviated simply
as <i>release</i>.</p>
<p class="docText">Some IDEs also provide a simple way to produce a release build. For
instance, as I mentioned in Recipe 1.21, when
you create a new project with Visual C++, the IDE generates debug and
release configurations automatically. To request a release build,
simply select Configuration Manager... from the Build
menu and select Release as the active configuration. You can also
select Release from the drop-down list of configurations on the
standard toolbar. The next time you build your project, it will
produce a release build.</p>
<p class="docText">Similarly, when you create a new project with CodeWarrior using one
of Metrowerks's project templates, called
<i>stationery</i>,
the IDE generates debug and release targets automatically. The name
of the release target may vary, but it should always contain the word
"release" or
"final." To request a release
build, select Set Default Target from the Project menu, and then
select the menu item corresponding to the release target. You can
also select the release target from the drop-down list of targets on
your project's window.</p>
<p class="docText">C++Builder does not support multiple build configurations for a
single project, but it does provide an easy way produce a release
build. To request a release build, go to Project
Options→ Compiler and press
Release. This will enable optimization and inlining and disable
debugging information.</p>
<p class="docText">If you are using an IDE which doesn't provide preset
debug and release configurations, such as Dev-C++, or if you need
more control over your project's settings, refer to
Tables 1-27 through 1-29.</p>
<p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 1-27. Enabling optimization from your IDE</h5></caption><colgroup span="2"><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									IDE
								</th><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Configuration
								</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Visual C++
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									From your project's property pages, go to
Configuration Properties→
C/C++→ Optimization and set
Optimization to Maximize Speed, Favor Size or Speed to Favor Fast
Code, and Global Optimizations, Enable Intrinsic Functions, and Omit
Frame Pointers to Yes. Use the default settings for the other
properties on this page.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									CodeWarrior
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									From the Target Settings Window, go to Code
Generation→ Global
Optimizations and select Level 4.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									C++Builder
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									From Project Options, go to Compiler and select Speed under Code
optimization.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Dev-C++
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									See the entry for GCC in Table 1-26 and refer to
Recipe 1.20.
								</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 1-28. Enabling inlining from your IDE</h5></caption><colgroup span="2"><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									IDE
								</th><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Configuration
								</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Visual C++
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									From your project's property pages, go to
Configuration Properties→
C/C++→ Optimization and set
Inline Function Expansion to Any Suitable.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									CodeWarrior
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									From the Target Settings Window, go to Language
Settings→ C/C++ Language.
Set Inline Depth to 8, check Auto-Inline and leave the other inlining
options unchecked.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									C++Builder
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									From Project Options, go to Compiler and uncheck Disable inline
expansions under Debugging.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Dev-C++
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									See the entry for GCC in Table 1-26 and refer to
Recipe 1.20.
								</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 1-29. Disabling debug information from your IDE</h5></caption><colgroup span="2"><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									IDE
								</th><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Configuration
								</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Visual C++
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									From your project's property pages, go to
Configuration Properties→
C/C++→ General and select
Disabled as the Debug Information Format
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Metrowerks
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									From the Target Settings Window, go to Language
Settings→
Linker→ x86 Linker and
uncheck Store full paths, Link debug info, and Debug inline
functions.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									C++Builder
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									From Project Options, go to Compiler and uncheck Debug Information
and Line Number Information.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
									Dev-C++
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Make sure that the command-line option <i>-g</i> has
not been specified, as described in Recipe 1.20.
								</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E5YAG">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">Most toolsets offer several options for optimization; some offer
dozens. Which optimizations you choose depends heavily on the
requirements of your project. In an embedded environment, for
example, you may want to pick an optimization that produces a smaller
executable at the expense of some speed. In other cases, speed may be
paramount. Some optimizations will make your program faster on one
platform but slower on another. You might even find that certain
options make parts of your program faster and other parts slower.</p>
<p class="docText">While Table 1-26 and Table 1-27 present good general-purpose optimization
options, for best results you should carefully consider your
requirements, study your toolset's documentation,
and conduct extensive tests.</p>
<p class="docText">This situation is similar with inlining, although toolsets usually
provide fewer options for inlining than for other

 optimizations.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ED1AG">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 1.21</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
