<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 1.25. Causing a Source File to Be Linked Automatically Against a Specified Library</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 1.25. Causing a Source File to Be Linked Automatically Against a Specified Library</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EVLAG">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You've written a library that



 you'd like to
distribute as a collection of headers and prebuilt static or dynamic
libraries, but you don't want users of your library
to have to specify the names of the binaries when they link their
applications.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E4MAG">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">If you are programming for Windows and using the Visual C++, Intel,
Metrowerks, Borland, or Digital Mars toolsets, you can use
<tt>pragma</tt>
<tt>comment</tt> in your
library's headers to specify the names, and
optionally the full file pathnames, of the prebuilt binaries against
which any code that includes the headers should be linked.</p>
<p class="docText">For example, suppose you want to distribute the library from Example 1-1 as a static library
<i>libjohnpaul.lib</i> together with the header
<i>johnpaul.hpp</i>. Modify the header as shown in
Example 1-26.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E4NAG">Example 1-26. Using pragma comment</h5><p></p><div class="box">

<pre>#ifndef JOHNPAUL_HPP_INCLUDED
#define JOHNPAUL_HPP_INCLUDED

#pragma comment(lib, "libjohnpaul")

void johnpaul( );

#endif // JOHNPAUL_HPP_INCLUDED</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">With this change, the Visual C++, Intel, Metrowerks, Borland, and
Digital Mars linkers will automatically search for the library
<i>libjohnpaul.lib</i> when linking code that includes
the header <i>johnpaul.hpp</i>.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ENOAG">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">In some ways, linking can be a more difficult phase of the build
process than compiling. One of the most common problems during
linking occurs when the linker finds the wrong version of a library.
This is a particular problem on Windows, where runtime
libraries—and the libraries that depend on
them—frequently come in many variants. For this reason,
libraries for Windows are often distributed with names mangled to
reflect the various build configurations. While this helps to reduce
version conflict, it also makes linking harder because you have to
specify the correct mangled name to the linker.</p>
<p class="docText">For this reason, <tt>pragma comment</tt> is a very powerful
tool. Among other things, it allows you to specify the correct
mangled name of a library in a header file, saving the user the
trouble of having to understand your name-mangling convention. If, in
addition, you design your installation process to copy the binary
files to a location automatically searched by the linker—such
as the <i>lib</i> subdirectory of the Visual C++,
CodeWarrior, or C++Builder root directories—programmers will be
able to use your library<i>
</i>simply by including
your headers.</p>
<p class="docText">So far, so good. There's just one problem:
<tt>pragma comment</tt> is not recognized by all compilers.
If you wish to write portable code, you should invoke a pragma only
after verifying that it is supported by the toolset being used. For
example, you could modify <i>johnpaul.cpp</i> to read:</p>
<pre>#ifndef JOHNPAUL_HPP_INCLUDED
#define JOHNPAUL_HPP_INCLUDED

#if defined(_MSC_VER) || \
    defined(_  _ICL) || \
    defined(_  _MWERKS_  _) &amp;&amp; defined(_WIN32) || \
    defined(_  _BORLANDC_  _) \
    defined(_  _DMC_  _) \
    /**/
# pragma comment(lib, "libjohnpaul") 
#endif

void johnpaul( );

#endif // JOHNPAUL_HPP_INCLUDED</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This example is already pretty complex, and, unfortunately,
it's still not exactly right: some compilers that
don't support <tt>pragma</tt>
<tt>comment</tt> define the macro
<tt>_MSC_VER</tt> for compatibility
with Visual C++. Fortunately, Boost provides an easy solution:</p>
<pre>#ifndef JOHNPAUL_HPP_INCLUDED
#define JOHNPAUL_HPP_INCLUDED

#define BOOST_LIB_NAME libjohnpaul
#define BOOST_AUTO_LINK_NOMANGLE
#include &lt;boost/config/auto_link.hpp&gt;

void johnpaul( );

#endif // JOHNPAUL_HPP_INCLUDED</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Here, the line:</p>
<pre>#define BOOST_LIB_NAME libjohnpaul</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">specifies your library name, the line:</p>
<pre>#define BOOST_AUTO_LINK_NOMANGLE</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">indicates that you don't want to use the Boost
name-mangling convention, and the line:</p>
<pre>#include &lt;boost/config/auto_link.hpp&gt;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">invokes <tt>pragma comment</tt> for



 compilers which
support it.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E4QAG">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 1.23</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
