<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Introduction</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Introduction</h3>
<p class="docText">Perhaps one of the reasons C++ has been so popular is its ability to
serve small, large, and massive projects well. You can write a few
classes for a small prototype or research project, and as the project
grows and people are added, C++ will allow you to scale the
application into modules that have varying degrees of independence.
The trade-off is that you have to make time to do some manual
reorganization along the way (adding namespaces, rearranging your
header files' physical locations, etc.). Usually
this is worth it though, because you can make your application
modular and let different people focus only on their logical,
functional areas.</p>
<p class="docText">The manual labor that you have to invest along the way is inversely
proportional to the amount of time you spend designing modularity in
the first place. Start with some of the good techniques for
modularization, and your code base will scale.</p>
<p class="docText">If you don't already use namespaces,
you've probably at least heard of them, and very
likely you use one already: the <tt>std</tt> namespace,
which is the namespace that contains the standard library. Namespaces
are not used as frequently as they ought to be, in my experience, but
that's not because they're
complicated or using them requires much effort. Recipe 2.3 explains how to modularize code with
namespaces.</p>
<p class="docText">Many of the recipes in this chapter describe techniques that you
apply from within header files. Since there are a number of
facilities discussed, each explaining a different part of a header
file, I have included Example 2-1 in the
introduction, which shows what a typical header file looks like that
uses all of the techniques described in this chapter.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E3PAG">Example 2-1. A header file</h5><p></p><div class="box">

<pre class="preFixedHeight">#ifndef MYCLASS_H_  _ // #include guards, Recipe 2.0
#define MYCLASS_H_  _

#include &lt;string&gt; 

namespace mylib { // Namespaces, Recipe 2.3

   class AnotherClass; // forward class declarations, Recipe 2.2
   class Logger;

   extern Logger* gpLogger; // External storage declaration, Recipe 2.1

   class MyClass {
   public:
      std::string getVal( ) const;
      // ...
   private:
      static int refCount_;
      std::string val_;
   }

// Inline definitions, Recipe 2.4
inline std::string MyClass::getVal( ) const {
   return(val_);
}

#include "myclass.inl"

} // namespace

#endif // MYCLASS_H_  _

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Once you have your header file written and out of the way, most of
the time you will need an <span class="docEmphasis">implementation</span> file,
too, by which I mean a <span class="docEmphasis">.cpp</span> file that contains
definitions and not just declarations. There is less that goes in an
implementation file than there is in a header file, but for the sake
of completeness, Example 2-2 contains a sample
implementation file that goes with the header file presented in Example 2-1.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EQRAG">Example 2-2. An implementation 
file</h5><p></p><div class="box">

<pre>#include "myclass.h"

namespace mylib {

   MyClass::refCount_ = 0; // Static definition, Recipe 8.4

   MyClass::foo( ) { // Method implementations
      // ...
   }
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Of course, your implementation files will no doubt be full of
thoughtful, well-written comments, too, but I left that out for the
sake of clarity.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
