<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 2.1. Making Sure a Header File Gets Included Only Once</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 2.1. Making Sure a Header File Gets Included Only Once</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EGQAG">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have a header
file

 that is included by several other
files. You want to make sure the preprocessor scans the declarations
in the header file no more than once.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E6QAG">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText"><tt>#define</tt> a macro in your header file, and include
<span class="docEmphasis">only</span> the contents of the header file if the
macro hasn't already been defined. You can use this
combination of the <tt>#ifndef</tt>,
<tt>#define</tt>, and <tt>#endif</tt>
preprocessor directives, as I did in Example 2-1:</p>
<pre>#ifndef MYCLASS_H_  _ // #include guards
#define MYCLASS_H_  _

// Put everything here...

#endif // MYCLASS_H_  _</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">When the preprocessor scans this header file, one of the first things
it will encounter is the <tt>#ifndef</tt> directive and the
symbol that follows. <tt>#ifndef</tt> tells the
preprocessor to continue processing on the next line only if the
symbol <tt>MYCLASS_H_ _</tt> is not already defined. If it
is already defined, then the preprocessor should skip to the closing
<tt>#endif</tt>. The line following
<tt>#ifndef</tt> defines <tt>MYCLASS_H_ _</tt>,
so if this file is scanned by the preprocessor twice in the same
compilation, the second time <tt>MYCLASS_H_ _</tt> is
defined. By placing all of your code in between the
<tt>#ifndef</tt> and <tt>#endif</tt>, you ensure
that it is only read once during the compilation process.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ENSAG">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">If you don't use this technique, which is called
using <span class="docEmphasis">include guards</span>
, you've probably
already seen "symbol already
defined" compilation errors that result from not
taking a protective measure against multiple definitions. C++ does
not allow you to define the same symbol more than once, and if you do
(on purpose or by accident) you get a compilation error. Include
guards prevent such errors, and they are pretty standard practice.</p>
<p class="docText">The macros you <tt>#define</tt> don't have
to follow any particular format, but the syntax I used above is
common. The idea is to use a symbol that won't
conflict with another macro and cause your file to inadvertently be
skipped during preprocessing. In practice, you may see other
techniques, such as including a header file or module version in the
macro, e.g., <tt>MYCLASS_H_V301_ _</tt>, or maybe even the
author's name. It isn't that
important how you name it, so long as you are consistent. These
macros should only be referenced by the header file they are
protecting, and nowhere else.</p>
<p class="docText">In some code you may see
<span class="docEmphasis">external</span> include guards, which are the same as
the <span class="docEmphasis">internal</span> include guards I described earlier,
except that they appear in the file that is including the header
file, not the header file itself:</p>
<pre>#ifndef MYCLASS_H_  _
#include "myclass.h"
#endif</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This short-circuits the inclusion process by not even including the
file <tt>myclassh.h</tt> if the macro <tt>MYCLASS_H_
_</tt> is already defined. External include guards were
advocated several years ago to improve compile times for large
projects, but compilers have improved and they are no longer
necessary. Don't use them.</p>
<p class="docText">Even if you are working on a small project, it's a
good idea to put include guards in your header files. If your header
file is included by more than one other file, chances are
you're going to get redefinition errors someday.
Furthermore, small projects tend to turn into larger projects in a
short amount of time, and while a project may have started off with a
single executable and a set of header files that are only ever
included once, sooner or later the project will grow and compilation
errors will start to appear. If you add include guards from the
beginning, you won't have to go back and add them to
a bunch of files all at once sometime in the future.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
