<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 2.2. Ensuring You Have Only One Instance of a Variable Across Multiple Source Files</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 2.2. Ensuring You Have Only One Instance of a Variable Across Multiple Source Files</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E6QAG">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You need the same variable to be

 used by different modules in
a program, and you can only have one copy of this variable. In other
words, a <span class="docEmphasis">global</span>

variable.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EESAG">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Declare and
define
 the variable in a single
implementation file in the usual manner, and use the
<tt>extern</tt> keyword in other implementation files where
you require access to that variable at runtime. Often, this means
including the <tt>extern</tt> declarations in a header file
that is used by all implementation files that need access to the
global variable. Example 2-3 contains a few files
that show how the <tt>extern</tt> keyword can be used to
access variables defined in another implementation file.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EHTAG">Example 2-3. Using the 
extern keyword</h5><p></p><div class="box">

<pre>// global.h
#ifndef GLOBAL_H_  _ // See Recipe 2.0
#define GLOBAL_H_  _

#include &lt;string&gt;

extern int x;
extern std::string s;

#endif

// global.cpp
#include &lt;string&gt;

int x = 7;
std::string s = "Kangaroo";

// main.cpp
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include "global.h"

using namespace std; 

int main( ) {

   cout &lt;&lt; "x = " &lt;&lt; x &lt;&lt; endl;
   cout &lt;&lt; "s = " &lt;&lt; s &lt;&lt; endl;
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EQTAG">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">The <tt>extern</tt> keyword is a way of telling the
compiler that the actual storage for a variable is allocated
somewhere else. <tt>extern</tt> tells the linker that the
variable it qualifies is somewhere in another object file, and that
the linker needs to go find it when creating the final executable or
library. If the linker never finds the <tt>extern</tt>
variable you have declared, or it finds more than one of definition
for it, you will get a link error.</p>
<p class="docText">Example 2-3 isn't terribly
exciting, but it illustrates the point well. My two global variables
are declared and defined in <i>global.cpp:</i></p>
<pre>int x = 7;
std::string s = "Kangaroo";</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">I need to be able to access them from other implementation files, so
I put an <tt>extern</tt> declaration for them in the header
file <span class="docEmphasis">global.h</span>:</p>
<pre>extern int x;
extern std::string s;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The distinction between declaration and definition is important. In
C++, you can declare something many times, so long as the
declarations match, but you may only define something once; this is
called the <span class="docEmphasis">one-definition
rule</span>

(you can actually define it more than once, in some cases, but only
if the definitions are exactly the same—usually this is not a
good idea). The <tt>extern</tt> keyword is a mechanism for
telling the compiler and linker that the definition is somewhere
else, to be resolved at link time.</p>
<p class="docText">This is not to say that using <tt>extern</tt> should be a
regular practice. You should use it sparingly, and only when you have
to, since it permits application-global variables. Sometimes you may
need this for truly global objects or data—a logging object; a
piece of hardware; a large, shared data

 object—but most of the time
there are more appropriate design alternatives.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
