<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 2.3. Reducing #includes with Forward Class Declarations</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 2.3. Reducing #includes with Forward Class Declarations</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EESAG">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have a header file that



references classes in other
headers, and you need to reduce compilation dependencies (and perhaps
time).</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EATAG">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use forward class declarations where possible to avoid unnecessary
compilation dependencies. Example 2-4 gives a short
example of a forward class declaration.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ENTAG">Example 2-4. Forward class declaration</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>// myheader.h
#ifndef MYHEADER_H_  _
#define MYHEADER_H_  _

class A; // No need to include A's header

class B {
   public:
      void f(const A&amp; a);
   // ...
   private:
      A* a_;
};

#endif</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Somewhere else there is a header and perhaps an implementation file
that declares and defines the class <tt>A</tt>, but from
within <i>myheader.h</i> I don't care
about the details of <tt>A</tt>: all I need to know is that
<tt>A</tt> is a class.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EBUAG">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">A forward class declaration is a way to ignore details that you
don't need to be concerned with. In Example 2-4, <i>myheader.h</i>
doesn't need to know anything about the class
<tt>A</tt> except that it exists and that
it's a class.</p>
<p class="docText">Consider what would happen if you <tt>#include</tt>d the
header file for <tt>A</tt>, or, more realistically, the
header files for the half-dozen or so classes you would use in a real
header file. Now an implementation file
(<i>myheader.cpp</i>) includes this header,
<i>myheader.h</i>, because it contains the declarations
for everything. So far, so good. If you change one of the header
files included by <i>myheader.h</i> (or one of the
header files included by one of those files), then all of the
implementation files that include <i>myheader.h</i>
will need to be recompiled.</p>
<p class="docText">Forward declare your class and these compilation dependencies go
away. Using a forward declaration simply creates a name to which
everything else in the header file can refer. The linker has the
happy task of matching up definitions in the implementation files
that use your header.</p>
<p class="docText">Sadly, you can't always use forward declarations.
The class <tt>B</tt> in Example 2-4 only
uses pointers or references to <tt>A</tt>, so I can get
away with a forward declaration. However, if I use an
<tt>A</tt> member function or variable, or if I have an
object of type <tt>A--</tt>and not just a pointer or
reference to one—in my definition for the class
<tt>B</tt>, suddenly my forward declaration is
insufficient. This is because files including
<i>myheader.h</i> need to know the size of
<tt>B</tt>, and if <tt>A</tt> is a member
variable of <tt>B</tt>, then the compiler needs to know
<tt>A</tt>'s size to figure out
<tt>B</tt>'s size. A pointer or a
reference to something is always the same size, so in the case where
you are using pointers or references, the details of
<tt>A</tt> aren't of interest to the
compiler and therefore <tt>A</tt>'s header
file isn't necessary.</p>
<p class="docText">Not surprisingly, if you include any definition in
<i>myheader.h</i> that uses members of
<tt>A</tt>, you have to <tt>#include</tt>
<tt>A</tt>'s header. This is because the
compiler needs to check the function signature of the
<tt>A</tt> member function or the data type of the
<tt>A</tt> data member you are referencing. To illustrate,
this code requires an <tt>#include</tt>:</p>
<pre>#include "a.h"

class B {
   public:
      void f(const A&amp; a) {
         foo_ = a.getVal( ); // Have to know if a.getVal is valid
      }
// ...</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In general, use forward declarations when you can to reduce the
amount of <tt>#include</tt>-ing that goes on at compile
time.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
