<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 2.4. Preventing Name Collisions with Namespaces</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 2.4. Preventing Name Collisions with Namespaces</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E4SAG">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have names from unrelated modules 


that are clashing, or you want to
avoid such clashes by creating logical groups of code in advance.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E3TAG">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use namespaces to 
modularize
code. With namespaces, you can group large groups of code in separate
files into a single namespace. You can nest namespaces as deeply as
necessary to partition a large module into submodules, and consumers
of your module can selectively expose the elements in your
namespace they want to use. Example 2-5 shows a few of the ways you can use a
namespace.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EXUAG">Example 2-5. Using namespaces</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// Devices.h
#ifndef DEVICES_H_  _
#define DEVICES_H_  _

#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;list&gt;

namespace hardware {

   class Device {
   public:
      Device( ) : uptime_(0), status_("unknown") {}
      unsigned long getUptime( ) const;
      std::string getStatus( ) const;
      void reset( );
   private:
      unsigned long uptime_;
      std::string status_;
   };

   class DeviceMgr {
   public:
      void getDeviceIds(std::list&lt;std::string&gt;&amp; ids) const;
      Device getDevice(const std::string&amp; id) const;
      // Other stuff...
   };
}

#endif // DEVICES_H_  _

// Devices.cpp
#include "Devices.h"
#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;list&gt;

namespace hardware {

   using std::string;
   using std::list;

   unsigned long Device::getUptime( ) const {
      return(uptime_);
   }
   string Device::getStatus( ) const {
      return(status_);
   }

   void DeviceMgr::getDeviceIds(list&lt;string&gt;&amp; ids) const {
   }

   Device DeviceMgr::getDevice(const string&amp; id) const {
      Device d;
      return(d);
   }
}

// DeviceWidget.h
#ifndef DEVICEWIDGET_H_  _
#define DEVICEWIDGET_H_  _

#include "Devices.h"

namespace ui {

   class Widget { /* ... */ };
   class DeviceWidget : public Widget {
   public:
      DeviceWidget(const hardware::Device&amp; dev) : device_(dev) {}
      // Some other stuff
   protected:
      hardware::Device device_;
   };
}
#endif // DEVICEWIDGET_H_  _

// main.cpp
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include "DeviceWidget.h"
#include "Devices.h"

int main( ) {

   hardware::Device d;
   ui::DeviceWidget myWidget(d);
   // ...
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EAVAG">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">Example 2-5 is a bit complicated, but
let's go through it piece by piece, because it
illustrates several key points about namespaces. Imagine that you are
writing an administrative application that needs to interface with a
bunch of hardware devices. You might want to divide your application
into two or more namespaces to prevent naming collisions, or just to
divide logically the two parts of the application in a way that makes
sense.</p>
<p class="docText">First, consider the file <i>Devices.h</i>. It contains
a couple of classes that manage the hardware elements,
<tt>Device</tt> and <tt>DeviceMgr</tt>. I
don't want them in the global namespace though
(meaning their names are visible everywhere else in the program), so
I put them in the <tt>hardware</tt> namespace:</p>
<pre>#ifndef DEVICES_H_  _ // See Recipe 2.0
#define DEVICES_H_  _

#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;list&gt;

namespace hardware {

   class Device {
      // ...
   };

   class DeviceMgr {
      // ...
   };
}

#endif // DEVICES_H_  _</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The mechanism is simple: wrap everything you want to put in your
namespace in a <tt>namespace</tt> block.</p>
<p class="docText">The above excerpt is the declaration of <tt>Device</tt> and
<tt>DeviceMgr</tt>, but we still have to think about the
implementation, which is in <i>Devices.cpp</i>. Once
again, wrap everything in a <tt>namespace</tt>
block—it is added to what's already in that
namespace:</p>
<pre>#include "Devices.h"
#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;list&gt;

namespace hardware {

   using std::string;
   using std::list;

   // Implementation for Device and DeviceMgr
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">At this point, the <tt>hardware</tt> namespace contains
everything we need it to. All that's left is to use
it from somewhere. There are a few ways to do this; the way I did it
in Example 2-5 is to qualify fully the name to the
<tt>Device</tt> class with the namespace name, like this:</p>
<pre>#ifndef DEVICEWIDGET_H_  _
#define DEVICEWIDGET_H_  _

#include "Devices.h"

namespace ui {

   class Widget { /* ... */ };
   class DeviceWidget : public Widget {
   public:
      DeviceWidget(const <b>hardware::Device&amp;</b> dev) : device_(dev) {}
      // Other stuff...
   protected:
      <b>hardware::Device</b> device_;
   };
}
#endif // DEVICEWIDGET_H_  _</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">I also did the same thing from <tt>main</tt> in
<i>main.cpp</i>:</p>
<pre>int main( ) {
   hardware::Device d;
   ui::DeviceWidget myWidget(d);
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">To add types to one of the namespaces, declare your header and
implementation files in the same way as in Example 2-5. Each time you wrap code in a namespace block,
it is added to that namespace, so you can have code
that's in the same namespace that
doesn't have to know anything about the other code
in that namespace.</p>
<p class="docText">If you use the approach of qualifying class names with their
namespace, you will quickly get tired of all the typing. There are a
couple of ways to make this problem go away. You can create an alias
for a namespace-qualified type with the <tt>using</tt>
keyword:</p>
<pre>using hardware::Device;

int main( ) {
   Device d;  // No namespace name needed
   ui::DeviceWidget myWidget(d);
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In subsequent code, you can simply refer to the alias instead of the
entire namespace name. Or, you can import everything in the namespace
by <tt>using</tt> the namespace instead of one of the types
it contains:</p>
<pre>using namespace hardware;

int main( ) {
   Device d;
   ui::DeviceWidget myWidget(d);
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">You have probably already used this, or at least seen it in examples,
when using the standard library (many of the examples in this book
use this technique). Everything in the standard library is in the
<tt>std</tt> namespace, so quite often, you will see this:</p>
<pre>using namespace std;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Importing an entire namespace is often a bad idea, though, and is
generally considered a bad practice. We have imported the
<tt>std</tt> namespace in most of the examples in this book
for clarity only, and, in general, recommend against doing so in real
programs.</p>
<p class="docText">If you are importing an entire namespace, or several of them, the
utility of namespaces decreases significantly. One of the reasons
namespaces exist is to reduce naming collisions. If you import a
bunch of different namespaces, then you increase the probability of
naming conflicts. Your code may compile fine and run now, but
someone, somewhere else, can add something to the namespace in the
future and create a conflict the next time your code is rebuilt.</p>
<p class="docText">You can also



nest
namespaces to divide the contents of a namespace into smaller groups.
For example, the <tt>hardware</tt> namespace I defined in
Example 2-5 might actually contain a lot of network
classes and more device classes, so I could partition the namespace
by nesting some others with more descriptive names:</p>
<pre>namespace hardware {
   namespace net {
      // network stuff
   }
   namespace devices {
      // device stuff
   }
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Now, I can access elements contained in the namespace with a bit more
qualification:</p>
<pre>// In some other file...
using hardware::devices::Device;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Namespaces are handy. There are a few cool things that you can do
with namespaces to make your life easier: namespace aliases,
automatic name lookup in function parameter namespaces, and name
matching for function overloads in <tt>using</tt>
declarations. The last two are wordy, but simple.</p>
<p class="docText">A namespace

alias is just what it sounds like: a (probably short) name that you
can substitute for another (probably long) namespace name. If you
don't want to use a <tt>using</tt>
statement, but also don't want to type out a huge
fully qualified name every time you use a class, you can create an
alias for it:</p>
<pre>using dev = hardware::devices;
// ...
dev::Device d;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">You can then use the alias when referring to elements in that
namespace.</p>
<p class="docText">C++ also provides automatic lookup in function parameter namespaces.
So, for example, the following code qualifies its argument with a
namespace (<tt>dev</tt> is the namespace that
<tt>Device</tt> is declared in):</p>
<pre>void f(dev::Device&amp; d) {
   register(d);  // This is actually dev::register
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">When you pass in a function parameter that belongs to a namespace,
the compiler includes that namespace when performing name lookup on
functions within the body of the function. You may not need this
every day, but it saves a lot of typing or an extra
<tt>using</tt> directive when you do. The idea behind this
is that functions that operate on some type are often defined in the
same namespace as that type. Incidentally, it a good practice, in
general, to put functions that operate on certain types in the same
namespace as those types, when possible.</p>
<p class="docText">The last cool thing about namespaces
is
 name
matching for overloads in <tt>using</tt> declarations.
Consider this example:</p>
<pre>namespace mylib {
   void foo(int);
   void foo(double);
   void foo(std::string);
   // More overloads of foo( )...
}

// In some other file...
using mylib::foo; // Which one does this use?</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>using</tt> declaration matches all overloads of
<tt>foo</tt> so you don't have to write
one for each overload. The other benefit of this is that if an
overload of <tt>foo</tt> is added, any code with a
declaration such as <tt>using</tt>
<tt>mylib::foo</tt>
"sees" it automatically because the
<tt>using</tt> declaration will pick it up (when the code
containing the using declaration is compiled, of course).</p>
<p class="docText">You have to use namespaces wisely, though, or you may get some
unexpected compilation errors or create them for others who use your
code. Here are a few popular guidelines when
using

namespaces:</p>
<dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor">Use <span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">using namespace</span></span>
<tt><i>xxx</i></tt> sparingly</span></p></dt>
<dd>
<p class="docList">As I explained earlier, importing an entire namespace increases the
probability of a name collision, either right now or in the future
(someone may add to the namespace you are <tt>using</tt>,
creating a conflict in your code). It also dilutes the modularity
provided by namespaces.</p>
</dd>
<dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor">Don't use <span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">using</span></span> statements in header files</span></p></dt>
<dd>
<p class="docList">Header files are included by lots of other files, so if you use a
namespace or something in a namespace in a header file, you expose
what you are <tt>using</tt> to the file that is including
your header file. The solution to this problem is to qualify fully
everything you need in a header file.</p>
</dd>
<dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor">Don't put <span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">using</span></span> declarations or definitions before <span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">#include</span></span> directives</span></p></dt>
<dd>
<p class="docList">If you do this, then you expose whatever you're
<tt>using</tt> to the code in the header file, which is
probably not what the author of the header file intended.</p>
</dd>
</dl>
<p class="docText">If you obey these guidelines, using 


namespaces in a new project or adding
them to an existing project should be relatively easy.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
