<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 2.5. Including an Inline File</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 2.5. Including an Inline File</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E5VAG">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have a number of
membe

r functions or standalone functions
that you want to make inline, but you don't want to
define them all in the class definition (or even after it) in the
header file. This way, you keep declaration and implementation
separate.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EVWAG">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Create an <i>.inl</i> file and
<tt>#include</tt> it at the end of your header file. This
is equivalent to putting the function definition at
the end of the header file, but this lets
you keep declaration and definition separate. Example 2-6 shows how.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ELXAG">Example 2-6. Using an inline file</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>// Value.h
#ifndef VALUE_H_  _
#define VALUE_H_  _

#include &lt;string&gt;

class Value {
public:
   Value (const std::string&amp; val) : val_(val) {}
   std::string getVal( ) const;
private:
   std::string val_;
};

#include "Value.inl"

#endif VALUE_H_  _

// Value.inl
inline std::string Value::getVal( ) const {
   return(val_);
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">This solution doesn't require much explanation.
<tt>#include</tt> is replaced with the contents of its
argument, so what happens here is that the contents of
<i>Value.inl</i> are brought into the header file. Any
file that includes this header, therefore, has the definition of the
inline functions, but you don't have to clutter up
your class declaration.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
