<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 3.1. Converting a String to a Numeric Type</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 3.1. Converting a String to a Numeric Type</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E1XAG">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have numbers in string


 format, but you need to convert
them to a numeric type, such as an <tt>int</tt> or
<tt>float</tt>.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ECZAG">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">You can do this in one of two ways, with standard library functions
or with the <tt>lexical_cast</tt> class in Boost (written
by Kevlin Henney). The standard library functions are cumbersome and
unsafe, but they are standard, and in some cases, you need them, so I
present them as the first solution. <tt>lexical_cast</tt>
is safer, easier to use, and just more fun, so I present it in the
discussion.</p>
<p class="docText">The functions <tt>strtol</tt>, <tt>strtod</tt>,
and <tt>strtoul</tt>, defined in
<tt>&lt;cstdlib&gt;</tt>, convert a null-terminated
character string to a <tt>long</tt>
<tt>int</tt>,
<tt>double</tt>, or <tt>unsigned</tt>
<tt>long</tt>. You can use them to convert numeric strings
of any base to a numeric type. The code in Example 3-1 demonstrates a function,
<tt>hex2int</tt>, that you can use for converting a
hexadecimal string to a <tt>long</tt>.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EM1AG">Example 3-1. Converting number strings to numbers</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;cstdlib&gt;

using namespace std;

long hex2int(const string&amp; hexStr) {
   char *offset;
   if (hexStr.length( ) &gt; 2) {
      if (hexStr[0] == '0' &amp;&amp; hexStr[1] == 'x') {
         return strtol(hexStr.c_str( ), &amp;offset, 0);
      }
   }
   return strtol(hexStr.c_str( ), &amp;offset, 16);
}

int main( ) {
   string str1 = "0x12AB";
   cout &lt;&lt; hex2int(str1) &lt;&lt; endl;
   string str2 = "12AB";
   cout &lt;&lt; hex2int(str2) &lt;&lt; endl;
   string str3 = "QAFG";
   cout &lt;&lt; hex2int(str3) &lt;&lt; endl;
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here's the output from this program:</p>
<pre>4779
4779
0</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The first two strings both contain the hexadecimal number 12AB. The
first of the two has the <tt>0x</tt> prefix, while the
second doesn't. The third string
doesn't contain a valid hexadecimal number; the
function simply returns <tt>0</tt> in that case.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EA2AG">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">Some people might be inclined to write their own function that
converts hexadecimal numbers to integers. But why reinvent the wheel?
The standard library already provides this functionality. Example 3-1 provides a wrapper function to simplify the
calling of <tt>strtol</tt>. The <tt>strtol</tt>
function is actually an older function from the C library, and it
requires you to pass in a pointer to a null-terminated string, along
with the address of another character pointer; this latter pointer
receives the address of where the parsing ended. In C++, however,
most people prefer to work with the more powerful
<tt>string</tt> class rather than the older-style character
pointers. Thus, this <tt>hex2int</tt> function takes a
<tt>string</tt> parameter.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>strtol</tt>

function is a bit odd in that it allows you to use two different
methods for specifying a base of 16; you can either pass 16 as a
third parameter to the function; or, you can pass
<tt>0</tt> for the base while preceding your string with
the characters <tt>0x</tt> (just as you would do for
specifying hexadecimal constants in your code; however, remember that
with <tt>strtol</tt>, you're passing a
string).</p>
<p class="docText">Example 3-1 allows you to use either method. If you
pass a string such as <tt>0x12AB</tt>, the function will
detect the <tt>0x</tt> and pass it right on to
<tt>strtol</tt>, with <tt>0</tt> for the third
parameter. Otherwise, the function will pass the string with
<tt>16</tt> for the third parameter.</p>
<p class="docText"><tt>strtol</tt> and <tt>strtoul</tt> work the
same way; the only difference is the return type.
<tt>strtod</tt> is similar, but does not allow you to
specify a base.</p>
<p class="docText">These old-school C functions aren't the only way to
convert strings to numbers. The Boost project provides a conversion
class <tt>lexical_cast</tt>

that does the same thing for numeric strings of base 10. Example 3-2 shows how to use it.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ET4AG">Example 3-2. Using lexical_cast</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;boost/lexical_cast.hpp&gt;

using namespace std;

int main( ) {
   string str1 = "750";
   string str2 = "2.71";
   string str3 = "0x7FFF";
   try {
      cout &lt;&lt; boost::lexical_cast&lt;int&gt;(str1) &lt;&lt; endl;
      cout &lt;&lt; boost::lexical_cast&lt;double&gt;(str2) &lt;&lt; endl;
      cout &lt;&lt; boost::lexical_cast&lt;int&gt;(str3) &lt;&lt; endl;
   }
   catch (boost::bad_lexical_cast&amp; e) {
      cerr &lt;&lt; "Bad cast: " &lt;&lt; e.what( ) &lt;&lt; endl;
   }
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The output from Example 3-2 is:</p>
<pre>750
2.71
Bad cast: bad lexical cast: source type value could not be
interpreted as target</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">You can see that it throws an exception for the last value, which is
a hexadecimal number. If you have to convert numbers of a base other
than 10, you will have to use the <tt>strtol</tt>
functions.</p>
<p class="docText">There are versions of the <tt>strtol</tt> functions for
wide characters, too. The wide character equivalent to
<tt>strtol</tt> is <tt>wcstol</tt> and it is
declared in <tt>&lt;cwchar&gt;</tt>. The equivalent
functions for <tt>strtod</tt> and
<tt>strtoul</tt> are <tt>wcstod</tt> and
<tt>wcstoul</tt>. Each of these functions the same way,
except that the parameters that are
<tt>char*</tt>'s in the 


narrow character
functions are <tt>wchar_t*</tt>'s in the
wide character functions.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EV6AG">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 3.2</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
