<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 3.2. Converting Numbers to Strings</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 3.2. Converting Numbers to Strings</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ELZAG">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have numeric types (<tt>int</tt>,
<tt>float</tt>) and 

you need to put the results in a
<tt>string</tt>, perhaps formatted a certain way.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EO1AG">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">There are a number of different ways to do this, all with benefits
and drawbacks. The first technique I will present uses a
<tt>stringstream</tt> class to store the string data,
because it is part of the standard library and easy to use. This
approach is presented in Example 3-3. See the
discussion
for alternative
techniques.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EE2AG">Example 3-3. Formatting a number as a string</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;iomanip&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;sstream&gt;

using namespace std;

int main( ) {

   stringstream ss;

   ss &lt;&lt; "There are " &lt;&lt; 9 &lt;&lt; " apples in my cart.";
   cout &lt;&lt; ss.str( ) &lt;&lt; endl;  // stringstream::str( ) returns a string
                              // with the contents

   ss.str("");                   // Empty the string
   ss &lt;&lt; showbase &lt;&lt; hex &lt;&lt; 16;  // Show the base in hexadecimal
   cout &lt;&lt; "ss = " &lt;&lt; ss.str( ) &lt;&lt; endl;

   ss.str("");
   ss &lt;&lt; 3.14;
   cout &lt;&lt; "ss = " &lt;&lt; ss.str( ) &lt;&lt; endl;
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The output of Example 3-3 looks like this:</p>
<pre>There are 9 apples in my cart.
ss = 0x10
ss = 3.14</pre><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EW2AG">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">A <tt>stringstream</tt> is a convenient way to put data
into a <tt>string</tt> because it lets you use all of the
formatting facilities provided by the standard input and output
stream classes. In the simplest case in Example 3-3,
I just use the left-shift operator (<tt>&lt;&lt;</tt>) to
write a combination of text and numeric data to my string stream:</p>
<pre>ss &lt;&lt; "There are " &lt;&lt; 9 &lt;&lt; " apples in my cart.";</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>&lt;&lt;</tt> operator is overloaded for built-in
types to format the input accordingly. When you want to get the
<tt>string</tt> that holds your data, use the
<tt>str</tt> member function:</p>
<pre>cout &lt;&lt; ss.str( ) &lt;&lt; endl;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">There are lots of

stream
manipulators in <tt>&lt;iomanip&gt;</tt>, and you can use
them to do all sorts of formatting of your numeric data as you put it
in the string. I used <tt>showbase</tt> and hex to format
my number as hexadecimal in Example 3-3, but there
are lots more. For example, you can set the precision to display more
than the default number of digits:</p>
<pre>ss &lt;&lt; setprecision(6) &lt;&lt; 3.14285;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Using manipulators isn't the most intuitive thing
though, which is why there is a Recipe on the subject. See Recipe
Recipe 10.2 for more detailed information about
formatting numeric data with stream manipulators.</p>
<p class="docText">Of course, as is often the case with C++, there is another way. The
Boost Format library (written by Samuel Krempp) contains a
<tt>format</tt>

class that makes formatting and conversion extremely easy. Example 3-4 shows you how to do such a conversion.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ER5AG">Example 3-4. Formatting integers 

as hexadecimal</h5><p></p><div class="box">

<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;boost/format.hpp&gt;

using namespace std;
using boost::format;
using boost::io::str;
using boost::io::format_error;

int main( ) {

   try {
      format f("There are %1% ways %2% %3% %4%");

      f % 3;
      f % "to" % "do" % "this.";

      cout &lt;&lt; f &lt;&lt; endl;

      f.clear( ); // Clear buffers to format something else

      f.parse("Those cost $%d.");
      f % 50;

      cout &lt;&lt; f &lt;&lt; endl;

      int x = 11256099;

      string strx = str(format("%x") % x);
      cout &lt;&lt; strx &lt;&lt; endl;
   }
   catch (format_error &amp;e) {
      cout &lt;&lt; e.what( ) &lt;&lt; endl;
   }
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here's what you see when you run this program:</p>
<pre>There are 3 ways to do this.
Those cost $50.
abc123</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Using a <tt>format</tt> class involves two steps, creating
the <tt>format</tt> object and then sending it the content.
To use the trivial case from Example 3-4, I create
the format object using the simplest version of its syntax:</p>
<pre>format f("There are %1% ways %2% %3% %4%");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In the format string, the placeholders are numbers with a % on either
side. Then I start sending it the content for the format I provided:</p>
<pre>f % 3;
f % "to" % "do" % "this.";</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>%</tt> operator has been overridden in the
formatting library to add the variables you give it to the
<tt>format</tt> object to its left. You can use it once per
line or call it several times in a row. It is analogous to the
<tt>&lt;&lt;</tt> operator for streams. Speaking of the
<tt>&lt;&lt;</tt> operator, it has also been overridden so
you can write <tt>format</tt> objects directly to an output
stream. Alternatively, if you need to put the results in a string,
use the <tt>str</tt> member function:</p>
<pre>string s = f.str( );</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">If you are a <tt>printf</tt>

person, you can use <tt>printf</tt> format specifiers:</p>
<pre>f.parse("Those cost $%d.");
f % 50;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">If you feed too many or too few content variables to format and try
to write it to a stream or extract a formatted string, it will throw
a <tt>format_error</tt> (or a subclass thereof) exception.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>format</tt> class is quite powerful, and it has too
many neat formatting capabilities to list here, but
it's worth checking out. See
Boost's web site at www.boost.org to download Boost or to read
the documentation.</p>
<p class="docText">You can also convert numbers from numeric types to strings using
<tt>sprintf</tt> or the related functions. Typically, you
should avoid this

 because it is unsafe and there are
better alternatives.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ESBBG">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Chapter 10</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
