<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 3.3. Testing Whether a String Contains a Valid Number</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 3.3. Testing Whether a String Contains a Valid Number</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E31AG">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have a <tt>string</tt> and you need to



find out if it contains a valid number.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EA3AG">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">You can use the Boost <tt>lexical_cast</tt> function
template to test for a valid number. Using this approach, a valid
number can include a preceding minus sign, or a preceding plus sign,
but not whitespace. I give a few examples of the kinds of formats
that work with <tt>lexical_cast</tt> in Example 3-5.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ER3AG">Example 3-5. Validating a string number</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;boost/lexical_cast.hpp&gt;

using namespace std;
using boost::lexical_cast;
using boost::bad_lexical_cast;

template&lt;typename T&gt;
bool isValid(const string&amp; num) {

   bool res = true;

   try {
      T tmp = lexical_cast&lt;T&gt;(num);
   }
   catch (bad_lexical_cast &amp;e) {
      res = false;
   }

   return(res);
}

void test(const string&amp; s) {

   if (isValid&lt;int&gt;(s))
      cout &lt;&lt; s &lt;&lt; " is a valid integer." &lt;&lt; endl;
   else
      cout &lt;&lt; s &lt;&lt; " is NOT a valid integer." &lt;&lt; endl;

   if (isValid&lt;double&gt;(s))
      cout &lt;&lt; s &lt;&lt; " is a valid double." &lt;&lt; endl;
   else
      cout &lt;&lt; s &lt;&lt; " is NOT a valid double." &lt;&lt; endl;

   if (isValid&lt;float&gt;(s))
      cout &lt;&lt; s &lt;&lt; " is a valid float." &lt;&lt; endl;
   else
      cout &lt;&lt; s &lt;&lt; " is NOT a valid float." &lt;&lt; endl;
}

int main( ) {

   test("12345");
   test("1.23456");
   test("-1.23456");
   test(" - 1.23456");
   test("+1.23456");
   test("  1.23456  ");
   test("asdf");
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Here's the output from this example:</p>
<pre>12345 is a valid integer.
12345 is a valid double.
12345 is a valid float.
1.23456 is NOT a valid integer.
1.23456 is a valid double.
1.23456 is a valid float.
-1.23456 is NOT a valid integer.
-1.23456 is a valid double.
-1.23456 is a valid float.
 - 1.23456 is NOT a valid integer.
 - 1.23456 is NOT a valid double.
 - 1.23456 is NOT a valid float.
+1.23456 is NOT a valid integer.
+1.23456 is a valid double.
+1.23456 is a valid float.
  1.23456   is NOT a valid integer.
  1.23456   is NOT a valid double.
  1.23456   is NOT a valid float.
asdf is NOT a valid integer.
asdf is NOT a valid double.
asdf is NOT a valid float.</pre><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E53AG">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">The <tt>lexical_cast</tt>

function template converts a value from one type to another. It is
declared like this:</p>
<pre>template&lt;typename Target, typename Source&gt;
Target lexical_cast(Source arg)</pre><br/>
<p class="docText"><tt>Source</tt> is the type of the original variable, and
<tt>Target</tt> is the type of the variable being converted
to. So, for example, if you want to convert from a
<tt>string</tt> to an <tt>int</tt>, you invoke
<tt>lexical_cast</tt> like this:</p>
<pre>int i = lexical_cast&lt;int&gt;(str); // str is a string</pre><br/>
<p class="docText"><tt>lexical_cast</tt> does the parsing and attempts the
conversion. If the conversion is not possible, it throws a
<tt>bad_lexical_cast</tt> exception. In Example 3-5, I only want to test for validity and
don't need to keep the destination variable around,
so I return <tt>true</tt> if no exception is thrown,
<tt>false</tt> otherwise.</p>
<p class="docText">You only have to supply the first template argument to
<tt>lexical_cast</tt> because it's a
function template, which means the compiler can deduce the type of
the function argument and use that as the second template argument.
Explaining this distinction is more confusing than illustrating it,
so let me use a code example. Instead of invoking
<tt>lexical_cast</tt> as in the previous code snippet, you
could do this:</p>
<pre>int i = lexical_cast&lt;int, string&gt;(str);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This means the same thing, but you don't have to
supply the <tt>string</tt> argument because the compiler
can see that <tt>str</tt> is a <tt>string</tt>
and figure out the rest.</p>
<p class="docText">If you are going to write a similar wrapper function to test for
validity and return true or false, you would do well to write it as a
function template. This way, you only have to write it once with a
parameterized type, and a different version will be instantiated each
time you use it on a different type.</p>
<p class="docText"><tt>lexical_cast</tt> is also handy for converting from one
numeric type to another; I discuss more about that in
Recipe



Recipe 3.6.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EAABG">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 3.6</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
