<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 3.4. Comparing Floating-Point Numbers with Bounded Accuracy</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 3.4. Comparing Floating-Point Numbers with Bounded Accuracy</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EN3AG">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You need to compare 



floating-point
values, but you only want tests for equality, greater-than, or
less-than to be concerned with a limited number of digits. For
example, you want 3.33333 and 3.33333333 to show as being equal when
comparing to a precision of .0001.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ER4AG">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Write your own comparison functions that take a parameter that bounds
the accuracy of the comparison. Example 3-6 shows
the basic technique for such comparison functions.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E54AG">Example 3-6. Comparing floating-point numbers</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;cmath&gt;    // for fabs( )

using namespace std;

bool doubleEquals(double left, double right, double epsilon) {
   return (fabs(left - right) &lt; epsilon);
}

bool doubleLess(double left, double right, double epsilon,
                bool orequal = false) {
   if (fabs(left - right) &lt; epsilon) {
      // Within epsilon, so considered equal
      return (orequal);
   }
   return (left &lt; right);
}

bool doubleGreater(double left, double right, double epsilon,
                   bool orequal = false) {
   if (fabs(left - right) &lt; epsilon) {
      // Within epsilon, so considered equal
      return (orequal);
   }
   return (left &gt; right);
}

int main( ) {

   double first = 0.33333333;
   double second = 1.0 / 3.0;
   cout &lt;&lt; first &lt;&lt; endl;
   cout &lt;&lt; second &lt;&lt; endl;
    
   // Straight equalify test. Fails when you wouldn't want it to.
   // (boolalpha prints booleans as "true" or "false")
   cout &lt;&lt; boolalpha &lt;&lt; (first == second) &lt;&lt; endl;
   // New equality. Passes as scientific app probably wants.
   cout &lt;&lt; doubleEquals(first, second, .0001) &lt;&lt; endl;
   // New less-than
   cout &lt;&lt; doubleLess(first, second, .0001) &lt;&lt; endl;
   // New Greater-than
   cout &lt;&lt; doubleGreater(first, second, .0001) &lt;&lt; endl;
   // New less-than-or-equal-to
   cout &lt;&lt; doubleLess(first, second, .0001, true) &lt;&lt; endl;
   // New greater-than-or-equal-to
   cout &lt;&lt; doubleGreater(first, second, .0001, true) &lt;&lt; endl;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Following is the output from this example:</p>
<pre>0.333333
0.333333
false
true
false
false
true
true</pre><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EL5AG">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">The code in Example 3-6 starts with two values,
0.33333333 and whatever the computer figures 1.0 / 3.0 to be. It
prints out the two values using the default formatting in cout; these
two values appear to be the same at 0.333333. However, when you
compare these two values, they are indeed different. The value of 1.0
/ 3.0 has more significant digits than 0.33333333, and therefore, as
far as your machine is concerned, the two numbers are not equal. In
some applications, however, you may want these two numbers to show up
as being the same.</p>
<p class="docText">The way to handle this is to write three of your own functions for
comparing double values: <tt>doubleLess</tt>,
<tt>doubleEquals</tt>, and
<tt>doubleGreater</tt>, each of which takes two
<tt>double</tt> values as parameters. Additionally, the
<tt>doubleLess</tt> and <tt>doubleGreater</tt>
take an additional parameter, which, when <tt>true</tt>,
causes the functions to behave as
<span class="docEmphasis">less-than-or-equal</span> or
<span class="docEmphasis">greater-than-or-equal</span>, respectively.</p>
<p class="docText">To make these functions handle a precision, first consider the
<tt>doubleEquals</tt>

function. Instead of testing for equality, this function tests
whether the difference between the two numbers is within a
user-specified epsilon. (The example uses .0001 for the epsilon.) If
so, then the function returns <tt>true</tt>, meaning the
values are indeed the same. Thus, the values 0.3333, 0.33333,
0.333333, 0.33333333333, and 0.33333323438 would all show up as being
equal.</p>
<p class="docText">To handle a <span class="docEmphasis">less-than</span> and
<span class="docEmphasis">greater-than</span> operation, first test whether the
numbers are equal within the range, as you did in the
<tt>doubleEquals</tt> function. If so, then return
<tt>true</tt> if you want to include equality in the test,




and false
if you don't. Otherwise, do a straight comparison.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
