<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 3.5. Parsing a String Containing a Number in Scientific Notation</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 3.5. Parsing a String Containing a Number in Scientific Notation</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ES4AG">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have a string containing a


 number in scientific
notation, and you want to store the number's value
in a <tt>double</tt> variable.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EW5AG">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">The most direct way to parse a scientific notation number is by using
the C++ library's built-in
<tt>stringstream</tt> class declared in
<tt>&lt;sstream&gt;</tt>, as you can see in Example 3-7.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EH6AG">Example 3-7. Parsing a number in scientific notation</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;sstream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;

using namespace std;

double sciToDub(const string&amp; str) {

   stringstream ss(str);
   double d = 0;
   ss &gt;&gt; d;

   if (ss.fail( )) {
      string s = "Unable to format ";
      s += str;
      s += " as a number!";
      throw (s);
   }

   return (d);
}

int main( ) {

   try {
      cout &lt;&lt; sciToDub("1.234e5") &lt;&lt; endl;
      cout &lt;&lt; sciToDub("6.02e-2") &lt;&lt; endl;
      cout &lt;&lt; sciToDub("asdf") &lt;&lt; endl;
   }
   catch (string&amp; e) {
      cerr &lt;&lt; "Whoops: " &lt;&lt; e &lt;&lt; endl;
   }
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Following is the output from this code:</p>
<pre>123400
0.0602
Whoops: Unable to format asdf as a number!</pre><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EU6AG">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">The <tt>stringstream</tt> class is, not surprisingly, a
<tt>string</tt> that behaves like a stream. It is declared
in <tt>&lt;sstring&gt;</tt>. If you need to parse a
<tt>string</tt> that contains a number in scientific
notation (see also Recipe 3.2), a
<tt>stringstream</tt> will do the job nicely. The standard
stream classes already "know" how
to parse numbers, so don't waste your time
reimplementing this logic if you don't have to.</p>
<p class="docText">In Example 3-7, I wrote the simple function
<tt>sciToDub</tt> that takes a <tt>string</tt>
parameter and returns the <tt>double</tt> it contains, if
it is valid. Within <tt>sciToDub</tt>, I use the
<tt>stringstream</tt> as follows:</p>
<pre>stringstream ss(str); // Construct from a string
double d = 0;
ss &gt;&gt; d;

if (ss.fail( )) {
   string s = "Unable to format ";
   s += str;
   s += " as a number!";
   throw (s);
}
return (d);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The most important part here is that all you have to do is use the
right-shift operator (<tt>&gt;&gt;</tt>) to read from the
string stream into a <tt>double</tt>, just as you would
read from <tt>cin</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Well, that's not <span class="docEmphasis">all</span> you have
to do. If there's a value in the
<tt>stringstream</tt> that can't be
written to the variable on the right side of the
<tt>&gt;&gt;</tt> operator, the <tt>fail</tt> bit
is set on the stream. You can check this bit using the
<tt>fail</tt> member function (this is actually a member
function of <tt>basic_ios</tt>, which is a superclass of
<tt>stringstream</tt>). Additionally, the variable on the
righthand side of the <tt>&gt;&gt;</tt> operator is
unchanged if the operation fails.</p>
<p class="docText">In the interest of being generic, however, you can avoid having to
write separate versions of <tt>sciToDub</tt> for
<tt>int</tt>s, <tt>float</tt>s,
<tt>double</tt>s, and whatever else you want to convert to
by writing a function template. Consider this new version:</p>
<pre>template&lt;typename T&gt;
T strToNum(const string&amp; str) {
   stringstream ss(str);
   T tmp;
   ss &gt;&gt; tmp;

   if (ss.fail( )) {
      string s = "Unable to format ";
      s += str;
      s += " as a number!";
      throw (s);
   }
     
   return (tmp);
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Now, if you want to convert a <tt>string</tt> to a numeric
type, you can do it like this:</p>
<pre>double d = strToNum&lt;double&gt;("7.0");
float f = strToNum&lt;float&gt;("7.0");
int i = strToNum&lt;int&gt;("7.0");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">You can also make the type of character


 a template parameter, but
that's straightforward to do, so
I'll leave it as an exercise for you.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EGDBG">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 3.2</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
