<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 3.6. Converting Between Numeric Types</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 3.6. Converting Between Numeric Types</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EX5AG">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have number of one type 

and you need to convert it to another,
such as an <tt>int</tt> to a <tt>short</tt> or a
vice versa, but you want to catch any overflow or underflow errors at
runtime.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EY6AG">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use Boost's <tt>numeric_cast</tt> class
template. It performs runtime checks that throw an exception of type
<tt>bad_numeric_cast</tt> if you will overflow or underflow
the variable where you are putting a value. Example 3-8 shows you how to do this.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EJABG">Example 3-8. Safe numeric conversions</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;boost/cast.hpp&gt;

using namespace std;
using boost::numeric_cast;
using boost::bad_numeric_cast;

int main( ) {

   // Integer sizes
   try {
      int i = 32767;
      short s = numeric_cast&lt;short&gt;(i);

      cout &lt;&lt; "s = " &lt;&lt; s &lt;&lt; endl;

      i++; // Now i is out of range (if sizeof(short) is 2)
      s = numeric_cast&lt;short&gt;(i);
   }
   catch (bad_numeric_cast&amp; e) {
      cerr &lt;&lt; e.what( ) &lt;&lt; endl;
   }

   try {
      int i = 300;
      unsigned int ui = numeric_cast&lt;unsigned int&gt;(i);

      cout &lt;&lt; ui &lt;&lt; endl; // Fine

      i *= -1;
      ui = numeric_cast&lt;unsigned int&gt;(i); // i is negative!
   }
   catch (bad_numeric_cast&amp; e) {
      cerr &lt;&lt; e.what( ) &lt;&lt; endl;
   }

   try {
      double d = 3.14;
      int i = numeric_cast&lt;int&gt;(d);

      i = numeric_cast&lt;int&gt;(d); // This shaves off the 0.14!

      cout &lt;&lt; i &lt;&lt; endl;  // i = 3

   }
   catch (bad_numeric_cast&amp; e) {
      cerr &lt;&lt; e.what( ) &lt;&lt; endl;
   }
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ESABG">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">You are probably aware of the fact that the basic C++ types have
different sizes. The C++ standard has strict specifications for the
relative size of types—an <tt>int</tt> is always at
least as big as a <tt>short</tt>
<tt>int--</tt>but it does not specify the absolute size.
What this means is that if you take a <tt>long</tt>
<tt>int</tt> and try to put it in a short, or attempt to
put an <tt>int</tt> in an <tt>unsigned int</tt>,
then you may be losing information about the value in the source
variable, such as its sign or even part of its numeric value.</p>
<p class="docText">Just knowing that this causes problems isn't enough.
You may have tight space requirements and not want to use four bytes
for a <tt>long</tt> when you can get away with two for a
<tt>short</tt> (if your platform, in fact, uses these
sizes, which are common but not guaranteed). Because of your space
requirements, you want to try to store values in the smallest
possible type. If you want to live dangerously but want a safety net,
use Boost's <tt>numeric_cast</tt> to catch
loss of data at runtime.</p>
<p class="docText">The syntax of
<tt>numeric_cast</tt>

is straightforward. It is a function template, declared like this:</p>
<pre>template&lt;typename Target, typename Source&gt;
inline Target numeric_cast(Source arg)</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">It is just like <tt>lexical_cast</tt> if you have already
read Recipe 3.1 or Recipe 3.3. There are two template parameters,
<tt>Target</tt> and <tt>Source</tt>, which
represent the types of the originating and destination values.
Because it is a function template, the compiler can deduce the type
of the <tt>Source</tt> template argument, so you only need
to supply <tt>Target</tt>, like this:</p>
<pre>int i = 32767;
short s = numeric_cast&lt;short&gt;(i);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText"><tt>short</tt> is the template argument for the
<tt>Target</tt> parameter. The compiler figures out that
<tt>Source</tt> is an <tt>int</tt> because
<tt>i</tt> is an <tt>int</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">In this case, I am cramming an <tt>int</tt> into a
<tt>short</tt>. On my (Windows XP) system, an
<tt>int</tt> is four bytes and a <tt>short</tt>
is two. A <tt>short</tt> is signed, which means that I have
15 bits to represent a number with and, therefore, 32,767 is the
maximum positive value it can hold. The above piece of code goes off
without a hitch, but when I increment <tt>i</tt> by one, it
goes beyond the range of a <tt>short</tt>:</p>
<pre>i++;
s = numeric_cast&lt;short&gt;(i); // Uh-oh</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">And a <tt>bad_numeric_cast</tt> exception is
thrown—you get the idea. See the rest of Example 3-8: <tt>numeric_cast</tt> also catches
underflow if you try to assign a negative signed value to an unsigned
type.</p>
<p class="docText">But <tt>numeric_cast</tt> doesn't solve
all of your problems. If you try to put a floating-point value in a
nonfloating-point type, you lose everything to the right of the
decimal, correct? <tt>numeric_cast</tt> does not help you
with this, so don't think that it can rescue you
from all of your risky endeavors. For example, consider this piece of
code from Example 3-8:</p>
<pre>double d = 3.14;
int i = numeric_cast&lt;int&gt;(d);  // Ouch</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">No exception is thrown here. But it is if you try this:</p>
<pre>double d = -3.14;
unsigned int ui = numeric_cast&lt;unsigned in&gt;(d);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Because regardless of you tossing everything to the right of the
decimal point out the window, you are losing the

 negative sign, and
that is bad.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EJFBG">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 3.1 and Recipe 3.3</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
