<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Introduction</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Introduction</h3>
<p class="docText">This chapter contains recipes for working with strings and text
files. Most C++ programs, regardless of their application, manipulate
strings and text files to some degree. Despite the variety of
applications, however, the requirements are often the same—for
strings: trimming, padding, searching, splitting, and so on; for text
files: wrapping, reformatting, reading delimited files, and more. The
recipes that follow provide solutions to many of these common needs
that do not have ready-made solutions in the C++ standard library.</p>
<p class="docText">The standard library is portable, standardized, and, in general, at
least as efficient as homemade solutions, so in the following
examples I have preferred it over code from scratch. It contains a
rich framework for manipulating and managing strings and text, much
of which is in the form of the class templates
<tt>basic_string</tt> (for strings),
<tt>basic_istream</tt>, and
<tt>basic_ostream</tt> (for input and output text streams).
Almost all of the techniques in this chapter use or extend these
class templates. In cases where they didn't have
what I wanted, I turned to another area of the standard library that
is full of generic, prebuilt solutions: algorithms and containers.</p>
<p class="docText">Everybody uses strings, so chances are that if what you need
isn't in the standard library, someone has written
it. The Boost String Algorithms library, written by Pavol Droba,
fills many of the gaps in the standard library by implementing most
of the algorithms that you've had to use at one time
or another, and it does it in a portable, efficient way. Check out
the Boost project at www.boost.org for more information and
documentation of the String Algorithms library. There is some overlap
between the String Algorithms library and the solutions I present in
this chapter. In most cases, I provide examples of or at least
mention Boost algorithms that are related to the solutions presented.</p>
<p class="docText">For most examples, I have provided both a nontemplate and a template
version. I did this for two reasons. First, most of the areas of the
standard library that use character data are class or function
templates that are parameterized on the type of character, narrow
(<tt>char</tt>) or wide (<tt>wchar_t</tt>). By
following this model, you will help maximize the compatibility of
your software with the standard library. Second, whether you are
working with the standard library or not, class and function
templates provide an excellent facility for writing generic software.
If you do not need templates, however, you can use the nontemplate
versions, though I recommend experimenting with templates if you are
new to them.</p>
<p class="docText">The standard library makes heavy use of templates and uses
<tt>typedef</tt>s to insulate programmers from some of the
verbose syntax that templates use. As a result, I use the terms
<tt>basic_string</tt>, <tt>string</tt>, and
<tt>wstring</tt> interchangeably, since what applies to one
usually applies to them all. <tt>string</tt> and
<tt>wstring</tt> are just <tt>typedef</tt>s for
<tt>basic_string&lt;char&gt;</tt> and
<tt>basic_string&lt;wchar_t&gt;</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Finally, you will probably notice that none of the recipes in this
chapter use C-style strings, i.e., null-terminated character arrays.
The standard library provides such a wealth of efficient and
extensible support for C++ strings that to use C-style string
functions (which were provided primarily for backward-compatibility
anyway) is to forego the flexibility, safety, and generic nature of
what you get for free with your compiler: C++ string classes.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
