<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 4.1. Padding a String</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 4.1. Padding a String</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E3CBG">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You need to "pad," or fill, a
string


with a number of occurrences of some character to a certain width.
For example, you may want to pad the string
"<tt>Chapter</tt>
<tt>1</tt>" to 20 characters
wide with periods, so that it looks like "<tt>Chapter
1...........</tt>".</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E1DBG">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use <tt>string</tt>'s
<tt>insert</tt>



and <tt>append</tt> member functions to pad a string with
characters on the beginning or end. For example, to pad the end of a
string to 20 characters with X's:</p>
<pre>std::string s = "foo";
s.append(20 - s.length( ), 'X');</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">To pad the string at the beginning instead:</p>
<pre>s.insert(s.begin( ), 20 - s.length( ), 'X');</pre><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EAFBG">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">The difference in usage between the two functions is
<tt>insert</tt>'s first parameter. It is
an iterator that points to the character immediately to the right of
where the insert should occur. The <tt>begin</tt> member
function returns an iterator pointing to the first element in the
string, so in the example, the series of characters is inserted to
the left of that. The parameters common to both functions are the
number of times to repeat the character and the character itself.</p>
<p class="docText"><tt>insert</tt> and <tt>append</tt> are actually
member functions of the <tt>basic_string</tt> class
template in the <tt>&lt;string&gt;</tt> header
(<tt>string</tt> is a <tt>typedef</tt> for
<tt>basic_string&lt;char&gt;</tt> and
<tt>wstring</tt> is a <tt>typedef</tt> for
<tt>basic_string&lt;wchar_t&gt;</tt>), so they work for
strings of narrow or wide characters. Using them as needed, as in the
above example, will work fine, but if you are using
<tt>basic_string</tt> member functions from within your own
generic utility functions, you should build on the standard
library's existing generic design and use a function
template. Consider the code in Example 4-1, which defines a generic
<tt>pad</tt> function template that operates on
<tt>basic_string</tt>s.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E5GBG">Example 4-1. A 



generic pad function template</h5><p></p><div class="box">

<pre>#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;iostream&gt;

using namespace std;

// The generic approach
template&lt;typename T&gt;
void pad(basic_string&lt;T&gt;&amp; s,
         typename basic_string&lt;T&gt;::size_type n, T c) {
   if (n &gt; s.length( ))
      s.append(n - s.length( ), c);
}

int main( ) {

   string  s  = "Appendix A";
   wstring ws = L"Acknowledgments"; // The "L" indicates that
                                     // this is a wide char
   pad(s, 20, '*');                  // literal
   pad(ws, 20, L'*');

   // cout  &lt;&lt; s  &lt;&lt; std::endl;  // You shouldn't be able to
   wcout &lt;&lt; ws &lt;&lt; std::endl;     // run these at the same time
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText"><tt>pad</tt> in Example 4-1 pads the given string
<tt>s</tt> up to some width <tt>n</tt>, with the
character <tt>c</tt>. Since the function template uses a
parameterized type for the elements of the string
(<tt>T</tt>), it will work on a
<tt>basic_string</tt> of any kind of character:
<tt>char</tt>, <tt>wchar_t</tt>, or other custom
characters.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
