<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 4.2. Trimming a String</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 4.2. Trimming a String</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EBEBG">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You need to trim some number


of characters from the end(s) of a string, usually whitespace.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E3EBG">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use iterators to identify the portion of the string you want to
remove, and the <tt>erase</tt> member function to remove
it. Example 4-2 presents the function <tt>rtrim</tt> that
trims a character from the end of a string.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ENFBG">Example 4-2. Trimming characters from a string</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;iostream&gt;

// The approach for narrow character strings
void rtrim(std::string&amp; s, char c) {

   if (s.empty( ))
      return;

   std::string::iterator p;
   for (p = s.end( ); p != s.begin( ) &amp;&amp; *--p == c;);

   if (*p != c)
      p++;

   s.erase(p, s.end( ));
}

int main( )
{
   std::string s = "zoo";

   rtrim(s, 'o');

   std::cout &lt;&lt; s &lt;&lt; '\n';
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EWFBG">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">Example 4-2 will do the trick for strings of
<tt>char</tt>s, but it <span class="docEmphasis">only</span> works for
<tt>char</tt> strings. Just like you saw in Example 4-1,
you can take advantage of the generic design of
<tt>basic_string</tt> and use a function
template

instead. Example 4-3 uses a function template to trim characters from
the end of any kind of character string.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E3GBG">Example 4-3. A generic version of rtrim</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;iostream&gt;

using namespace std;

// The generic approach for trimming single
// characters from a string
template&lt;typename T&gt;
void rtrim(basic_string&lt;T&gt;&amp; s, T c)
{
   if (s.empty( ))
      return;

   typename basic_string&lt;T&gt;::iterator p;
   for (p = s.end( ); p != s.begin( ) &amp;&amp; *--p == c;);

   if (*p != c)
      p++;

   s.erase(p, s.end( ));
}

int main( ) {

   string s = "Great!!!!";
   wstring ws = L"Super!!!!";

   rtrim(s, '!');
   rtrim(ws, L'!');

   cout &lt;&lt; s &lt;&lt; '\n';
   wcout &lt;&lt; ws &lt;&lt; L'\n';
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">This function works exactly the same way as the previous, nongeneric,
version in Example 4-2, but since it is parameterized on the type of
character being used, it will work for
<tt>basic_string</tt>s of any kind.</p>
<p class="docText">Examples Example 4-2 and Example 4-3 remove sequences of a single character from a
string. Trimming whitespace is different, however, because whitespace
can be one of several characters. Conveniently, the standard library
provides a concise way to do this: the <tt>isspace</tt>
function in the <tt>&lt;cctype&gt;</tt> header (and its
<tt>wchar_t</tt> equivalent, <tt>iswspace</tt>,
in <tt>&lt;cwctype&gt;</tt>). Example 4-4 defines a generic
function that trims trailing
whitespace.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EMIBG">Example 4-4. Trim trailing whitespace</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;cctype&gt;
#include &lt;cwctype&gt;

using namespace std;

template&lt;typename T, typename F&gt;
void rtrimws(basic_string&lt;T&gt;&amp; s, F f) {

   if (s.empty( ))
      return;

   typename basic_string&lt;T&gt;::iterator p;
   for (p = s.end( ); p != s.begin( ) &amp;&amp; f(*--p););

   if (!f(*p))
      p++;

   s.erase(p, s.end( ));
}

// Overloads to make cleaner calling for client code
void rtrimws(string&amp; s) {
   rtrimws(s, isspace);
}

void rtrimws(wstring&amp; ws) {
   rtrimws(ws, iswspace);
}

int main( ) {

   string s = "zing        ";
   wstring ws = L"zong        ";

   rtrimws(s);
   rtrimws(ws);

   cout &lt;&lt; s &lt;&lt; "|\n";
   wcout &lt;&lt; ws &lt;&lt; L"|\n";
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The function template in Example 4-4,

<tt>rtrimws</tt>, is a generic function template, similar
to the previous examples, that accepts a
<tt>basic_string</tt> and trims whitespace from the end of
it. But unlike the other examples, it takes a function object, and
not a character, that is used to test an element of the string to
determine whether it should be removed.</p>
<p class="docText">You don't need to overload
<tt>rtrimws</tt> as I did in the example, but it makes the
syntax cleaner when using the function, since the calling code can
omit the predicate function argument when using them.</p>
<p class="docText">But alas, this solution requires that you write the code yourself. If
you would rather use a library—and a good one at
that—Boost's String Algorithms library
supplies lots of functions for trimming strings, and chances are that
what you need is already there. In fact, there are lots of handy
trimming functions in the 

String Algorithms library, so if
you can use Boost you should take a look. Table 4-1 lists the
function templates in the library that you can use for trimming
strings, including some miscellaneous functions. Since these are
function templates, they have template parameters that represent the
different types used. Here is what each of them mean:</p>
<dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><i><span class="docPubcolor">Seq</span></i></p></dt>
<dd>
<p class="docList">This is a type that satisfies the sequence requirements as defined in
the C++ standard.</p>
</dd>
<dt><br/><p><i><span class="docPubcolor">Coll</span></i></p></dt>
<dd>
<p class="docList">This is a type that satisfies a less-restrictive set of requirements
than a standard sequence. See the Boost String Algorithms definitions
a detailed description of the requirements a collection satisfies.</p>
</dd>
<dt><br/><p><i><span class="docPubcolor">Pred</span></i></p></dt>
<dd>
<p class="docList">This is a function object or function pointer that takes a single
argument and returns a bool—in other words, an unary predicate.
You can supply your own unary predicates to some of the trimming
functions to trim elements that satisfy certain criteria.</p>
</dd>
<dt><br/><p><i><span class="docPubcolor">OutIt</span></i></p></dt>
<dd>
<p class="docList">This is a type that satisfies the requirements of an output iterator
as defined in the C++ standard, namely that you can increment it and
assign to the new location to add an element to the end of the
sequence to which it points.</p>
</dd>
</dl>
<p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 4-1. Boost's string trimming function templates</h5></caption><colgroup span="2"><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Declaration
								</th><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Description
								</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<pre>template&lt;typename Seq&gt;
void trim(Seq&amp; s,
  const locale&amp; loc =
  locale( ));</pre><br/>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Trim spaces from both ends of a string in place using the
locale's classification function for identifying the
space character.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<pre>template&lt;typename Seq,
         typename Pred&gt;
void trim_if(Seq&amp; s, Pred p);</pre><br/>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Trim elements from each end of the sequence <tt>s</tt> for
which <tt>p(*it)</tt> is <tt>true</tt>, where
<tt>it</tt> is an iterator that refers to an element in the
sequence. The trimming ceases when <tt>p(*it) = false</tt>.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<pre>template&lt;typename Seq&gt;
Seq trim_copy(const Seq&amp; s,
  const locale&amp; loc =
  locale( ));</pre><br/>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Does the same thing as <tt>trim</tt>, but instead of
modifying <tt>s</tt> it returns a new sequence with the
trimmed results.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<pre>template&lt;typename Seq,
         typename Pred&gt;
Seq trim_copy_if(const Seq&amp; s,
  Pred p);</pre><br/>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Does the same thing as <tt>trim_if</tt>, but instead of
modifying <tt>s</tt> it returns a new sequence with the
trimmed results.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<pre>template&lt;typename OutIt,
         typename Coll,
         typename Pred&gt;
OutIt trim_copy_if(OutIt out,
  const Coll&amp; c, Pred p);</pre><br/>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Does the same thing as the previous version of
<tt>trim_copy_if</tt>, with a few differences. First, it
gives the guarantee of strong exception safety. Second, it takes an
output iterator as the first argument and returns an output iterator
that refers to one position past the end of the destination sequence.
Finally, it takes a collection type instead of a sequence type; see
the list before this table for more information.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>trim_lefttrim_right</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Works like <tt>trim</tt>, but only for the left or right
end of a string.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>trim_left_iftrim_right_if</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Works like <tt>trim_if</tt>, but only for the left or right
end of a string.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>trim_left_copytrim_right_copy</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Works like <tt>trim_copy</tt>, but only for the left or
right end of a string.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>trim_left_copy_iftrim_right_copy_if</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Works like <tt>trim_copy_if</tt>, but only for the left or
right end of a string. Both have two versions, one that operates on a
sequence and another that operates on a collection.
								</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">The first four function templates described in Table 4-1 are the core
functionality of the String Algorithms library's
trim functions. The rest are variations on those themes. To see some
of them in action, take a look at Example 4-5. It shows some of the
advantages of using these functions over string member functions.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EASBG">Example 4-5. Using Boost's string trim functions</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;boost/algorithm/string.hpp&gt;

using namespace std;
using namespace boost;

int main( ) {

   string s1 = "      leading spaces?";

   trim_left(s1); // Trim the original
   string s2 = trim_left_copy(s1); // Trim, but leave original intact

   cout &lt;&lt; "s1 = " &lt;&lt; s1 &lt;&lt; endl;
   cout &lt;&lt; "s2 = " &lt;&lt; s2 &lt;&lt; endl;

   s1 = "YYYYboostXXX";
   s2 = trim_copy_if(s1, is_any_of("XY")); // Use a predicate to

   trim_if(s1, is_any_of("XY"));

   cout &lt;&lt; "s1 = " &lt;&lt; s1 &lt;&lt; endl;
   cout &lt;&lt; "s2 = " &lt;&lt; s2 &lt;&lt; endl;

   s1 = "1234 numbers 9876";
   s2 = trim_copy_if(s1, is_digit( ));

   cout &lt;&lt; "s1 = " &lt;&lt; s1 &lt;&lt; endl;
   cout &lt;&lt; "s2 = " &lt;&lt; s2 &lt;&lt; endl;

   // Nest calls to trim functions if you like
   s1 = "    ****Trim!***     ";
   s2 = trim_copy_if(trim_copy(s1), is_any_of("*"));

   cout &lt;&lt; "s1 = " &lt;&lt; s1 &lt;&lt; endl;
   cout &lt;&lt; "s2 = " &lt;&lt; s2 &lt;&lt; endl;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Example 4-5 demonstrates how to use the Boost string trim functions.
They are generally self-explanatory to use, so I
won't go into a detailed explanation beyond
what's in Table 4-1. The one function that is in the
example that isn't in the table is
<tt>is_any_of</tt>. This is a function template that
returns a predicate function object that can be used by the
<tt>trim_if</tt>-style functions. Use it when you want to
trim a set of characters. There is a similar classification function
named <tt>is_from_range</tt> that takes two arguments and
returns an unary predicate that returns true when a character is
within the range. For example, to trim the characters
<tt>a</tt> through <tt>d</tt> from a string, you
could do something like this:</p>
<pre>s1 = "abcdXXXabcd";
trim_if(s1, is_from_range('a', 'd'));
cout &lt;&lt; "s1 = " &lt;&lt; s1 &lt;&lt; endl;       // Now s1 = XXX</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Note that this works in a case-sensitive way, since the range
<tt>a</tt> through <tt>d</tt> does not include
the uppercase versions of those 

letters.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
