<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 4.3. Storing Strings in a Sequence</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 4.3. Storing Strings in a Sequence</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EKGBG">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You want to store a set of 


strings in a sequence that looks and feels
like an array.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ENHBG">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use a <tt>vector</tt> for array-like storage of
your strings. Example 4-6 offers a simple
example.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EBIBG">Example 4-6. Store strings in a vector</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;vector&gt;
#include &lt;iostream&gt;

using namespace std;

int main( ) {

   vector&lt;string&gt; v;

   string s = "one";
   v.push_back(s);

   s = "two";
   v.push_back(s);

   s = "three";
   v.push_back(s);

   for (int i = 0; i &lt; v.size( ); ++i)
   {
      cout &lt;&lt; v[i] &lt;&lt; '\n';
   }
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText"><tt>vector</tt>s follow array semantics for random access
(they also do a lot more), so they are easy and familiar to use.
<tt>vector</tt>s are just one of many sequences in the
standard library, however; read on for more of this broad subject.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EQIBG">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">A <tt>vector</tt> is a dynamically sized sequence of
objects that provides array-style <tt>operator[]</tt>
random access. The member function <tt>push_back</tt>
copies its argument via copy constructor, adds that copy as the last
item in the vector, and increments its size by one.
<tt>pop_back</tt> does the exact opposite, by removing the
last element. Inserting or deleting items from the end of a vector
takes amortized constant time, and inserting or deleting from any
other location takes linear time. These are the basics of vectors.
There is a lot more to them.</p>
<p class="docText">In most cases, a <tt>vector</tt> should be your first
choice over a C-style array. First of all, they are dynamically
sized, which means they can grow as needed. You
don't have to do all sorts of research to figure out
an optimal static size, as in the case of C arrays; a
<tt>vector</tt> grows as needed, and it can be resized
larger or smaller manually if you need to. Second,
<tt>vector</tt>s offer bounds checking with the
<tt>at</tt> member function (but not with
<tt>operator[]</tt>), so that you can do something if you
reference a nonexistent index instead of simply watching your program
crash or worse, continuing execution with corrupt data. Look at
Example 4-7. It shows how to deal with



out-of-bounds indexes.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EDKBG">Example 4-7. Bounds-checking on vectors</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;vector&gt;
#include &lt;exception&gt;

using namespace std;

int main( ) {

   char carr[] = {'a', 'b', 'c', 'd', 'e'};

   cout &lt;&lt; carr[100000] &lt;&lt; '\n'; // Whoops, who knows what's going
                                 // to happen
   vector&lt;char&gt; v;
   v.push_back('a');
   v.push_back('b');
   v.push_back('c');
   v.push_back('d');
   v.push_back('e');

   try {
      cout &lt;&lt; v.at(10000) &lt;&lt; '\n'; // at checks bounds and throws
   } catch(out_of_range&amp; e) {      // out_of_range if it's invalid
      cerr &lt;&lt; e.what( ) &lt;&lt; '\n';
   }
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">If you catch <tt>out_of_range</tt>, defined in
<tt>&lt;stdexcept&gt;</tt>, you can deal with invalid
indexes in a meaningful way. And you can call the
<tt>what</tt> member function to, depending on your
implementation, get a useful error message, like this one returned by
the code in Example 4-7:</p>
<pre>invalid vector&lt;T&gt; subscript</pre><br/>
<p class="docText"><tt>vector</tt>s aren't your only option
though. There are lots of ways to store sequences of things in C++.
In addition to <tt>vector</tt>s, there are
<tt>list</tt>s, <tt>set</tt>s, and


double-ended queues
(<tt>deque</tt>s). All support many of the same operations,
and each supports operations of its own. In addition, each has
different algorithmic complexity guarantees, storage requirements,
and semantics in general. There is a lot to choose from.</p>
<p class="docText">Look at Example 4-6 closely. You will probably notice that I keep
changing the value of the string <tt>s</tt> before I add it
to the back of the container with <tt>push_back</tt>. You
could reasonably expect the output to look like this:</p>
<pre>three
three
three</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">I pushed the same string on the end of the vector three times, so
each time I reassign the string, don't all vector
elements now just refer to the same thing? No. This is an important
point about STL containers.</p>
<p class="docText">STL containers store copies of the objects you put into them, not the
objects themselves. So after I've put all three of
my strings in the container, there are four strings in memory: the
three copies that were made and are now
"in" the container, and the one
copy I've been assigning values to.</p>
<p class="docText">Who cares? So a few extra copies have been made: big deal. It is a
big deal, because if whatever you are writing uses a lot of strings,
you are going to pay for all of that copying with processor time, or
memory, or both. Copying elements in and out of containers is the
intentional behavior of the STL, and all containers work that way.</p>
<p class="docText">A solution to this (certainly not <span class="docEmphasis">the</span> solution)
is to store pointers in the container instead. Just remember that the
container doesn't <tt>delete</tt> the
pointers when it is destroyed. Your code allocated the memory for the
pointer, so your code has to clean it up. This goes for when the
container is destroyed entirely, or when the element is removed.</p>
<p class="docText">In the interest of providing alternative solutions,
let's explore another option. Consider the class
template
<tt>list</tt>,
defined in <tt>&lt;list&gt;</tt>, which is a doubly linked
list. If you plan on having lots of inserts and deletes in the middle
of the sequence, or if you want to ensure that iterators pointing to
elements of the sequence are not invalidated when you modify the
sequence, you may want to use a <tt>list</tt>. Example 4-8
uses a <tt>list</tt> instead of a <tt>vector</tt>
to store a few <tt>string</tt>s; it also uses
<tt>for_each</tt> to iterate through them and print them
out instead of the index operator, as you would
have to do with a simple array.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EMNBG">Example 4-8. Storing strings in a list</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;list&gt;
#include &lt;algorithm&gt;
#include &lt;iostream&gt;

using namespace std;

void write(const string&amp; s) {
   cout &lt;&lt; s &lt;&lt; '\n';
}

int main( ) {
   list&lt;string&gt; lst;

   string s = "knife";
   lst.push_front(s);

   s = "fork";
   lst.push_back(s);

   s = "spoon";
   lst.push_back(s);

   // A list doesn't have random access, so
   // use for_each( ) instead
   for_each(lst.begin( ), lst.end( ), write);
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The point of this digression from the original problem (storing
strings in a sequence) is to give a brief introduction to the
sequences in the STL. I can't give comprehensive
coverage of the topic here. For an overview of the STL, see Chapter 10 of <span class="docEmphasis">C++ in a Nutshell</span>,
by Ray 


Lischner
(O'Reilly).</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
