<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 4.4. Getting the Length of a String</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 4.4. Getting the Length of a String</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EHIBG">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You need the length 
of a string.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E3IBG">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use <tt>string</tt>'s
<tt>length</tt> member function:</p>
<pre>std::string s = "Raising Arizona";
int i = s.length( );</pre><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ELJBG">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">Retrieving the length of a string is a trivial task, but it is a good
opportunity to discuss the allocation scheme for
<tt>string</tt>s (both wide and narrow character).
<tt>string</tt>s, unlike C-style null-terminated character
arrays, are dynamically sized, and grow as needed. Most standard
library implementations start with an arbitrary (low) capacity, and
grow by doubling the capacity each time it is reached. Knowing how to
analyze this growth, if not the exact algorithm, is helpful in
diagnosing string performance problems.</p>
<p class="docText">The characters in a <tt>basic_string</tt> are stored in a
buffer that is a contiguous chunk of memory with a static size. The
buffer a string uses is an arbitrary size initially, and as
characters are added to the string, the buffer fills up until its
capacity is reached. When this happens, the buffer grows, sort of.
Specifically, a new buffer is allocated with a larger size, the
characters are copied from the old buffer to the new buffer, and the
old buffer is deleted.</p>
<p class="docText">You can find out the size of the buffer (not the number of characters
it contains, but its maximum size) with the
<tt>capacity</tt> member function. If you want to manually
set the capacity to avoid needless buffer copies, use the
<tt>reserve</tt> member function and pass it a numeric
argument that indicates the desired buffer size. There is a maximum
size on the possible buffer size though, and you can get that by
calling <tt>max_size</tt>. You can use all of these to
observe memory growth in your standard library implementation. Take a
look at Example 4-9 to see how.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ENKBG">Example 4-9. String length and capacity</h5><p></p><div class="box">

<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;iostream&gt;

using namespace std;

int main( ) {

   string s = "";
   string sr = "";

   sr.reserve(9000);

   cout &lt;&lt; "s.length    = " &lt;&lt; s.length( )   &lt;&lt; '\n';
   cout &lt;&lt; "s.capacity  = " &lt;&lt; s.capacity( ) &lt;&lt; '\n';
   cout &lt;&lt; "s.max_size  = " &lt;&lt; s.max_size( ) &lt;&lt; '\n';

   cout &lt;&lt; "sr.length   = " &lt;&lt; sr.length( )   &lt;&lt; '\n';
   cout &lt;&lt; "sr.capacity = " &lt;&lt; sr.capacity( ) &lt;&lt; '\n';
   cout &lt;&lt; "sr.max_size = " &lt;&lt; sr.max_size( ) &lt;&lt; '\n';

   for (int i = 0; i &lt; 10000; ++i) {

      if (s.length( ) == s.capacity( )) {
         cout &lt;&lt; "s reached capacity of " &lt;&lt; s.length( )
              &lt;&lt; ", growing...\n";
      }
      if (sr.length( ) == sr.capacity( )) {
         cout &lt;&lt; "sr reached capacity of " &lt;&lt; sr.length( )
              &lt;&lt; ", growing...\n";
      }
      s += 'x';
      sr += 'x';
   }
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">With Visual C++ 7.1, my output looks like this:</p>
<pre class="preFixedHeight">s.length    = 0
s.capacity  = 15
s.max_size  = 4294967294
sr.length   = 0
sr.capacity = 9007
sr.max_size = 4294967294
s reached capacity of 15, growing...
s reached capacity of 31, growing...
s reached capacity of 47, growing...
s reached capacity of 70, growing...
s reached capacity of 105, growing...
s reached capacity of 157, growing...
s reached capacity of 235, growing...
s reached capacity of 352, growing...
s reached capacity of 528, growing...
s reached capacity of 792, growing...
s reached capacity of 1188, growing...
s reached capacity of 1782, growing...
s reached capacity of 2673, growing...
s reached capacity of 4009, growing...
s reached capacity of 6013, growing...
sr reached capacity of 9007, growing...
s reached capacity of 9019, growing...

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText">What is happening here is that the buffer for the string keeps
filling up as I append characters to it. If the buffer is full (i.e.,
length = capacity), a new, larger buffer is allocated and the
original string characters and the newly appended character(s) are
copied into the new buffer. <tt>s</tt> starts with the
default capacity of 15 (results vary by compiler), then grows by
about half each time.</p>
<p class="docText">If you anticipate significant growth in your string, or you have a
large number of strings that will need to grow at least modestly, use
<tt>reserve</tt> to minimize the amount of buffer
reallocation that goes on. It's also a good idea to
experiment with your standard library implementation to see how it
handles string growth.</p>
<p class="docText">Incidentally, when you want to know if a string is empty,
don't check length against zero, just call the
<tt>empty</tt> member function. It is a
<tt>const</tt> member function that returns true if the
length of the string is 
zero.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
