<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 4.5. Reversing a String</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 4.5. Reversing a String</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EMJBG">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You want to reverse
a
 string.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E5JBG">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">To reverse a string "in place,"
without using a temporary string, use the
<tt>reverse</tt>

function template in the <tt>&lt;algorithm&gt;</tt> header:</p>
<pre>std::reverse(s.begin( ), s.end( ));</pre><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EVKBG">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText"><tt>reverse</tt> works simply enough: it modifies the range
you give it such that it is in the opposite order that it was
originally. It takes linear time.</p>
<p class="docText">In the event that you want to
<span class="docEmphasis">copy</span> the string to another string, but backward,
use reverse iterators, like this:</p>
<pre>std::string s = "Los Angeles";
std::string rs;

rs.assign(s.rbegin( ), s.rend( ));</pre><br/>
<p class="docText"><tt>rbegin</tt> and <tt>rend</tt> return reverse
iterators. Reverse iterators behave as though they are looking at the
sequence backward. <tt>rbegin</tt> returns an iterator that
points to the last element, and <tt>rend</tt> returns an
iterator that points to one before the first; this is exactly
opposite of what <tt>begin</tt> and <tt>end</tt>
do.</p>
<p class="docText">But do you <span class="docEmphasis">need</span> to reverse the string in the
first place? With <tt>rbegin</tt> and
<tt>rend</tt>, any member functions or algorithms that
operate on iterator ranges can be used on the reverse version of the
string. And if you want to search through the string, you can use
<tt>rfind</tt> to do what <tt>find</tt> does but
starting from the end of the string and moving backward. For large
strings, or large numbers of strings, reversing can be expensive, so
avoid it if you can.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
