<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 4.7. Tokenizing a String</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 4.7. Tokenizing a String</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EWLBG">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You need to break a string 
into
pieces using a set of delimiters.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ELMBG">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use the <tt>find_first_of</tt> and
<tt>first_first_not_of</tt> member functions on
<tt>basic_string</tt> to iterate through the string and
alternately locate the next tokens and non-tokens. Example 4-12
presents a simple <tt>StringTokenizer</tt> class that does
just that.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EANBG">Example 4-12. A string tokenizer</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;iostream&gt;

using namespace std;

// String tokenizer class.
class StringTokenizer {

public:

   StringTokenizer(const string&amp; s, const char* delim = NULL) :
      str_(s), count_(-1), begin_(0), end_(0) {

      if (!delim)
         delim_ = " \f\n\r\t\v";  //default to whitespace
      else
         delim_ = delim;

      // Point to the first token
      begin_ = str_.find_first_not_of(delim_);
      end_ = str_.find_first_of(delim_, begin_);
   }

   size_t countTokens( ) {
     if (count_ &gt;= 0) // return if we've already counted
       return(count_);

     string::size_type n = 0;
     string::size_type i = 0;

     for (;;) {
        // advance to the first token
        if ((i = str_.find_first_not_of(delim_, i)) == string::npos)
           break;
        // advance to the next delimiter
        i = str_.find_first_of(delim_, i+1);
        n++;
        if (i == string::npos)
          break;
     }
     return (count_ = n);
   }
   bool hasMoreTokens( ) {return(begin_ != end_);}
   void nextToken(string&amp; s) {
     if (begin_ != string::npos &amp;&amp; end_ != string::npos) {
        s = str_.substr(begin_, end_-begin_);
        begin_ = str_.find_first_not_of(delim_, end_);
        end_ = str_.find_first_of(delim_, begin_);
     }
     else if (begin_ != string::npos &amp;&amp; end_ == string::npos)
     {
        s = str_.substr(begin_, str_.length( )-begin_);
        begin_ = str_.find_first_not_of(delim_, end_);
     }

   }

private:
   StringTokenizer( ) {};
   string delim_;
   string str_;
   int count_;
   int begin_;
   int end_;
};

int main( ) {
   string s = " razzle dazzle giddyup ";
   string tmp;

   StringTokenizer st(s);

   cout &lt;&lt; "there are " &lt;&lt; st.countTokens( ) &lt;&lt; " tokens.\n";
   while (st.hasMoreTokens( )) {
      st.nextToken(tmp);
      cout &lt;&lt; "token = " &lt;&lt; tmp &lt;&lt; '\n';
   }
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EJNBG">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">Splitting a string with well-defined structure, as in Example 4-10,
is nice, but it's not always that easy. Suppose
instead that you have to <span class="docEmphasis">tokenize</span> a string
instead of simply break it into pieces based on a single delimiter.
The most common incarnation of this is tokenizing based on ignoring
whitespace. Example 4-12 gives an implementation of a
<tt>StringTokenizer</tt> class (like the standard
Java© class of the same name) for C++ that accepts
delimiter characters, but defaults to whitespace.</p>
<p class="docText">The most important lines in <tt>StringTokenizer</tt> use
<tt>basic_string</tt>'s
<tt>find_first_of</tt> and
<tt>find_first_not_of</tt> member functions. I describe how
they work and when to use them in Recipe 4.9. Example 4-10 produces this output:</p>
<pre>there are 3 tokens.
token = razzle
token = dazzle
token = giddyup</pre><br/>
<p class="docText"><tt>StringTokenizer</tt> is a more flexible form of the
<tt>split</tt> function in Example 4-10. It maintains
state, so you can advance from one token to the next instead of
parsing the input string all at once. You can also count the number
of tokens.</p>
<p class="docText">There are a couple of improvements you can make on
<tt>StringTokenizer</tt>. First, for simplicity, I wrote
<tt>StringTokenizer</tt> to only work with strings, or in
other words, narrow character strings. If you want the same class to
work for both narrow and wide characters, you can parameterize the
character type as I have done in previous recipes. The other thing
you may want to do is extend <tt>StringTokenizer</tt> to
allow more friendly interaction with sequences and more
extensibility. You can always write all of this yourself, or you can
use an existing tokenizer class instead. The Boost project has a
class named <tt>tokenizer</tt> that does this. See
www.boost.org for 
more details.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EZPBG">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 4.24</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
