<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 4.8. Joining a Sequence of Strings</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 4.8. Joining a Sequence of Strings</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E2MBG">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">Given a sequence of strings, such

 as output from Example 4-10, you want to
join them together into a single, long string, perhaps with a
delimiter.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E2NBG">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Loop through the sequence and append each string to the output
string. You can handle any standard sequence as input; Example 4-13
uses a <tt>vector</tt> of <tt>string</tt>s.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EMOBG">Example 4-13. Join a sequence of strings</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;vector&gt;
#include &lt;iostream&gt;

using namespace std;

void join(const vector&lt;string&gt;&amp; v, char c, string&amp; s) {

   s.clear( );

   for (vector&lt;string&gt;::const_iterator p = v.begin( );
        p != v.end( ); ++p) {
      s += *p;
      if (p != v.end( ) - 1)
        s += c;
   }
}

int main( ) {

   vector&lt;string&gt; v;
   vector&lt;string&gt; v2;
   string s;

   v.push_back(string("fee"));
   v.push_back(string("fi"));
   v.push_back(string("foe"));
   v.push_back(string("fum"));

   join(v, '/', s);

   cout &lt;&lt; s &lt;&lt; '\n';
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EVOBG">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">Example 4-13 has one technique that is slightly different from
previous examples. Look at this line:</p>
<pre>for (vector&lt;string&gt;::<b>const_iterator </b>p = v.begin( );</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The previous string examples simply used
<tt>iterator</tt>s, without the
"const" part, but you
can't get away with that here because
<tt>v</tt> is declared as a reference to a
<tt>const</tt> object. If you have a
<tt>const</tt> container object, you can only use a
<tt>const_iterator</tt> to access its elements. This is
because a plain <tt>iterator</tt> allows writes to the
object it refers to, which, of course, you can't do
if your container object is <tt>const</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">I declared <tt>v</tt>
<tt>const</tt> for two
reasons. First, I know I'm not going to be modifying
its contents, so I want the compiler to give me an error if I do. The
compiler is much better at spotting that kind of thing than I am,
especially since a subtle syntactic or semantic error can cause an
unwanted assignment. Second, I want to advertise to consumers of this
function that I won't do anything to their
container, and <tt>const</tt> is the perfect way to do
that. Now, I just have to create a generic version that works on
multiple character types.</p>
<p class="docText">Just as in Recipe 4.6, making
<tt>join</tt> generic with a function template is easy. All
you have to do is change the header to be parameterized on the type
of character, like this:</p>
<pre>template&lt;typename T&gt;
void joing(const std::vector&lt;std::basic_string&lt;T&gt; &gt;&amp; v, T c,
           std::basic_string&lt;T&gt;&amp; s)</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">But <tt>vector</tt>s may not be your only input. You may be
saddled with the task of joining an array of C-style strings. C++
<tt>string</tt>s are preferable to C-style strings, so if
you have to do this, join them into a C++ <tt>string</tt>.
Once you've done that, you can always retrieve a
C-style version by calling
<tt>string</tt>'s <tt>c_str</tt>
member function, which returns a <tt>const</tt> pointer to
a null-terminated character array.</p>
<p class="docText">Example 4-14 offers a generic version of <tt>join</tt> that
joins an array of character arrays into a <tt>string</tt>.
Since the new, generic version is parameterized on the character
type, it will work for narrow or wide character arrays.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EIRBG">Example 4-14. Joining C-style strings</h5><p></p><div class="box">

<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;iostream&gt;

const static int MAGIC_NUMBER = 4;

template&lt;typename T&gt;
void join(T* arr[], size_t n, T c, std::basic_string&lt;T&gt;&amp; s) {
   s.clear( );

   for (int i = 0; i &lt; n; ++i) {
      if (arr[i] != NULL)
         s += arr[i];
      if (i &lt; n-1)
         s += c;
   }
}

int main( ) {
   std::wstring ws;

   wchar_t* arr[MAGIC_NUMBER];

   arr[0] = L"you";
   arr[1] = L"ate";
   arr[2] = L"my";
   arr[3] = L"breakfast";

   join(arr, MAGIC_NUMBER, L'/', ws);


}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
