<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 4.9. Finding Things in Strings</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 4.9. Finding Things in Strings</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EMOBG">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You want to search a string for something. 

Maybe
it's a single character, another string, or one of
(or <span class="docEmphasis">not</span> of) an unordered set of characters. And,
for your own reasons, you have to find it in a particular way, such
as the first or last occurrence, or the first or last occurrence
relative to a particular index.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EHPBG">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use one of <tt>basic_string</tt>'s
"find" member functions. Almost all
start with the word "find," and
their name gives you a pretty good idea of what they do. Example 4-15
shows how some of the find member functions work.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EWPBG">Example 4-15. Searching strings</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;iostream&gt;

int main( ) {
   std::string s = "Charles Darwin";

   std::cout &lt;&lt; s.find("ar") &lt;&lt; '\n';            // Search from the
                                                 // beginning
   std::cout &lt;&lt; s.rfind("ar") &lt;&lt; '\n';           // Search from the end

   std::cout &lt;&lt; s.find_first_of("swi")           // Find the first of
             &lt;&lt; '\n';                            // any of these chars

   std::cout &lt;&lt; s.find_first_not_of("Charles")   // Find the first
             &lt;&lt; '\n';                            // that's not in this
                                                 // set

   std::cout &lt;&lt; s.find_last_of("abg") &lt;&lt; '\n';   // Find the first of
                                                 // any of these chars
                                                 // starting from the
                                                 // end

   std::cout &lt;&lt; s.find_last_not_of("aDinrw")     // Find the first
             &lt;&lt; '\n';                            // that's not in this
                                                 // set, starting from
                                                 // the end
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Each of the find member functions is discussed in more detail in the
"Discussion" section.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EBQBG">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">There are six different find member functions for finding things in
strings, each of which provides four overloads. The overloads allow
for either <tt>basic_string</tt> or
<tt>charT*</tt> parameters (<tt>charT</tt> is the
character type). Each has a
<tt>basic_string::size_type</tt> parameter
<tt>pos</tt> that lets you specify the index where the
search should begin, and there is one overload with a
<tt>size_type</tt> parameter <tt>n</tt> that
allows you only to search based on the first <tt>n</tt>
characters from the set.</p>
<p class="docText">It's hard to keep track of all of these member
functions, so Table 4-2 gives a quick reference of each function and
its parameters.</p>
<p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 4-2. Member functions for
 searching strings</h5></caption><colgroup span="2"><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Member function
								</th><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Description
								</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<pre>size_type find (const basic_string&amp; str,
                size_type pos = 0) const;
size_type find (const charT* s,
                size_type pos,
                size_type n) const;
size_type find (const charT* s,
                size_type pos = 0) const;
size_type find (charT c,
                size_type pos = 0) const;</pre><br/>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Returns the index of the first instance of a character or substring,
starting at the beginning or the index indicated by the
<tt>pos</tt> parameter. If <tt>n</tt> is
specified, then match the first <tt>n</tt> characters in
the target string.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<pre>size_type rfind ( ... )</pre><br/>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Find the first instance of a character or substring, from the end to
the beginning. In other words, do the same thing as
<tt>find</tt>, but starting from the end of the string.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<pre>size_type find_first_of ( ... )</pre><br/>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Find the first occurrence of any of the characters in the set that is
provided as a <tt>basic_string</tt> or character pointer.
If <tt>n</tt> is specified, then only the first
<tt>n</tt> characters in the set are considered.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<pre>size_type find_last_of ( ... )</pre><br/>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Find the last occurrence of any of the characters in the set that is
provided as a <tt>basic_string</tt> or character pointer.
If <tt>n</tt> is specified, then only the first
<tt>n</tt> characters in the set are considered.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<pre>size_type find_first_not_of ( ... )</pre><br/>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Find the first occurrence of a character that is
<span class="docEmphasis">not</span> one of the characters in the set that is
provided as a <tt>basic_string</tt> or character pointer.
If <tt>n</tt> is specified, then only the first
<tt>n</tt> characters in the set are considered.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<pre>size_type find_last_not_of ( ... )</pre><br/>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Find the last occurrence of any of the characters in the set that is
provided as a <tt>basic_string</tt> or character pointer.
If <tt>n</tt> is specified, then only the first
<tt>n</tt> characters in the set are considered.
								</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">All of these member functions return the index of the occurrence of
what you are looking for as a value of type
<tt>basic_string&lt;T&gt;::size_type</tt>. If the search
fails, it returns <tt>basic_string&lt;T&gt;::npos</tt>,
which is a special value (usually <tt>-1</tt>) that
indicates search failure. Even though it is usually
<tt>-1</tt>, you should test for equality with
<tt>npos</tt> to be as portable as possible; this also
makes your intent clear, since by comparing to
<tt>npos</tt> you are explicitly checking for search
failure and not some magic number.</p>
<p class="docText">With this variety of searching algorithms, you should be able to find
what you're looking for, and if not, to use them in
your own algorithms. If <tt>basic_string</tt>
doesn't provide what you need, however, look in
<tt>&lt;algorithm&gt;</tt> before you roll your own. The
standard algorithms operate on sequences by using iterators and,
nearly as often, function objects. Conveniently,
<tt>basic_string</tt>s provide iterators for easy
traversal, so it is trivial to plug <tt>string</tt>
iterators into standard algorithms. Say you want to find the first
occurrence of the same character twice in a row. You can use the
<tt>adjacent_find</tt> function template to find two equal,
adjacent elements in a string
("adjacent" means that their
positions differ by one iterator, i.e., that <tt>*iter == *(iter
+ 1)</tt>).</p>
<pre>std::string s = "There was a group named Kiss in the 70s";

std::string::iterator p =
   std::adjacent_find(s.begin( ), s.end( ));</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The result is an iterator that points to the first of the adjacent
elements.</p>
<p class="docText">If you have to write your own algorithm



for operating on strings,
don't use a <tt>basic_string</tt> like you
would a C-style string by using <tt>operator[]</tt> to get
at each item. Take advantage of the existing member functions. Each
of the find functions takes a <tt>size_type</tt> parameter
that indicates the index where the search should proceed from. Using
the find functions repeatedly, you can advance through the string as
you see fit. Consider Example 4-16, which counts the number of unique
characters in a string.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ECYBG">Example 4-16. Counting unique characters</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;iostream&gt;

template&lt;typename T&gt;
int countUnique(const std::basic_string&lt;T&gt;&amp; s) {
   using std::basic_string;

   basic_string&lt;T&gt; chars;

   for (typename basic_string&lt;T&gt;::const_iterator p = s.begin( );
        p != s.end( ); ++p) {
     if (chars.find(*p) == basic_string&lt;T&gt;::npos)
        chars += *p;
   }
   return(chars.length( ));
}

int main( ) {
   std::string s = "Abracadabra";

   std::cout &lt;&lt; countUnique(s) &lt;&lt; '\n';
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The find functions come in handy

 quite often. Keep them at the top of
the list when you have to find things in <tt>string</tt>s.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
