<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 4.10. Finding the nth Instance of a Substring</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 4.10. Finding the nth Instance of a Substring</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E4PBG">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">Given two <tt>string</tt>s
<tt>source</tt>




 and <tt>pattern</tt>, you
want to find the <span class="docEmphasis">n</span>th occurrence of
<tt>pattern</tt> in <tt>source</tt>.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EORBG">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use the find member function to locate successive instances of the
substring you are looking for. Example 4-17 contains a
simple

<tt>nthSubstr</tt> function.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EGSBG">Example 4-17. Locate the nth version of a substring</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;iostream&gt;

using namespace std;

int nthSubstr(int n, const string&amp; s,
              const string&amp; p) {
   string::size_type i = s.find(p);     // Find the first occurrence

   int j;
   for (j = 1; j &lt; n &amp;&amp; i != string::npos; ++j)
      i = s.find(p, i+1); // Find the next occurrence

   if (j == n)
     return(i);
   else
     return(-1);
}

int main( ) {
   string s = "the wind, the sea, the sky, the trees";
   string p = "the";

   cout &lt;&lt; nthSubstr(1, s, p) &lt;&lt; '\n';
   cout &lt;&lt; nthSubstr(2, s, p) &lt;&lt; '\n';
   cout &lt;&lt; nthSubstr(5, s, p) &lt;&lt; '\n';
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EPSBG">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">There are a couple of improvements you can make to
<tt>nthSubstr</tt> as it is presented in Example 4-17.
First, you can make it generic by making it a function template
instead of an ordinary function. Second, you can add a parameter to
account for substrings that may or may not overlap with themselves.
By "overlap," I mean that the
beginning of the string matches part of the end of the same string,
as in the word "abracadabra," where
the last four characters are the same as the first four. Example 4-18
demonstrates this.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ECTBG">Example 4-18. An improved version of nthSubstr</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;iostream&gt;

using namespace std;

template&lt;typename T&gt;
int nthSubstrg(int n, const basic_string&lt;T&gt;&amp; s,
               const basic_string&lt;T&gt;&amp; p,
               bool repeats = false) {
   string::size_type i = s.find(p);
   string::size_type adv = (repeats) ? 1 : p.length( );

   int j;
   for (j = 1; j &lt; n &amp;&amp; i != basic_string&lt;T&gt;::npos; ++j)
      i = s.find(p, i+adv);

   if (j == n)
     return(i);
   else
     return(-1);
}

int main( ) {
   string s = "AGATGCCATATATATACGATATCCTTA";
   string p = "ATAT";

   cout &lt;&lt; p &lt;&lt; " as non-repeating occurs at "
        &lt;&lt; nthSubstrg(3, s, p) &lt;&lt; '\n';
   cout &lt;&lt; p &lt;&lt; " as repeating occurs at "
        &lt;&lt; nthSubstrg(3, s, p, true) &lt;&lt; '\n';
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The output for the strings in Example 4-18 is as follows:</p>
<pre>ATAT as non-repeating occurs at 18
ATAT as repeating occurs at 11</pre><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EUTBG">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 4.9</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
