<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 4.11. Removing a Substring from a String</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 4.11. Removing a Substring from a String</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ECRBG">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You want to remove a substring
from a

string.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E2RBG">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use the <tt>find</tt>, <tt>erase</tt>, and
<tt>length</tt> member functions of
<tt>basic_string</tt>:</p>
<pre>std::string t = "Banana Republic";
std::string s = "nana";

std::string::size_type i = t.find(s);

if (i != std::string::npos)
   t.erase(i, s.length( ));</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This will erase <tt>s.length( )</tt> elements starting at
the index where <tt>find</tt> found the first occurrence of
the substring.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EVSBG">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">There are lots of variations on the theme of finding a substring and
removing it. For example, you may want to remove all instances of a
substring instead of just one. Or just the last one. Or the seventh
one. Each time the steps are the same: find the index of the
beginning of the pattern you want to remove, then call
<tt>erase</tt> on that index for the next
<span class="docEmphasis">n</span> characters, where <span class="docEmphasis">n</span> is
the length of the pattern string. See Recipe 4.9 for the different member functions for finding
things in strings.</p>
<p class="docText">Chances are you also want to make your substring-removal function
generic, so you can use it on strings of any kind of character.
Example 4-19 offers a generic version that removes all instances of
the pattern from a string.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EQTBG">Example 4-19. Remove all substrings from a string (generic version)</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;iostream&gt;

using namespace std;

template&lt;typename T&gt;
void removeSubstrs(basic_string&lt;T&gt;&amp; s,
                   const basic_string&lt;T&gt;&amp; p) {
   basic_string&lt;T&gt;::size_type n = p.length( );

   for (basic_string&lt;T&gt;::size_type i = s.find(p);
        i != basic_string&lt;T&gt;::npos;
        i = s.find(p))
      s.erase(i, n);
}

int main( ) {
   string s = "One fish, two fish, red fish, blue fish";
   string p = "fish";

   removeSubstrs(s, p);

   cout &lt;&lt; s &lt;&lt; '\n';
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>basic_string</tt> member function
<tt>erase</tt> is what does the important work here. In
<tt>&lt;string&gt;</tt>, it is overloaded three times. The
version I used in Example 4-19 accepts the index to begin erasing at
and the number of characters to erase. Another version accepts
starting and ending iterator arguments, and there is a version that
takes a single iterator and erases the element at that location. To
ensure optimal performance, prefer the first two when you plan to
delete multiple contiguous elements instead of repeatedly calling
<tt>s.erase(iter)</tt> for each element you want to erase.
In other words, use member functions that operate on ranges instead
of single elements—especially for those member functions that
modify the contents of the string (or sequence). By doing so, you
will avoid the extra function calls to <tt>erase</tt> for
each element in the sequence, and you will permit the
<tt>string</tt> implementation to more
intelligently manage its data.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
