<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 4.12. Converting a String to Lower- or Uppercase</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 4.12. Converting a String to Lower- or Uppercase</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E2RBG">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have a string that you want


 to convert to lower- or uppercase.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E3SBG">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use the <tt>toupper</tt>



and <tt>tolower</tt> functions in the
<tt>&lt;cctype&gt;</tt> header 
to convert characters to upper- or
lowercase. Example 4-20 shows how to do it using these functions. See
the discussion for an alternative.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EJUBG">Example 4-20. Converting a string's case</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;cctype&gt;
#include &lt;cwctype&gt;
#include &lt;stdexcept&gt;

using namespace std;

void toUpper(basic_string&lt;char&gt;&amp; s) {
   for (basic_string&lt;char&gt;::iterator p = s.begin( );
        p != s.end( ); ++p) {
      *p = toupper(*p); // toupper is for char
   }
}

void toUpper(basic_string&lt;wchar_t&gt;&amp; s) {
   for (basic_string&lt;wchar_t&gt;::iterator p = s.begin( );
        p != s.end( ); ++p) {
      *p = towupper(*p); // towupper is for wchar_t
   }
}

void toLower(basic_string&lt;char&gt;&amp; s) {
   for (basic_string&lt;char&gt;::iterator p = s.begin( );
        p != s.end( ); ++p) {
      *p = tolower(*p);
   }
}

void toLower(basic_string&lt;wchar_t&gt;&amp; s) {
   for (basic_string&lt;wchar_t&gt;::iterator p = s.begin( );
        p != s.end( ); ++p) {
      *p = towlower(*p);
   }
}

int main( ) {

   string s = "shazam";
   wstring ws = L"wham";

   toUpper(s);
   toUpper(ws);

   cout &lt;&lt; "s =  " &lt;&lt; s &lt;&lt; endl;
   wcout &lt;&lt; "ws = " &lt;&lt; ws &lt;&lt; endl;

   toLower(s);
   toLower(ws);

   cout &lt;&lt; "s =  " &lt;&lt; s &lt;&lt; endl;
   wcout &lt;&lt; "ws = " &lt;&lt; ws &lt;&lt; endl;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">This produces the following output:</p>
<pre>s =  SHAZAM
ws = WHAM
s =  shazam
ws = wham</pre><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EWUBG">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">One would think that the standard string class has a member function
that converts the whole thing to upper- or lowercase, but, in fact,
it doesn't. If you want to convert a string of
characters to upper- or lowercase, you have to do it yourself, sort
of.</p>
<p class="docText">Not surprisingly, there is more than one way to convert a
string's case (and when I say
"string," I mean a sequence of
characters, either narrow or wide). The simplest way to do it is with
using one of the four-character conversion functions
<tt>toupper</tt>, <tt>towupper</tt>,
<tt>tolower</tt>, and <tt>towlower</tt>. The
first form of each of these is the narrow character version; the
second form (with the extra "w") is
its wide character equivalent.</p>
<p class="docText">Each of these functions converts the case of the character using the
current global locale's rules for case conversion.
Upper- and lowercase depend on the characters being used in the
current locale; some characters don't have an upper-
or lowercase version, in which case the functions listed above will
return the same character you pass in. See Chapter 13 for more information on locales. The C++
facilities for dealing with different locales are complicated, and I
cannot do them justice here.</p>
<p class="docText">Doing the actual character conversion is easy. Consider the
<tt>toUpper</tt> function in Example 4-20:</p>
<pre>void toUpper(basic_string&lt;char&gt;&amp; s) {
   for (basic_string&lt;char&gt;::iterator p = s.begin( );
        p != s.end( ); ++p) {
      *p = <b>toupper(*p)</b>;
   }
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The line in bold does the real work. The version for wide characters
is nearly identical:</p>
<pre>void toUpper(basic_string&lt;wchar_t&gt;&amp; s) {
   for (basic_string&lt;wchar_t&gt;::iterator p = s.begin( );
        p != s.end( ); ++p) {
      *p = <b>towupper(*p);</b>
   }
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">I overloaded <tt>toUpper</tt> for the different character
types because there is no fully generic <tt>toupper</tt>
function to convert a character's case (unless you
are using facets from the <tt>&lt;locale&gt;</tt> header,
which I discuss below). Two simple functions, as above, will get the
job done.</p>
<p class="docText">There is another way to do this though, and the motivating factor for
using this second approach would be your need to use explicit
locales. The following versions of <tt>toUpper</tt> and
<tt>toLower</tt> convert the case of a string, regardless
of its character type, as long as the named locale (which defaults to
the current locale) supports case conversion for that locale and
character type.</p>
<pre>template&lt;typename C&gt;
void toUpper2(basic_string&lt;C&gt;&amp; s, const locale&amp; loc = locale( )) {
   typename basic_string&lt;C&gt;::iterator p;
   for (p = s.begin( ); p != s.end( ); ++p) {
      *p = <b>use_facet&lt;ctype&lt;C&gt; &gt;(loc).toupper(*p)</b>;
   }
}

template&lt;typename C&gt;
void toLower2(basic_string&lt;C&gt;&amp; s, const locale&amp; loc = locale( )) {
   typename basic_string&lt;C&gt;::iterator p;
   for (p = s.begin( ); p != s.end( ); ++p) {
      *p = <b>use_facet&lt;ctype&lt;C&gt; &gt;(loc).tolower(*p)</b>;
   }
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The lines in bold do the real work. Functionally, they work the same
as the upper- and lowercase functions used in Example 4-20, except
that they use the internationalization facilities in the
<tt>&lt;locale&gt;</tt> header to do it. See Chapter 13 for a more thorough discussion of locales,
facets, and


 internationalization.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
