<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 4.13. Doing a Case-Insensitive String Comparison</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 4.13. Doing a Case-Insensitive String Comparison</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EMTBG">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have two strings, and 

you want to know if they are equal,
regardless of the case of the characters. For example,
"cat" is not equal to
"dog," but
"Cat," for your purposes, is equal
to "cat,"
"CAT," or
"caT."</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EIUBG">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Compare the strings using the <tt>equal</tt> standard
algorithm (defined in <tt>&lt;algorithm&gt;</tt>), and
supply your own comparison function that uses the
<tt>toupper</tt> function in
<tt>&lt;cctype&gt;</tt> (or <tt>towupper</tt> in
<tt>&lt;cwctype&gt;</tt> for wide characters) to compare
the uppercase versions of characters. Example 4-21 offers a generic
solution. It also demonstrates the use and flexibility of the STL;
see the discussion below for a full explanation.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EBVBG">Example 4-21. Case-insensitive string comparison</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">        

1   #include &lt;string&gt;
2   #include &lt;iostream&gt;
3   #include &lt;algorithm&gt;
4   #include &lt;cctype&gt;
5   #include &lt;cwctype&gt;
6    
7   using namespace std;
8
9   inline bool caseInsCharCompareN(char a, char b) {
10     return(toupper(a) == toupper(b));
11  }
12
13  inline bool caseInsCharCompareW(wchar_t a, wchar_t b) {
14     return(towupper(a) == towupper(b));
15  }
16
17  bool caseInsCompare(const string&amp; s1, const string&amp; s2) {
18     return((s1.size( ) == s2.size( )) &amp;&amp;
19            equal(s1.begin( ), s1.end( ), s2.begin( ), caseInsCharCompareN));
20  }
21
22  bool caseInsCompare(const wstring&amp; s1, const wstring&amp; s2) {
23     return((s1.size( ) == s2.size( )) &amp;&amp;
24            equal(s1.begin( ), s1.end( ), s2.begin( ), caseInsCharCompareW));
25  }
26
27  int main( ) {
28     string s1 = "In the BEGINNING...";
29     string s2 = "In the beginning...";
30     wstring ws1 = L"The END";
31     wstring ws2 = L"the endd";
32
33     if (caseInsCompare(s1, s2))
34        cout &lt;&lt; "Equal!\n";
35
36     if (caseInsCompare(ws1, ws2))
37        cout &lt;&lt; "Equal!\n";
38  }



					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EKVBG">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">The critical part of case-insensitive string comparison is the
equality test of each corresponding pair of characters, so
let's discuss that first. Since I am using the
<tt>equal</tt> standard algorithm in this approach but I
want it to use my special comparison criterion, I have to create a
standalone function to handle my special comparison.</p>
<p class="docText">Lines 9-15 of Example 4-21 define the functions that do the character
comparison,
<tt>caseInsCharCompareN</tt>

and
<tt>caseInsCharCompareW</tt>
.
These use <tt>toupper</tt> and <tt>towupper</tt>
to convert each character to uppercase and then return whether they
are equal.</p>
<p class="docText">Once I have my comparison functions complete, it's
time to use a standard algorithm to handle applying my comparison
functions to arbitrary sequences of characters. The
<tt>caseInsCompare</tt> functions defined in lines 17-25 do
just that using <tt>equal</tt>. There are two overloads,
one for each character type I care about. They both do the same
thing, but each instantiates the appropriate character comparison
function for its character type. For this example, I overloaded two
ordinary functions, but you can achieve the same effect with
templates. See the sidebar "Should I Use a
Template?" for a discussion.</p>
<p class="docText"><tt>equal</tt> compares two sequence ranges for equality.
There are two versions: one that uses <tt>operator==</tt>,
and another that uses whatever binary predicate (i.e., takes two
arguments and returns a <tt>bool</tt>) function object you
supply. In Example 4-21, <tt>caseInsCharCompareN</tt> and
<tt>W</tt> are the binary predicate functions.</p>
<p class="docText">But that's not all you have to do—you need to
compare the sizes, too. Consider equal's
declaration:</p>
<pre>template&lt;typename InputIterator1, typename InputIterator2,
         typename BinaryPredicate&gt;
bool equal(InputIterator1 first1, InputIterator1 last1,
           InputIterator2 first2, BinaryPredicate pred);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Let <span class="docEmphasis">n</span> be the distance between
<tt>first1</tt> and <tt>last1</tt>, or in other
words, the length of the first range. <tt>equal</tt>
returns true if the first <span class="docEmphasis">n</span> elements of both
sequences are equal. That means that if, given two sequences where
the first <span class="docEmphasis">n</span> elements are equal, and the second
sequence has more than <span class="docEmphasis">n</span> elements,
<tt>equal</tt> will return true. Include a size check in
your comparison to avoid this false positive.</p>
<p class="docText">You don't need to encapsulate this logic in a
function. Your code or your client's code can just
call the algorithm directly, but it's easier to
remember and cleaner to write this:</p>
<pre>if (caseInsCompare(s1, s2)) {
// they are equal, do something</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">than this:</p>
<pre class="preFixedWidth">if ((s1.size( ) == s2.size( )) &amp;&amp;
    std::equal(s1.begin( ), s1.end( ), s2.begin( ), caseInsCharCompare&lt;char&gt;)) {
// they are equal, do something

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText">whenever you want to do a case-insensitive 

string comparison.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
