<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 4.14. Doing a Case-Insensitive String Search</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 4.14. Doing a Case-Insensitive String Search</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ERUBG">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You want to find a

 substring in a string without regard
for case.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ENVBG">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use the standard algorithms <tt>transform</tt> and
<tt>search</tt>, defined in
<tt>&lt;algorithm&gt;</tt>, along with your own special
character comparison functions, similar to the approach presented in.
Example 4-22 shows how to do this.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EAWBG">Example 4-22. Case-insensitive string search</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;algorithm&gt;
#include &lt;iterator&gt;
#include &lt;cctype&gt;

using namespace std;

inline bool caseInsCharCompSingle(char a, char b) {
   return(toupper(a) == b);
}

string::const_iterator caseInsFind(string&amp; s, const string&amp; p) {
   string tmp;

   transform(p.begin( ), p.end( ),             // Make the pattern
             back_inserter(tmp),                 // upper-case
             toupper);

   return(search(s.begin( ), s.end( ),         // Return the iter- 
                 tmp.begin( ), tmp.end( ),     // ator returned by
                 caseInsCharCompSingle));        // search
}

int main( ) {
   string s = "row, row, row, your boat";
   string p = "YOUR";
   string::const_iterator it = caseInsFind(s, p);

   if (it != s.end( )) {
      cout &lt;&lt; "Found it!\n";
   }
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">By returning an iterator that refers to the element in the target
string where the pattern string starts, you ensure ease of
compatibility with other standard algorithms since most of them
accept iterator arguments.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ELWBG">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">Example 4-22 demonstrates the usual mode of operation when working
with standard algorithms. Create the functions that do the work, then
plug them into the most appropriate algorithms as function objects.
The <tt>charInsCharCompSingle</tt> function does the real
work here but, unlike Example 4-21, this character comparison
function only uppercases the <span class="docEmphasis">first</span> argument.
This is because a little later in <tt>caseInsFind</tt>, I
convert the pattern string to all uppercase before using it to search
to avoid having to uppercase each pattern character multiple times.</p>
<p class="docText">Once the comparison function is out of the way, use the
<tt>transform</tt> and <tt>search</tt> standard
algorithms to do two things. Use <tt>transform</tt> to
uppercase the entire pattern (but not the target string). After that,
use <tt>search</tt> with the comparison function to find
the location of the substring.</p>
<p class="docText">Remember that standard algorithms operate on
<span class="docEmphasis">sequences</span>, not just strings. They are general
algorithms that operate on, primarily but not exclusively, the
standard containers, but they make no assumptions about the contents
of the containers. All the standard algorithms care about is that you
supply a comparison function (or if not, they use the default
<tt>operator</tt>s) that somehow compares two elements and
returns a <tt>bool</tt> indicating whether the test is true
or false.</p>
<p class="docText">There is one thing I should point out that looks odd in Example 4-22.
You can see that <tt>caseInsCompare</tt> returns a
<tt>const_iterator</tt>, as in</p>
<pre>string::const_iterator caseInsFind(const string&amp; s,
                                   const string&amp; p)</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">What if you want to modify the element that the returned iterator
points to? This is a reasonable request. The reason it is
<tt>const</tt> is because the strings being passed into
<tt>caseInsFind</tt> are <tt>const</tt>, and
therefore you can't get a
non-<tt>const</tt> iterator to a <tt>const</tt>
string. If you want an iterator you can use to modify the string,
remove the <tt>const</tt> from the parameters and change
the function declaration to

 return a
<tt>string::iterator</tt> instead.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
