<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 4.15. Converting Between Tabs and Spaces in a Text File</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 4.15. Converting Between Tabs and Spaces in a Text File</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EWVBG">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have a text file that 




contains tabs or spaces, and you want
to convert from one to the other. For example, you may want to
replace all tabs with three spaces, or you may want to do just the
opposite and replace occurrences of some number of spaces with a
single tab.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EBXBG">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Regardless of whether you are replacing tabs with spaces or spaces
with tabs, use the <tt>ifstream</tt> and
<tt>ofstream</tt> classes in
<tt>&lt;fstream&gt;</tt>. In the first (simpler) case, read
data in with an input stream, one character at a time, examine it,
and if it's a tab, write some number of spaces to
the output stream. Example 4-23 demonstrates how to do this.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EUXBG">Example 4-23. Replacing tabs with spaces</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;fstream&gt;
#include &lt;cstdlib&gt;

using namespace std;

int main(int argc, char** argv) {

   if (argc &lt; 3)
      return(EXIT_FAILURE);

   ifstream in(argv[1]);
   ofstream out(argv[2]);

   if (!in || !out)
     return(EXIT_FAILURE);

   char c;
   while (in.get(c)) {
      if (c == '\t')
         out &lt;&lt; "   "; // 3 spaces
      else
         out &lt;&lt; c;
   }
   
   out.close( );

   if (out)
      return(EXIT_SUCCESS);
   else
      return(EXIT_FAILURE);
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">If, instead, you need to replace spaces with tabs, see Example 4-24.
It contains the function <tt>spacesToTabs</tt> that reads
from an input stream, one character at a time, looking for three
consecutive spaces. When it finds three in a row, it writes a tab to
the output stream. For all other characters, or for fewer than three
spaces, whatever is read from the input stream is written to the
output stream.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EGYBG">Example 4-24. Replacing spaces with tabs</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;istream&gt;
#include &lt;ostream&gt;
#include &lt;fstream&gt;
#include &lt;cstdlib&gt;

using namespace std;

void spacesToTabs(istream&amp; in, ostream&amp; out, int spaceLimit) {

   int consecSpaces = 0;
   char c;

   while (in.get(c)) {
      if (c != ' ') {
         if (consecSpaces &gt; 0) {
            for (int i = 0; i &lt; consecSpaces; i++) {
               out.put(' ');
            }
            consecSpaces = 0;
         }
         out.put(c);
      } else {
         if (++consecSpaces == spaceLimit) {
            out.put('\t');
            consecSpaces = 0;
         }
      }
   }
}

int main(int argc, char** argv) {

   if (argc &lt; 3)
      return(EXIT_FAILURE);

   ifstream in(argv[1]);
   ofstream out(argv[2]);

   if (!in || !out)
      return(EXIT_FAILURE);

   spacesToTabs(in, out, 3);

   out.close( );

   if (out)
      return(EXIT_SUCCESS);
   else
      return(EXIT_FAILURE);
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EPYBG">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">The mechanism for both of these solutions is the same; only the
algorithms differ. Read characters from an input stream using
<tt>get</tt>, and put them to an output stream with
<tt>put</tt>. Put your logic for doing the translation
between calls to these two functions.</p>
<p class="docText">You probably noticed in Example 4-24 that in <tt>main</tt>
I declared <tt>in</tt> and <tt>out</tt> to be of
types <tt>ifstream</tt> and <tt>ofstream</tt>,
respectively, and that the parameters to
<tt>spacesToTabs</tt> are actually
<tt>istream</tt> and <tt>ostream</tt>. I did this
to allow <tt>spacesToTabs</tt> to work on any kind of input
or output streams (well, not <span class="docEmphasis">any</span> kind of
stream—ones that inherit from <tt>basic_istream</tt>
or <tt>basic_ostream</tt>), and not just file streams. For
example, you may have the text you want to reformat in a string
stream (<tt>istringstream</tt> and
<tt>ostringstream</tt> in
<tt>&lt;sstream&gt;</tt>). In that case, do something like
this:</p>
<pre>istringstream istr;
ostringstream ostr;

// fill up istr with text...

spacesToTabs(istr, ostr);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">As with strings, streams are actually class templates that are
parameterized on the type of character the stream operates on. For
example, an <tt>ifstream</tt> is a
<tt>typedef</tt> for
<tt>basic_ifstream&lt;char&gt;</tt>, and a
<tt>wifstream</tt> is a <tt>typedef</tt> for
<tt>basic_ifstream&lt;wchar_t&gt;</tt>. Thus, if you need
<tt>spacesToTabs</tt> from Examples Example 4-23 or Example 4-24 to work on a
stream of any kind of character, you can use the class templates
instead of the <tt>typedefs</tt>:</p>
<pre>template&lt;typename T&gt;
void spacesToTabs(std::basic_istream&lt;T&gt;&amp; 




in,
                  std::basic_ostream&lt;T&gt;&amp; out,
                  int spaceLimit) { //...</pre><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
