<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 4.16. Wrapping Lines in a Text File</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 4.16. Wrapping Lines in a Text File</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EHXBG">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You want to "wrap" text at a


specific number of characters in a
file. For example, if you want to wrap text at 72 characters, you
would insert a new-line character after every 72 characters in the
file. If the file contains human-readable text, you probably want to
avoid splitting words.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E5XBG">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Write a function that uses input and output streams to read in
characters with <tt>istream::get(char)</tt>, do some
bookkeeping, and write out characters with
<tt>ostream::put(char)</tt>. Example 4-25 shows how to do
this for text files that contain human-readable text without
splitting words.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EPYBG">Example 4-25. Wrapping text</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;fstream&gt;
#include &lt;cstdlib&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;cctype&gt;
#include &lt;functional&gt;

using namespace std;

void textWrap(istream&amp; in, ostream&amp; out, size_t width) {

   string tmp;
   char cur = '\0';
   char last = '\0';
   size_t i = 0;

   while (in.get(cur)) {
      if (++i == width) {
         ltrimws(tmp);                  // ltrim as in Recipe
         out &lt;&lt; '\n' &lt;&lt; tmp;            // 4.1
         i = tmp.length( );
         tmp.clear( );
      } else if (isspace(cur) &amp;&amp;   // This is the end of
                 !isspace(last)) { // a word
         out &lt;&lt; tmp;
         tmp.clear( );
      }
      tmp += cur;
      last = cur;
   }
}

int main(int argc, char** argv) {
   if (argc &lt; 3)
      return(EXIT_FAILURE);

   int w = 72;
   ifstream in(argv[1]);
   ofstream out(argv[2]);

   if (!in || !out)
     return(EXIT_FAILURE);

   if (argc == 4)
     w = atoi(argv[3]);

   textWrap(in, out, w);

   out.close( );

   if (out)
      return(EXIT_SUCCESS);
   else
      return(EXIT_FAILURE);
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EYYBG">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText"><tt>textWrap</tt> reads characters, one at a time, from the
input stream. Each character is appended to a temporary string,
<tt>tmp</tt>, until it reaches the end of a word or the
maximum line width. If it reaches the end of a word but is not yet at
the maximum line width, the temporary string is written to the output
stream. Otherwise, if the maximum line width has been exceeded, a new
line is written to the output stream, the whitespace at the beginning
of the temporary string is removed, and the string is written to the
output stream. In this way, <tt>textWrap</tt> writes as
much as it can to the output stream without exceeding the maximum
line width. Instead of splitting a word, it bumps the word to the
next line.</p>
<p class="docText">Example 4-25 uses streams nearly identically to Recipe 4.15. See that recipe for more information on what
streams are and how to use them.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ERZBG">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 4.15</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
