<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 4.17. Counting the Number of Characters, Words, and Lines in a Text File</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 4.17. Counting the Number of Characters, Words, and Lines in a Text File</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EMYBG">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have to count the numbers 




of
characters, words, and lines—or some other type of text
element—in a text file.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EYZBG">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use an input stream to read the characters in, one at a time, and
increment local statistics as you encounter characters, words, and
line breaks. Example 4-26 contains the function
<tt>countStuff</tt>, which does exactly that.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EP1BG">Example 4-26. Calculating statistics
 about a text file</h5><p></p><div class="box">

<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;fstream&gt;
#include &lt;cstdlib&gt;
#include &lt;cctype&gt;

using namespace std;

void countStuff(istream&amp; in,
                int&amp; chars,
                int&amp; words,
                int&amp; lines) {

   char cur = '\0';
   char last = '\0';
   chars = words = lines = 0;

   while (in.get(cur)) {
      if (cur == '\n' ||
          (cur == '\f' &amp;&amp; last == '\r'))
         lines++;
      else
        chars++;
      if (!std::isalnum(cur) &amp;&amp;   // This is the end of a
          std::isalnum(last))     // word
         words++;
      last = cur;
   }
   if (chars &gt; 0) {               // Adjust word and line
      if (std::isalnum(last))     // counts for special
         words++;                 // case
      lines++;
   }
}

int main(int argc, char** argv) {

   if (argc &lt; 2)
      return(EXIT_FAILURE);

   ifstream in(argv[1]);

   if (!in)
      exit(EXIT_FAILURE);

   int c, w, l;

   countStuff(in, c, w, l);
1
   cout &lt;&lt; "chars: " &lt;&lt; c &lt;&lt; '\n';
   cout &lt;&lt; "words: " &lt;&lt; w &lt;&lt; '\n';
   cout &lt;&lt; "lines: " &lt;&lt; l &lt;&lt; '\n';
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EY1BG">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">The algorithm here is straightforward. Characters are easy: increment
the character count each time you call <tt>get</tt> on the
input stream. Lines are only slightly more difficult, since the way a
line ends depends on the operating system. Thankfully,
it's usually either a new-line character
(<tt>\n</tt>) or a carriage return line feed sequence
(<tt>\r\l</tt>). By keeping track of the current and last
characters, you can easily capture occurrences of this sequence.
Words are easy or hard, depending on your definition of a word.</p>
<p class="docText">For Example 4-26, I consider a word to be a contiguous sequence of
alphanumeric characters. As I look at each character in the input
stream, when I encounter a nonalphanumeric character, I look at the
previous character to see if it was alphanumeric. If it was, then a
word has just ended and I can increment the word count. I can tell if
a character is alphanumeric by using <tt>isalnum</tt> from
<tt>&lt;cctype&gt;</tt>. But that's not
all—you can test characters for a number of different qualities
with similar functions. See Table 4-3 for the functions you can use
to test character qualities. For wide characters, use the functions
of the same name but with a "w"
after the "is," e.g.,
<tt>iswspace</tt>. The wide-character versions are declared
in the header <tt>&lt;cwctype&gt;</tt>.</p>
<p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 4-3. Character test functions from &lt;cctype&gt; and &lt;cwctype&gt;</h5></caption><colgroup span="2"><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Function
								</th><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Description
								</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>isalpha<br/>iswalpha</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Alpha characters: a-z, A-Z (upper- or lowercase).
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>isupper<br/>iswupper</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Alpha characters in uppercase only: A-Z.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>islower<br/>iswlower</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Alpha characters in lowercase only: a-z.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>isdigit<br/>iswdigit</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Numeric characters: 0-9.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>isxdigit<br/>iswxdigit</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Hexadecimal numeric characters: 0-9, a-f, A-F.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>isspace<br/>iswspace</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Whitespace characters: ' `, \n, \t,
\v, \r, \l.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>iscntrl<br/>iswcntrl</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Control characters: ASCII 0-31 and 127.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>ispunct<br/>iswpunct</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Punctuation characters that don't belong to the
previous groups.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>isalnum<br/>iswalnum</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>isalpha</tt> or <tt>isdigit</tt> is true.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>isprint<br/>iswprint</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Printable ASCII characters.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>isgraph<br/>iswgraph</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>isalpha</tt> or <tt>isdigit</tt> or
<tt>ispunct</tt> is true.
								</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">After all characters have been read in and the end of the stream has
been reached, there is a bit of adjustment to do. First, the loop
only counts line breaks, and not, strictly speaking, lines.
Therefore, it will always be one less than the actual number of
lines. To make this problem go away I just increment the line count
by one if there are more than zero characters in the file. Second, if
the stream ends with an alphanumeric character, the test for the end
of the last word will never occur because I can't
test the next character. To account for this, I check if the last
character in the stream is alphanumeric (also only when there are
more than zero characters in the file) and increment the word count
by one.</p>
<p class="docText">The technique in Example 4-26 of using streams is nearly identical to
that described in Recipe 4.14 and Recipe 4.15, but simpler since 


it's just inspecting
the file and not making any changes.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EJEAI">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 4.14 and Recipe 4.15</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
