<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 4.18. Counting Instances of Each Word in a Text File</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 4.18. Counting Instances of Each Word in a Text File</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E4ZBG">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You want to count the number of 
occurrences of each word in a text
file.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ES1BG">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use <tt>operator&gt;&gt;</tt>, defined in
<tt>&lt;string&gt;</tt>, to read contiguous chunks of text
from the input file, and use a <tt>map</tt>, defined in
<tt>&lt;map&gt;</tt>, to store each word and its frequency
in the file. Example 4-27 demonstrates how to do this.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EK2BG">Example 4-27. Counting word frequencies</h5><p></p><div class="box">

<pre class="preFixedHeight">        

1   #include &lt;iostream&gt;
2   #include &lt;fstream&gt;
3   #include &lt;map&gt;
4   #include &lt;string&gt;
5
6   typedef std::map&lt;std::string, int&gt; StrIntMap;
7
8   void countWords(std::istream&amp; in, StrIntMap&amp; words) {
9
10     std::string s;
11
12     while (in &gt;&gt; s) {
13        ++words[s];
14     }
15  }       
16
17  int main(int argc, char** argv) {
18
19     if (argc &lt; 2)
20        return(EXIT_FAILURE);
21
22     std::ifstream in(argv[1]);
23
24     if (!in)
25        exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
26
27     StrIntMap w;
28     countWords(in, w);
29
30     for (StrIntMap::iterator p = w.begin( );
31          p != w.end( ); ++p) {
32        std::cout &lt;&lt; p-&gt;first &lt;&lt; " occurred "
33                  &lt;&lt; p-&gt;second &lt;&lt; " times.\n";
34     }
35  }



					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ET2BG">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">Example 4-27 looks simple enough, but there is more going on than it
appears. Most of the subtleties have to do with
<tt>map</tt>s, so let's talk about them
first.</p>
<p class="docText">If you're not familiar with <tt>map</tt>s,
you should be. A <tt>map</tt> is a container class template
that is part of the STL. It stores key-value pairs in order according
to <tt>std::less</tt>, or your custom comparison function,
should you supply one. The kinds of keys and values you can store in
it depend only on your imagination; in this example, we are just
going to store <tt>string</tt>s and
<tt>int</tt>s.</p>
<p class="docText">I used a <tt>typedef</tt> on line 6 to make the code
cleaner:</p>
<pre>typedef map&lt;string, int&gt; StrIntMap;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Thus, a <tt>StrIntMap</tt> is a <tt>map</tt> that
stores <tt>string</tt>/<tt>int</tt> pairs. Each
<tt>string</tt> is a unique word—which is why
I'm using it as the key—that has been read in
and its associated <tt>int</tt> is the number of times it
occurs. All that's left is to read in each of the
words one-at-a-time, add it to the <tt>map</tt> if
it's not already there, and increment its associated
count value if it is.</p>
<p class="docText">This is what <tt>countWords</tt> does. The essential logic
is brief:</p>
<pre>while (in &gt;&gt; s) {
   ++words[s];
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText"><tt>operator&gt;&gt;</tt> reads in contiguous chunks of
non-whitespace from its lefthand side operand (an
<tt>istream</tt>) and places them in the righthand side
operand (a <tt>string</tt>). Once I've
read a "word," all I have to do is
update the statistics in the map, and that is done with the following
line:</p>
<pre>++words[s];</pre><br/>
<p class="docText"><tt>map</tt> defines <tt>operator[]</tt> for
retrieving a value given a key (it actually returns a reference to
the value itself), so to increment it, just increment the value
indexed at the particular key. But something about this might seem a
little weird. What if the key isn't already in the
map? Don't we try to increment a nonexistent index,
and crash like we would with an array? No, <tt>map</tt>
does <tt>operator[]</tt> differently than other STL
containers or ordinary, C-style arrays.</p>
<p class="docText">In a <tt>map</tt>, <tt>operator[]</tt> does two
things: if the key does not already exist, it creates a value by
using that value's type's default
constructor and adds that key/value pair to the map, if the key
already exists in the map, no modification is made. In both cases, a
reference to the value for the specified key is returned, even if
that value was just created with its default constructor. This is a
handy feature (if you know it's there), because it
eliminates the need for client code to check for a
key's existence before inserting it.</p>
<p class="docText">Now, look at lines 32 and 33. The iterator refers to members called
<tt>first</tt> and <tt>second--</tt>what are
those? <tt>map</tt>s play a trick on you by using another
class template to store your name value pairs: the
<tt>pair</tt> class template defined in
<tt>&lt;utility&gt;</tt> (included by
<tt>&lt;map&gt;</tt> already). If you are iterating through
the items stored in a map, you will be pointing to
<tt>pair</tt> objects. Working with
<tt>pair</tt>s is simple, the first item in a pair is
stored in the <tt>first</tt><a name="second is"></a> member, and the second is
stored in, well, <tt>second</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">I used <tt>operator&gt;&gt;</tt> in Example 4-27 to read in
contiguous chunks of text from the input stream, which is different
than some of the other examples. I did this to demonstrate that it
can be done, but you will almost certainly need to customize the
behavior based on your definition of a
"word" in a text file. For example,
consider an excerpt of the output produced by Example 4-27:</p>
<pre>with occurred 5 times.
work occurred 3 times.
workers occurred 3 times.
workers. occurred 1 times.
years occurred 2 times.
years. occurred 1 times.</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Notice that the periods on the end of words are included as part of
each word. Most likely, you will want to change the definition of
words to mean only alpha or alphanumeric characters, as I did in
Recipe



Recipe 4.17 by using some of the character-testing
functions in <tt>&lt;cctype&gt;</tt> and
<tt>&lt;cwctype&gt;</tt>.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EPAAI">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 4.17 and Table 4-3</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
