<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 4.19. Add Margins to a Text File</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 4.19. Add Margins to a Text File</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EC2BG">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">Given a text file, you want to 

add margins to it. In other words, you
want to pad either side of each line with some character so that each
line is the same width.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E32BG">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Example 4-28 shows how to add margins to a file using streams,
<tt>string</tt>s, and the <tt>getline</tt>
function template.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EM3BG">Example 4-28. Adding margins to a text file</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;fstream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;cstdlib&gt;

using namespace std;
const static char PAD_CHAR = '.';

// addMargins takes two streams and two numbers. The streams are for
// input and output. The first of the two numbers represents the
// left margin width (i.e., the number of spaces to insert at the 
// beginning of every line in the file). The second number represents
// the total line width to pad to.
void addMargins(istream&amp; in, ostream&amp; out,
                int left, int right) {

   string tmp;

   while (!in.eof( )) {
      getline(in, tmp, '\n');                     // getline is defined
                                                  // in &lt;string&gt;
      tmp.insert(tmp.begin( ), left, PAD_CHAR);
      rpad(tmp, right, PAD_CHAR);                 // rpad from Recipe
                                                  // 4.2
      out &lt;&lt; tmp &lt;&lt; '\n';
   }
}

int main(int argc, char** argv) {

   if (argc &lt; 3)
      return(EXIT_FAILURE);

   ifstream in(argv[1]);
   ofstream out(argv[2]);

   if (!in || !out)
      return(EXIT_FAILURE);

   int left = 8;
   int right = 72;

   if (argc == 5) {
      left = atoi(argv[3]);
      right = atoi(argv[4]);
   }

   addMargins(in, out, left, right);

   out.close( );

   if (out)
      return(EXIT_SUCCESS);
   else
      return(EXIT_FAILURE);
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">This example makes a few assumptions about the format of the incoming
text, so be sure to read the next section for details.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EX3BG">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText"><tt>addMargins</tt> assumes your input looks something like
this:</p>
<pre>The data is still inconclusive. But the weakness
in job creation and the apparent weakness in
high-paying jobs may be opposite sides of a coin.
Companies still seem cautious, relying on
temporary workers and anxious about rising health
care costs associated with full-time workers.</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This text is wrapped at 50 characters (see Recipe 4.16), and is left justified (see Recipe 4.20). <tt>addMargins</tt> also assumes
you want your output to look something like the following, which uses
periods instead of spaces to show where the padding has been done:</p>
<pre>........The data is still inconclusive. But the weakness................
........in job creation and the apparent weakness in....................
........high-paying jobs may be opposite sides of a coin................
........Companies still seem cautious, relying on.......................
........temporary workers and anxious about rising health...............
........care costs associated with full-time workers....................</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">By default, the left margin is eight characters and the total line
length is 72. Of course, if you know your input text will always be
left and right justified, you can simply pad each end of each line
with as many characters as you see fit. Either way, the logic is
straightforward. Many of the techniques used in this recipe have been
covered already (streams, padding a <tt>string</tt>), so I
won't discuss them here. The one function that has
not yet appeared is <tt>getline</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">If you want to read in text a line at a time, or to be more precise,
you want to read in text up to a particular delimiter, use the
<tt>getline</tt> function template defined in
<tt>&lt;string&gt;</tt>, as I did in Example 4-28:</p>
<pre>getline(in, tmp, '\n');</pre><br/>
<p class="docText"><tt>getline</tt> reads characters from the input stream and
appends them to <tt>tmp</tt> until the delimiter
'<tt>\n</tt>' is reached, which is not appended to
<tt>tmp</tt>. <tt>basic_istream</tt> has a member
function by the same name, but it behaves differently. It stores its
output in a character buffer, not a <tt>string</tt>. In
this case, I want to take advantage of string member functions, and
don't want to have to read a line into a character
buffer redundantly and then copy that into a string, so I used the
string version 

of <tt>getline</tt>.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EH6BG">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 4.16 and Recipe 4.20</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
