<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 4.21. Squeeze Whitespace to Single Spaces in a Text File</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 4.21. Squeeze Whitespace to Single Spaces in a Text File</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EY4BG">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have a text file with




whitespace of varying lengths in
it, and you want to reduce every occurrence of a contiguous span of
whitespace characters to a single space.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E15BG">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use the <tt>operator&gt;&gt;</tt> function template,
defined in <tt>&lt;string&gt;</tt>, to read in continuous
chunks of non-whitespace from a stream into a string. Then use its
counterpart, <tt>operator&lt;&lt;</tt>, to write each of
these chunks to an output stream, and append a single character after
each one. Example 4-30 gives a short example of this technique.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EN6BG">Example 4-30. Squeezing whitespace to single spaces</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;fstream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;

using namespace std;

int main(int argc, char** argv) {

   if (argc &lt; 3)
      return(EXIT_FAILURE);

   ifstream in(argv[1]);
   ofstream out(argv[2]);

   if (!in || !out)
      return(EXIT_FAILURE);

   string tmp;

   in &gt;&gt; tmp;          // Grab the first word
   out &lt;&lt; tmp;         // Dump it to the output stream

   while (in &gt;&gt; tmp) { // operator&gt;&gt; ignores whitespace, so all I have
      out &lt;&lt; ' ';      // to do is add a space and each chunk of non-
      out &lt;&lt; tmp;      // whitespace
   }

   out.close( );
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EW6BG">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">This is a simple thing to do if you take advantage of streams and
strings. Even if you have to implement a variation of this—for
example, you may want to preserve new lines—the same facilities
do the trick. If you want to add new lines, you can use the solution
presented in Recipe 4.16 to insert them in
the right place.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EFAAI">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 4.15 and Recipe 4.16</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
