<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 4.22. Autocorrect Text as a Buffer Changes</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 4.22. Autocorrect Text as a Buffer Changes</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ER5BG">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have a class that 

represents some kind of text
field or document, and as text is appended to it, you want to correct
automatically misspelled words the way Microsoft
Word's Autocorrect feature does.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EL6BG">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Using a <tt>map</tt>, defined in
<tt>&lt;map&gt;</tt>, <tt>string</tt>s, and a
variety of standard library features, you can implement this with
relatively little code. Example 4-31 shows how to do it.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E56BG">Example 4-31. Autocorrect text</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;cctype&gt;
#include &lt;map&gt;

using namespace std;

typedef map&lt;string, string&gt; StrStrMap;

// Class for holding text fields
class TextAutoField {

public:
   TextAutoField(StrStrMap* const p) : pDict_(p) {}
  ~TextAutoField( ) {}

   void append(char c);
   void getText(string&amp; s) {s = buf_;}

private:
   TextAutoField( );
   string buf_;
   StrStrMap* const pDict_;
};

// Append with autocorrect
void TextAutoField::append(char c) {

   if ((isspace(c) || ispunct(c)) &amp;&amp;         // Only do the auto-
       buf_.length( ) &gt; 0 &amp;&amp;                  // correct when ws or
       !isspace(buf_[buf_.length( ) - 1])) {  // punct is entered

      string::size_type i = buf_.find_last_of(" \f\n\r\t\v");

      i = (i == string::npos) ? 0 : ++i;

      string tmp = buf_.substr(i, buf_.length( ) - i);
      StrStrMap::const_iterator p = pDict_-&gt;find(tmp);

      if (p != pDict_-&gt;end( )) {                   // Found it, so erase
         buf_.erase(i, buf_.length( ) - i);        // and replace
         buf_ += p-&gt;second;
      }
   }
   buf_ += c;
}

int main( ) {

   // Set up the map
   StrStrMap dict;
   TextAutoField txt(&amp;dict);

   dict["taht"] = "that";
   dict["right"] = "wrong";
   dict["bug"] = "feature";

   string tmp = "He's right, taht's a bug.";
   cout &lt;&lt; "Original: " &lt;&lt; tmp &lt;&lt; '\n';
   for (string::iterator p = tmp.begin( );
        p != tmp.end( ); ++p) {
      txt.append(*p);
   }

   txt.getText(tmp);

   cout &lt;&lt; "Corrected version is: " &lt;&lt; tmp &lt;&lt; '\n';
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The output of Example 4-31 is:</p>
<pre>Original: He's right, taht's a bug.
Corrected version is: He's wrong, that's a feature.</pre><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ERAAI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText"><tt>string</tt>s and <tt>map</tt>s are handy for
situations when you have to keep track of <tt>string</tt>
associations. <tt>TextAutoField</tt> is a simple text
buffer that uses a string to hold its data. What makes
<tt>TextAutoField</tt>
interesting is its <tt>append</tt> method, which
"listens" for whitespace or
punctuation, and does some processing when either one occurs.</p>
<p class="docText">To make this autocorrect behavior a reality, you need two things.
First, you need a dictionary of sorts that contains the common
misspelling of a word and the associated correct spelling. A
<tt>map</tt> stores key-value pairs, where the key and
value can be of any types, so it's an ideal
candidate. At the top of Example 4-31, there is a
<tt>typedef</tt> for a map of <tt>string</tt>
pairs:</p>
<pre>typedef map&lt;string, string&gt; StrStrMap;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">See Recipe 4.18 for a more detailed
explanation of <tt>map</tt>s.
<tt>TextAutoField</tt> stores a pointer to the
<tt>map</tt>, because most likely you would want a single
dictionary for use by all fields.</p>
<p class="docText">Assuming client code puts something meaningful in the
<tt>map</tt>, <tt>append</tt> just has to
periodically do lookups in the <tt>map</tt>. In Example
4-31, <tt>append</tt> waits for whitespace or punctuation
to do its magic. You can test a character for whitespace with
<tt>isspace</tt>, or for punctuation by using
<tt>ispunct</tt>, both of which are defined in
<tt>&lt;cctype&gt;</tt> for narrow characters (take a look
at Table 4-3).</p>
<p class="docText">The code that does a lookup requires some explanation if you are not
familiar with using iterators and find methods on STL containers. The
<tt>string</tt>
<tt>tmp</tt> contains the last
chunk of text that was appended to the
<tt>TextAutoField</tt>. To see if it is a commonly
misspelled work, look it up in the dictionary like this:</p>
<pre>StrStrMap::iterator p = pDict_-&gt;find(tmp);

if (p != pDict_-&gt;end( )) {</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The important point here is that <tt>map::find</tt> returns
an iterator that points to the pair containing the matching key, if
it was found. If not, an iterator pointing to one past the end of the
map is returned, which is exactly what <tt>map::end</tt>
returns (this is how all STL containers that support
<tt>find</tt> work). If the word was found in the
<tt>map</tt>, erase the old word from the buffer and
replace it with the correct version:</p>
<pre>buf_.erase(i, buf_.length( ) - i);
buf_ += p-&gt;second;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Append the character that started the process (either whitespace or
punctuation) and you're 

done.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EFEAI">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 4.17, Recipe 4.18,
and Table 4-3</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
