<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 4.23. Reading a Comma-Separated Text File</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 4.23. Reading a Comma-Separated Text File</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EDAAI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You want to read in 

a text file that is delimited by commas
and new lines (or any other pair of delimiters for that matter).
Records are delimited by one character, and fields within a record
are delimited by another. For example, a comma-separated text file of
employee information may look like the following:</p>
<pre>Smith, Bill, 5/1/2002, Active
Stanford, John, 4/5/1999, Inactive</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Such files are usually interim storage for data sets exported from
spreadsheets, databases, or other file formats.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EBBAI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">See Example 4-32 for how to do this. If you read the text into
<tt>string</tt>s one contiguous chunk at a time using
<tt>getline</tt> (the function template defined in
<tt>&lt;string&gt;</tt>) you can use the
<tt>split</tt> function I presented in Recipe 4.6 to parse the text and put it in a data
structure, in this case, a <tt>vector</tt>.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E4BAI">Example 4-32. Reading in a delimited file</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;fstream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;vector&gt;

using namespace std;

void split(const string&amp; s, char c,
           vector&lt;string&gt;&amp; v) {
   int i = 0;
   int j = s.find(c);

   while (j &gt;= 0) {
      v.push_back(s.substr(i, j-i));
      i = ++j;
      j = s.find(c, j);

      if (j &lt; 0) {
         v.push_back(s.substr(i, s.length( )));
      }
   }
}

void loadCSV(istream&amp; in, vector&lt;vector&lt;string&gt;*&gt;&amp; data) {

   vector&lt;string&gt;* p = NULL;
   string tmp;

   while (!in.eof( )) {
      getline(in, tmp, '\n');                     // Grab the next line

      p = new vector&lt;string&gt;( );
      split(tmp, ',', *p);                        // Use split from
                                                  // Recipe 4.7
      data.push_back(p);

      cout &lt;&lt; tmp &lt;&lt; '\n';
      tmp.clear( );
   }
}

int main(int argc, char** argv) {

   if (argc &lt; 2)
      return(EXIT_FAILURE);

   ifstream in(argv[1]);

   if (!in)
      return(EXIT_FAILURE);

   vector&lt;vector&lt;string&gt;*&gt; data;

   loadCSV(in, data);

   // Go do something useful with the data...

   for (vector&lt;vector&lt;string&gt;*&gt;::iterator p = data.begin( );
        p != data.end( ); ++p) {
      delete *p;                                  // Be sure to de-
   }                                              // reference p!
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EMCAI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">There isn't much in Example 4-32
that hasn't been covered already. I discussed
<tt>getline</tt> in Recipe 4.19 and
<tt>vector</tt>s in Recipe 4.3.
The only piece worth mentioning has to do with memory allocation.</p>
<p class="docText"><tt>loadCSV</tt> creates a new <tt>vector</tt>
for each line of data it reads in and stores it in yet another
<tt>vector</tt> of pointers to <tt>vector</tt>s.
Since the memory for each of these <tt>vector</tt>s is
allocated on the heap, somebody has to de-allocate it, and that
somebody is you (and not the <tt>vector</tt>
implementation).</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>vector</tt> has no knowledge of whether it contains
a value or a pointer to a value, or anything else. All it knows is
that when it's destroyed, it needs to call the
destructor for each element it contains. If the
<tt>vector</tt> stores objects, then this is fine; the
object is properly destroyed. But if the <tt>vector</tt>
contains pointers, the pointer is destroyed, but not the object it
points to.</p>
<p class="docText">There are two ways to ensure the memory is freed. First, you can do
what I did in Example 4-32 and do it manually yourself, like this:</p>
<pre>for (vector&lt;vector&lt;string&gt;*&gt;::iterator p = data.begin( );
     p != data.end( ); ++p) {
   delete *p;
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Or you can use a reference-counted pointer, such as the Boost
project's <tt>smart_ptr</tt>, which will
be part of the forthcoming C++0x standard. But doing so is
nontrivial, so I recommend reading up on what a
<tt>smart_ptr</tt> is and how it works. For more
information on Boost in general, see the homepage at 

www.boost.org.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
