<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 4.24. Using Regular Expressions to Split a String</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 4.24. Using Regular Expressions to Split a String</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EIBAI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You want to split a string into
tokens,


 but you require more
sophisticated searching or flexibility than Recipe 4.7 provides. For example, you may want tokens
that are more than one character or can take on many different forms.
This often results in code, and causes confusion in consumers of your
class or function.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EJCAI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use Boost's <tt>regex</tt> class template.
<tt>regex</tt> enables the use of regular expressions on
string and text data. Example 4-33 shows how to use
<tt>regex</tt> to split strings.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E3CAI">Example 4-33. Using Boost's regular expressions</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;boost/regex.hpp&gt;

int main( ) {

   std::string s = "who,lives:in-a,pineapple    under the sea?";

   boost::regex re(",|:|-|\\s+");        // Create the reg exp
   boost::sregex_token_iterator         // Create an iterator using a
     p(s.begin( ), s.end( ), re, -1);  // sequence and that reg exp
   boost::sregex_token_iterator end;    // Create an end-of-reg-exp
                                        // marker
   while (p != end)
      std::cout &lt;&lt; *p++ &lt;&lt; '\n';
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EFDAI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">Example 4-33 shows how to use
<tt>regex</tt> to iterate over matches in a regular
expression. The following line sets up the regular expression:</p>
<pre>boost::regex re(",|:|-|\\s+");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">What it says, essentially, is that each match of the regular
expression is either a comma, or a colon, or a dash, or one or more
spaces. The pipe character is the logical operator that ORs each of
the delimiters together. The next two lines set up the iterator:</p>
<pre>boost::sregex_token_iterator
   p(s.begin( ), s.end( ), re, -1);
boost::sregex_token_iterator end;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The iterator <tt>p</tt> is constructed using the regular
expression and an input string. Once that has been built, you can
treat p like you would an iterator on a standard library sequence. A
<tt>sregex_token_iterator</tt> constructed with no
arguments is a special value that represents the end of a regular
expression token sequence, and can therefore be used in a comparison
to know when you hit the end.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
