<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Introduction</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Introduction</h3>
<p class="docText">Dates and times are surprisingly vast and complex topics. As a
reflection of this fact, the C++ standard library does not provide a
proper date type. C++ inherits the structs and functions for date and
time manipulation from C, along with a couple of date/time input and
output functions that take into account localization. You can find
relief, however, in the Boost date_time Library by Jeff Garland,
which is possibly the most comprehensive and extensible date and time
library for C++ available. I will be using it in several of the
recipes. There is an expectation among the C++ community that future
date/time extensions to the standard library will be based on the
Boost date_time library.</p>
<p class="docText">The Boost date_time library includes two separate systems for
manipulating dates and times: one for manipulating times and one for
manipulating dates using a Gregorian calendar. The recipes will cover
both systems.</p>
<p class="docText">For more information on dates and times, specifically reading and
writing them, please see Chapter 13.</p>
<p></p><div class="box">
<h2 class="docSidebarTitle">Gregorian Calendar and Leap Years</h2>
<p class="docText">The 
Gregorian
calendar is the most widely used calendar in the Western world today.
The Gregorian calendar was intended to fix a flaw in the

Julian
calendar. The slow process of adoption of the Gregorian calendar
started in 1582.</p>
<p class="docText">The Julian calendar dictates that every fourth year is a leap year,
but every hundredth year is a non-leap year. The Gregorian calendar
introduced a new exception that every 400 years should be a leap
year.</p>
<p class="docText">Leap years are
designed to compensate for the Earth's rotation
around the sun being out of synchronization with the length of the
day. In other words, dividing the length of a solar year, by the
length of a day is an irrational number. The result is that if the
calendar is not adjusted we would have seasonal drift, where the
equinoxes and solstices (which determine the seasons) would become
further out of synchronization with each new year.</p>
</div><p></p><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
