<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 5.1. Obtaining the Current Date and Time</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 5.1. Obtaining the Current Date and Time</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EEDAI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You want to retrieve the


 current date and time from the
user's computer, either as a local time or as a

Coordinated Universal Time
(UTC).</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EMEAI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Call the <tt>time</tt> function from the
<tt>&lt;ctime&gt;</tt> header, passing a value of
<tt>0</tt> as the parameter. The result will be a
<tt>time_t</tt> value. You can use the
<tt>gmtime</tt> function to convert the
<tt>time_t</tt> value to a <tt>tm</tt> structure
representing the current UTC time (a.k.a. Greenwich Mean Time or
GMT); or, you can use the <tt>localtime</tt> function to
convert the <tt>time_t</tt> value to a
<tt>tm</tt> structure representing the local time. The
program in Example 5-1 obtains the current
date/time, and then converts it to local time and outputs it. Next,
the program converts the current date/time to a UTC date/time and
outputs that.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ENFAI">Example 5-1. Getting the local and UTC times</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;ctime&gt;
#include &lt;cstdlib&gt;

using namespace std;

int main( )
{
  // Current date/time based on current system
  time_t now = time(0);
   
  // Convert now to tm struct for local timezone
  tm* localtm = localtime(&amp;now);
  cout &lt;&lt; "The local date and time is: " &lt;&lt; asctime(localtm) &lt;&lt; endl;

  // Convert now to tm struct for UTC
  tm* gmtm = gmtime(&amp;now);
  if (gmtm != NULL) {
     cout &lt;&lt; "The UTC date and time is: " &lt;&lt; asctime(gmtm) &lt;&lt; endl;
  }
  else {
    cerr &lt;&lt; "Failed to get the UTC date and time" &lt;&lt; endl;
    return EXIT_FAILURE;
  }           
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EWFAI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">The <tt>time</tt> function returns a
<tt>time_t</tt> type, which is an implementation-defined
arithmetic type for representing a time period (a.k.a. a time
interval) with at least a resolution of one second. The largest time
interval that can be portably represented using a
<tt>time_t</tt> is 2,147,483,648 seconds, or approximately
68 years.</p>
<p class="docText">A call to <tt>time(0)</tt> returns a
<tt>time_t</tt> representing the time interval from an
implementation defined base time (commonly 0:00:00 January 1, 1970)
to the current moment.</p>
<p></p><div class="box">
<h2 class="docSidebarTitle">The Year 2038 Bug</h2>
<p class="docText">Since a <tt>time_t</tt> is only required to represent time
intervals of 68 years, and many implementations use a base year of
1970 for representing the current time, there is an inability for
many popular C++ implementations to represent dates and times after
2038. This means that a lot of software could break in
2038, if
programmers don't take adequate precautions.</p>
</div><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">A more workable representation of the current date and time is
achieved by converting to a <tt>tm</tt> struct using the
<tt>localtime</tt> or <tt>gmtime</tt> functions.
A <tt>tm</tt>

 struct
has the integer fields shown in Example 5-2.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EYHAI">Example 5-2. Layout of a tm struct</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedWidth">struct tm {
  int tm_sec;   // seconds of minutes from 0 to 61 (60 and 61 are leap seconds)
  int tm_min;   // minutes of hour from 0 to 59
  int tm_hour;  // hours of day from 0 to 24
  int tm_mday;  // day of month from 0 to 23
  int tm_mon;   // month of year from 0 to 11
  int tm_year;  // year since 1900
  int tm_wday;  // days since sunday
  int tm_yday;  // days since January 1st
  int tm_isdst; // hours of daylight savings time
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">When using the <tt>gmtime</tt> function, be sure to check
its return value. If the computer running the code
doesn't have a local time zone defined, the
<tt>gmtime</tt> function will be unable to compute the UTC
time, and will return <tt>0</tt>. If you pass
<tt>0</tt> to the <tt>asctime</tt> function,
undefined behavior will result.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>localtime</tt>, <tt>gmtime</tt>, and
<tt>asctime</tt> functions all return pointers to
statically allocated objects. This is more efficient for the library,
but it means that subsequent calls will change the value of those
objects. The code in Example 5-3 shows how this can
have surprising effects.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E2IAI">Example 5-3. Pitfalls of using asctime</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedWidth">void f( ) {
  char* x = asctime(localtime(time(0)));
  wait_for_15_seconds( ); // do some long processing task 
  asctime(localtime(time(0)));
  cout &lt;&lt; x &lt;&lt; endl; // prints out the current time, not fifteen seconds ago


.
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
