<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 5.3. Performing Date and Time Arithmetic</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 5.3. Performing Date and Time Arithmetic</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EGGAI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You want to know
the


 amount of time elapsed between two
date/time points.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EDHAI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">If both date/time points falls between the years of 1970 and 2038,
you can use a <tt>time_t</tt> type and the
<tt>difftime</tt> function from the
<tt>&lt;ctime&gt;</tt> header. Example 5-6
shows how to compute the number of days elapsed between two dates.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EWHAI">Example 5-6. Date and time arithmetic with time_t</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;ctime&gt;
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;cstdlib&gt;

using namespace std;

time_t dateToTimeT(int month, int day, int year) {
  // january 5, 2000 is passed as (1, 5, 2000)
  tm tmp = tm( );
  tmp.tm_mday = day;
  tmp.tm_mon = month - 1;
  tmp.tm_year = year - 1900;
  return mktime(&amp;tmp);
}

time_t badTime( ) {
  return time_t(-1);
}

time_t now( ) {
  return time(0);
}

int main( ) {
  time_t date1 = dateToTimeT(1,1,2000);
  time_t date2 = dateToTimeT(1,1,2001);

  if ((date1 == badTime( )) || (date2 == badTime( ))) {
    cerr &lt;&lt; "unable to create a time_t struct" &lt;&lt; endl;
    return EXIT_FAILURE;
  }
  double sec = difftime(date2, date1);
  long days = static_cast&lt;long&gt;(sec / (60 * 60 * 24));
  cout &lt;&lt; "the number of days between Jan 1, 2000, and Jan 1, 2001, is ";
  cout &lt;&lt; days &lt;&lt; endl;
  return EXIT_SUCCESS;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The program in Example 5-6 should output :</p>
<pre>the number of days between Jan 1, 2000, and Jan 1, 2001, is 366</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Notice that the year 2000 is a leap year because even though it is
divisible by 100; it is also divisible by 400, thus it has 366 days.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EKIAI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">The <tt>time_t</tt> type is an implementation defined
arithmetic type. This means it is either an integer or floating-point
type, and thus supports the basic arithmetic operations. You can add,
subtract, divide, multiply, and so forth. To compute the distance
between two <tt>time_t</tt> values to seconds, you need to
use the <tt>difftime</tt> function. Do not assume that
<tt>time_t</tt> itself counts seconds, even if it is true.
Many C++ implementations may very well quietly change it to count
fractions of a second in the near future (this is one reason why
<tt>difftime</tt> returns a double).</p>
<p class="docText">If the limitations of <tt>time_t</tt> are too restricting
then you will probably want instead to use the various classes from
the Boost date_time library to compute time intervals. Example 5-7 shows how to use the Boost classes to
calculate the number of days in the 20th and the 21st centuries.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ENJAI">Example 5-7. Date and time arithmetic with 
date_duration</h5><p></p><div class="box">

<pre class="preFixedWidth">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;boost/date_time/gregorian/gregorian.hpp&gt;

using namespace std;
using namespace boost::gregorian;

int main( )
{
  date_duration dd = date(2000, 1, 1) - date(1900, 1, 1);
  cout &lt;&lt; "The twentieth century had " &lt;&lt; dd.days( ) &lt;&lt; " days" &lt;&lt; endl;
  dd = date(2100, 1, 1) - date(2000, 1, 1);
  cout &lt;&lt; "The twenty-first century will have " &lt;&lt; dd.days( ) &lt;&lt; " days" &lt;&lt; endl;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The program in Example 5-7 outputs:</p>
<pre>The twentieth century had 36524 days
The twenty-first century will have 36525 days</pre><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
