<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 5.5. Determining a Day's Number Within a Given Year</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 5.5. Determining a Day's Number Within a Given Year</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EEIAI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You want to determine a
day's number
within a given year. For example, January 1 is the first day of each
year; February 5 is the 36th day of each year, and so on. But since
some years have leap days, after February 28, a given day
doesn't necessarily have the same numbering each
year.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ESIAI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">The solution to this problem requires the solution to several
problems simultaneously. First, you have to know how many days are in
each month, which, in turn, means you have to know how to determine
whether a year is a leap year. Example 5-9 provides
routines for performing these computations.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E6IAI">Example 5-9. Routines for determining a day's number within a given year</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;

using namespace std;

enum MonthEnum  {
  jan = 0, feb = 1, mar = 2, apr = 3, may = 4, jun = 5,
  jul = 6, aug = 7, sep = 8, oct = 9, nov = 10, dec = 11
};

bool isLeapYear(int y) {
  return (y % 4 == 0) &amp;&amp; ((y % 100 != 0) || (y % 400 == 0));
}

const int arrayDaysInMonth[] = {
  31, 28, 31, 30, 31, 30, 31, 31, 30, 31, 30, 31
};

int n;
int arrayFirstOfMonth[] = {
  n = 0,
  n += arrayDaysInMonth[jan],
  n += arrayDaysInMonth[feb],
  n += arrayDaysInMonth[mar],
  n += arrayDaysInMonth[apr],
  n += arrayDaysInMonth[may],
  n += arrayDaysInMonth[jun],
  n += arrayDaysInMonth[jul],
  n += arrayDaysInMonth[aug],
  n += arrayDaysInMonth[sep],
  n += arrayDaysInMonth[::oct], 
  n += arrayDaysInMonth[nov]
};

int daysInMonth(MonthEnum month, int year) {
  if (month == feb) {
    return isLeapYear(year) ? 29 : 28;
  }
  else {
    return arrayDaysInMonth[month];
  }
}

int firstOfMonth(MonthEnum month, int year) {
  return arrayFirstOfMonth[month] + isLeapYear(year);
}

int dayOfYear(MonthEnum month, int monthDay, int year) {
  return firstOfMonth(month, year) + monthDay - 1;
}

int main( ) {
  cout &lt;&lt; "July 1, 1971, was the " &lt;&lt; dayOfYear(jul, 1, 1971);
  cout &lt;&lt; " day of the year" &lt;&lt; endl;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The program in Example 5-9 outputs the following:</p>
<pre>July 1, 1971, was the 181 day of the year</pre><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ERJAI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">The code in Example 5-9 is a relatively
straightforward but useful set of functions for working with dates
and leap years. Notice that I have abandoned what I call the
"document and pray" approach used
in the previous recipes. What I mean by this is that the months are
no longer represented by indexes but rather enumerations. This
significantly reduces the chance of programmer error when passing a
month to a function as an argument.</p>
<p class="docText">The 

leap year computation shown in Example 5-9 is in accordance to the modern Gregorian
calendar. Every fourth year is a leap year, except every hundredth
year unless that year is divisible by 400 (e.g., 1896 was a leap
year, 1900 wasn't, 2000 was, 2004 was, 2100 will not
be).</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
