<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 5.6. Defining Constrained Value Types</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 5.6. Defining Constrained Value Types</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E4IAI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You want self-validating numerical types


 to represents numbers with a
limited range of valid values such as hours of a day or minutes of an
hour.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E4JAI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">When working with dates and times, frequently you will want values
that are integers with a limited range of valid values (i.e., 0 to 59
for seconds of a minute, 0 to 23 for hours of a day, 0 to 365 for
days of a year). Rather than checking these values every time they
are passed to a function, you would probably prefer to have them
validated automatically by overloading the assignment operator. Since
there are so many of these types, it is preferable to implement a
single type that can handle this kind of validation for different
numerical ranges. Example 5-10 presents a
<tt>ConstrainedValue</tt> template class implementation
that makes it easy to define ranged integers and other constrained
value types.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EMKAI">Example 5-10. constrained_value.hpp</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#ifndef CONSTRAINED_VALUE_HPP
#define CONSTRAINED_VALUE_HPP

#include &lt;cstdlib&gt;
#include &lt;iostream&gt;

using namespace std;

template&lt;class Policy_T&gt;
struct ConstrainedValue
{
  public:
    // public typedefs
    typedef typename Policy_T policy_type;
    typedef typename Policy_T::value_type value_type;
    typedef ConstrainedValue self;

    // default constructor
    ConstrainedValue( ) : m(Policy_T::default_value) { }
    ConstrainedValue(const self&amp; x) : m(x.m) {  }
    ConstrainedValue(const value_type&amp; x) { Policy_T::assign(m, x); }
    operator value_type( ) const { return m; }

    // uses the policy defined assign function
    void assign(const value_type&amp; x) {
      Policy_T::assign(m, x);
    }

    // assignment operations
    self&amp; operator=(const value_type&amp; x) { assign(x); return *this; }
    self&amp; operator+=(const value_type&amp; x) { assign(m + x); return *this; }
    self&amp; operator-=(const value_type&amp; x) { assign(m - x); return *this; }
    self&amp; operator*=(const value_type&amp; x) { assign(m * x); return *this; }
    self&amp; operator/=(const value_type&amp; x) { assign(m / x); return *this; }
    self&amp; operator%=(const value_type&amp; x) { assign(m % x); return *this; }
    self&amp; operator&gt;&gt;=(int x) { assign(m &gt;&gt; x); return *this; }
    self&amp; operator&lt;&lt;=(int x) { assign(m &lt;&lt; x); return *this; }

    // unary operations
    self operator-( ) { return self(-m); }
    self operator+( ) { return self(-m); }
    self operator!( ) { return self(!m); }
    self operator~( ) { return self(~m); }

    // binary operations
    friend self operator+(self x, const value_type&amp; y) { return x += y; }
    friend self operator-(self x, const value_type&amp; y) { return x -= y; }
    friend self operator*(self x, const value_type&amp; y) { return x *= y; }
    friend self operator/(self x, const value_type&amp; y) { return x /= y; }
    friend self operator%(self x, const value_type&amp; y) { return x %= y; }
    friend self operator+(const value_type&amp; y, self x) { return x += y; }
    friend self operator-(const value_type&amp; y, self x) { return x -= y; }
    friend self operator*(const value_type&amp; y, self x) { return x *= y; }
    friend self operator/(const value_type&amp; y, self x) { return x /= y; }
    friend self operator%(const value_type&amp; y, self x) { return x %= y; }
    friend self operator&gt;&gt;(self x, int y) { return x &gt;&gt;= y; }
    friend self operator&lt;&lt;(self x, int y) { return x &lt;&lt;= y; }

    // stream operators
    friend ostream&amp; operator&lt;&lt;(ostream&amp; o, self x) { o &lt;&lt; x.m; return o; }
    friend istream&amp; operator&gt;&gt;(istream&amp; i, self x) {
      value_type tmp; i &gt;&gt; tmp; x.assign(tmp); return i;
    }

    // comparison operators
    friend bool operator&lt;(const self&amp; x, const self&amp; y) { return x.m &lt; y.m; }
    friend bool operator&gt;(const self&amp; x, const self&amp; y) { return x.m &gt; y.m; }
    friend bool operator&lt;=(const self&amp; x, const self&amp; y) { return x.m &lt;= y.m; }
    friend bool operator&gt;=(const self&amp; x, const self&amp; y) { return x.m &gt;= y.m; }
    friend bool operator==(const self&amp; x, const self&amp; y) { return x.m == y.m; }
    friend bool operator!=(const self&amp; x, const self&amp; y) { return x.m != y.m; }
  private:
    value_type m;
};

template&lt;int Min_N, int Max_N&gt;
struct RangedIntPolicy
{
  typedef int value_type;
  const static value_type default_value = Min_N;
  static void assign(value_type&amp; lvalue, const value_type&amp; rvalue) {
    if ((rvalue &lt; Min_N) || (rvalue &gt; Max_N)) {
      throw range_error("out of valid range");
    }
    lvalue = rvalue;
  }
};

#endif

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The program in Example 5-11 shows how you can use the
<tt>ConstrainedValue</tt> type.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E5KAI">Example 5-11. Using constained_value.hpp</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include "constrained_value.hpp"

typedef ConstrainedValue&lt; RangedIntPolicy&lt;1582, 4000&gt; &gt; GregYear;
typedef ConstrainedValue&lt; RangedIntPolicy&lt;1, 12&gt; &gt; GregMonth;
typedef ConstrainedValue&lt; RangedIntPolicy&lt;1, 31&gt; &gt; GregDayOfMonth;

using namespace std;

void gregOutputDate(GregDayOfMonth d, GregMonth m, GregYear y) {
  cout &lt;&lt; m &lt;&lt; "/" &lt;&lt; d &lt;&lt; "/" &lt;&lt; y &lt;&lt; endl;
}

int main( ) {
  try {
    gregOutputDate(14, 7, 2005);
  }
  catch(...) {
    cerr &lt;&lt; "whoops, shouldn't be here" &lt;&lt; endl;
  }
  try {
    gregOutputDate(1, 5, 1148);
    cerr &lt;&lt; "whoops, shouldn't be here" &lt;&lt; endl;
  }
  catch(...) {
    cerr &lt;&lt; "are you sure you want to be using a Gregorian Calendar?" &lt;&lt; endl;
  }
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The output from the program in Example 5-11 is:</p>
<pre>7/14/2005
are you sure you want to be using a Gregorian Calendar?</pre><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EQLAI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">Constrained value types are particularly relevant when working with
dates and times, because many values related to date/times are
integers that must occur within a specific range of values (e.g., a
month must be in the interval [0,11] or a day of the month must be in
the interval [0,30]). It is very time consuming and error prone to
manually check that every function parameter fits into a certain
range. Just imagine if you wanted to make a global change to how a
million line program handled date range errors!</p>
<p class="docText">The

<tt>ConstrainedValue</tt> template class when used with a
RangedIntPolicy template can be used to define easily several
different types that throw exceptions when assigned values out of
range. Example 5-12 shows some different examples of
how you can use <tt>ConstrainedValue</tt> to define new
self-validating integer types.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EMMAI">Example 5-12. More of usage of ConstrainedValue</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>typedef ConstrainedValue&lt; RangedIntPolicy &lt;0, 59&gt; &gt; Seconds;
typedef ConstrainedValue&lt; RangedIntPolicy &lt;0, 59&gt; &gt; Minutes;
typedef ConstrainedValue&lt; RangedIntPolicy &lt;0, 23&gt; &gt; Hours;
typedef ConstrainedValue&lt; RangedIntPolicy &lt;0, 30&gt; &gt; MonthDays;
typedef ConstrainedValue&lt; RangedIntPolicy &lt;0, 6&gt; &gt; WeekDays;
typedef ConstrainedValue&lt; RangedIntPolicy &lt;0, 365 &gt; &gt; YearDays;
typedef ConstrainedValue&lt; RangedIntPolicy &lt;0, 51&gt; &gt; Weeks;</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>ConstrainedValue</tt> template class is an example
of policy-based design. A policy is a class passed as a template
parameter that specifies aspects of the implementation or behavior of
the parameterized type. The policy passed to a
<tt>ConstrainedValue</tt> is expected to provide the
implementation detail of how to assign between the same
specializations of the type.</p>
<p class="docText">Using policies can improve the flexibility of classes by deferring
design decisions to the user of the type. It is common to use
policies when a group of types has a common interface but vary in
their implementation. Policies are also particularly useful when it
is impossible to anticipate and satisfy all possible usage scenarios
of a given type.</p>
<p class="docText">There are many other policies you can possibly use with a
<tt>ConstrainedValue</tt> type. For instance, rather than
throw an exception, you may choose to assign a default value, or
assign the nearest legal value. Furthermore, constraints
don't even have to be ranges: you might even have a
constraint that a value is 


always even.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
