<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Introduction</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Introduction</h3>
<p class="docText">This chapter describes the data structures in the standard
library that you can use to store data. They are generally referred
to as containers, since they
"contain" objects you add to them.
This chapter also describes another sort of container that is not
part of the standard library, although it ships with most standard
library implementations, namely the <span class="docEmphasis">hashed</span>
container.</p>
<p class="docText">The part of the library that comprises the containers is often
referred to as the Standard Template Library, or
STL, because this is what it was called
before it was included in the C++ standard. The STL includes not only
the containers that are the subject of this chapter, but iterators
and algorithms, which are the two other building blocks of the STL
that make it a flexible, generic library. Since this chapter is
primarily about the standard containers and not the STL in its
entirety, I will refer to containers as the
"standard containers" and not
"STL containers," as is done in
much of the C++ literature. Although I discuss iterators and
algorithms as much as necessary here, both are discussed in more
detail in Chapter 7.</p>
<p class="docText">The C++ standard uses precise terminology to describe its collection
of containers. A "container" in the
C++ standard library is a data structure that has a well-defined
interface described in the standard. For example, any C++ standard
library class that calls itself a container must support a member
function <tt>begin</tt> that has no parameters and that
returns an <tt>iterator</tt> referring to the first element
in that container. There are a number of required constructors and
member functions that define what it is to be a container in C++
terms. There are also optional member functions only some containers
implement, usually those that can be implemented efficiently.</p>
<p class="docText">The set of all containers is further subdivided into two different
kinds of containers:
<span class="docEmphasis">sequence</span>

containers and
<span class="docEmphasis">associative</span>

containers. A sequence container (usually just called a sequence)
stores objects in an order that is specified by the user, and
provides a required interface (in addition to container requirements)
for accessing and manipulating the elements. Associative containers
store their elements in sorted order, and therefore do not permit you
to insert elements at a specific location, although you can provide
hints when you insert to improve efficiency. Both sequences and
associative containers have a required interface they must support,
but only sequences have an additional set of operations that are only
supported by sequences for which they can be implemented efficiently.
These additional sequence operations provide more flexibility and
convenience than the required interface.</p>
<p class="docText">This sounds a lot like inheritance. A sequence is a container, an
associative container is a container, but a container is not a
sequence or an associative container. It's not
inheritance, though, in the C++ sense, but it <span class="docEmphasis">is</span>
inheritance conceptually. A <tt>vector</tt> is a sequence,
but it is its own, standalone class; it doesn't
inherit from a <tt>container</tt> class or some such thing
(standard library implementations are allowed freedom in how they
implement <tt>vector</tt> and other containers, but the
standard doesn't mandate that a standard library
implementation include a <tt>container</tt> base class). A
great deal of thought went into the design of the containers, and if
you would like to read more about it go pick up Matt
Austern's <span class="docEmphasis">Generic Programming and the
STL</span> (Addison Wesley).</p>
<p class="docText">This chapter has two parts. The first few recipes describe how to use
<tt>vector</tt>, which is a standard sequence, since it is
one of the more popular data structures. They describe how to use a
<tt>vector</tt> effectively and efficiently. The rest of
the recipes discuss most of the other standard containers that are
widely applicable, including the two nonstandard hashed containers I
mentioned earlier.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
