<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 6.1. Using vectors Instead of Arrays</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 6.1. Using vectors Instead of Arrays</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EJMAI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have to store 


things (built-in types,
objects, pointers, etc.) in a sequence, you require random access to
elements, and you can't be confined to a statically
sized array.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ELNAI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use the standard library's <tt>vector</tt>
class template, which is defined in
<tt>&lt;vector&gt;</tt>; don't use arrays.
<tt>vector</tt> looks and feels like an array, but it has a
number of safety and convenience advantages over arrays. Example 6-1 shows a few common <tt>vector</tt>
operations.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EIOAI">Example 6-1. Using common vector member
 functions</h5><p></p><div class="box">

<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;vector&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;

using namespace std;

int main( ) {

   vector&lt;int&gt;    intVec;
   vector&lt;string&gt; strVec;

   // Add elements to the "back" of the vector with push_back
   intVec.push_back(3);
   intVec.push_back(9);
   intVec.push_back(6);

   string s = "Army";

   strVec.push_back(s);
   s = "Navy";
   strVec.push_back(s);
   s = "Air Force";
   strVec.push_back(s);

   // You can access them with operator[], just like an array
   for (vector&lt;string&gt;::size_type i = 0; i &lt; intVec.size( ); ++i) {
      cout &lt;&lt; "intVec[" &lt;&lt; i &lt;&lt; "] = " &lt;&lt; intVec[i] &lt;&lt; '\n';
   }

   // Or you can use iterators
   for (vector&lt;string&gt;::iterator p = strVec.begin( );
        p != strVec.end( ); ++p) {
      cout &lt;&lt; *p &lt;&lt; '\n';
   }

   // If you need to be safe, use at( ) instead of operator[].  It
   // will throw out_of_range if the index you use is &gt; size( ).
   try {
      intVec.at(300) = 2;
   }
   catch(out_of_range&amp; e) {
      cerr &lt;&lt; "out_of_range: " &lt;&lt; e.what( ) &lt;&lt; endl;
   }
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EROAI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">In general, if you need to use an array, you should use a
<tt>vector</tt> instead. <tt>vector</tt>s offer
more safety and flexibility than arrays, and the performance overhead
is negligible in most cases—and if you find that
it's more than you can tolerate, you can fine-tune
vector performance with a few member functions.</p>
<p class="docText">If you're not familiar with the containers that come
with the standard library, or not acquainted with using class
templates (writing them is another matter), the way
<tt>vector</tt>s are declared in Example 6-1 may need some explanation. The declaration for
a vector looks like this:</p>
<pre>vector&lt;typename Value, // The type of element this vector will hold
       typename Allocator = allocator&lt;Value&gt; &gt; // The memory allocator
                                               // to use</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The standard containers are parameterized by the type of objects you
want them to hold. There is also a template parameter for the memory
allocator to use, but it defaults to the standard one, and writing
one is uncommon, so I don't discuss it here.</p>
<p class="docText">If you want a <tt>vector</tt> that holds
<tt>int</tt>s, declare it as in the example:</p>
<pre>vector&lt;int&gt;    intVec;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">And if you need one that holds strings, just change the
<tt>vector</tt>'s type argument:</p>
<pre>vector&lt;string&gt; strVec;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText"><tt>vector</tt>s can contain any C++ type that supports
copy construction and assignment.</p>
<p class="docText">The next logical thing to do after you instantiate a
<tt>vector</tt> is to put something in it. Add items to the
back of it with <tt>push_back</tt>:</p>
<pre>intVec.push_back(3);
intVec.push_back(9);
intVec.push_back(6);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This is roughly equivalent to adding elements 0, 1, and 2 to an
array. It is "roughly" equivalent
because, of course, <tt>push_back</tt> is a member function
that returns void and pushes its argument onto the back of the
vector. <tt>operator[]</tt> returns the memory location
referenced by an index in an array. <tt>push_back</tt>
makes sure there is enough room in the
<tt>vector</tt>'s internal buffer to add
its argument; if there is, it adds the item to the next unused
index—if there isn't room, it grows the buffer
using an implementation-defined algorithm, <span class="docEmphasis">then</span>
adds the argument object.</p>
<p class="docText">You can also insert items into the middle of a vector with the
<tt>insert</tt> member function, though you should avoid it
because doing so requires linear complexity. See Recipe 6.2 for a more detailed discussion of how to
sidestep performance problems when using <tt>vector</tt>s.
To insert an element, get an iterator to the point where you want
your insert to begin (for a discussion of iterators, see Recipe 7.1):</p>
<pre>string s = "Marines";
vector&lt;string&gt;::iterator p = find(strVec.begin( ),
                             strVec.end( ), s);

if (s != strVec.end( ))   // Insert s immediately before the element
   strVec.insert(p, s);  // p points to</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Overloaded versions of <tt>insert</tt> allow you to insert
<span class="docEmphasis">n</span> copies of an object into a
<tt>vector</tt>, as well as insert an entire range from
another sequence (that sequence may be another
<tt>vector</tt>, an array, a <tt>list</tt>, and
so on).</p>
<p class="docText">Instead of inserting, you might want simply to assign the vector to a
preexisting sequence from somewhere else, erasing whatever was there
before. The <tt>assign</tt> member function does this. You
can assign an entire range of values, or <span class="docEmphasis">n</span>
copies of the same object, to your vector like this:</p>
<pre>string sarr[3] = {"Ernie", "Bert", "Elmo"};
string s = "Oscar";
strVec.assign(&amp;sarr[0], &amp;sarr[3]); // Assign this sequence
strVec.assign(50, s);              // Assign 50 copies of s</pre><br/>
<p class="docText"><tt>assign</tt> will resize the
<tt>vector</tt>'s buffer to accommodate
the new sequence if it is larger than the previous buffer size.</p>
<p class="docText">Once you have put your data in a <tt>vector</tt>, there are
several ways for getting it back out. Probably the most intuitive is
<tt>operator[]</tt>, which returns a reference or a
<tt>const</tt> reference to the item at that index,
depending on whether the vector you are calling it on is
<tt>const</tt> or not. In this respect, it looks a lot like
an array:</p>
<pre>for (int i = 0; i &lt; intVec.size( ); ++i) {
   std::cout &lt;&lt; "intVec[" &lt;&lt; i &lt;&lt; "] = "
             &lt;&lt; intVec[i] &lt;&lt; '\n'; // rvalue
}
intVec[2] = 32; // lvalue</pre><br/>
<p class="docText"><tt>operator[]</tt> also behaves like an array in that if
you use an index that is higher than the last element in the
<tt>vector</tt>, the results are undefined, which usually
means your program will corrupt data or crash. You can avoid this by
querying the <tt>vector</tt> for the number of elements it
contains with <tt>size( )</tt>. You should prefer iterators
to <tt>operator[]</tt> though, because using iterators is
the conventional way to iterate through any standard container:</p>
<pre>for (vector&lt;string&gt;::iterator p = strVec.begin( );
     p != strVec.end( ); ++p) {
   std::cout &lt;&lt; *p &lt;&lt; '\n';
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Iterators are the more powerful
approach because they allow for more
generic interaction with containers. For example, if you write an
algorithm that operates on a sequence of elements between two
iterators, it can run against any standard container. This is a
generic approach. If you use random access with
<tt>operator[]</tt>, you limit yourself to only those
containers that support random access. The former approach is what
allows the standard library algorithms in
<tt>&lt;algorithm&gt;</tt> to work seamlessly with the
standard containers (and other things that behave like them).</p>
<p class="docText"><tt>vector</tt>s also provide you with safety that you just
can't get from a standard array. Unlike arrays,
<tt>vector</tt>s offer range-checking with the
<tt>at</tt> member function. If you give
<tt>at</tt> an invalid index, it will throw an
<tt>out_of_range</tt>

exception, which you then have a chance to <tt>catch</tt>
and react accordingly. For example:</p>
<pre>try {
   intVec.at(300) = 2;
}
catch(std::out_of_range&amp; e) {
   std::cerr &lt;&lt; "out_of_range: " &lt;&lt; e.what( ) &lt;&lt; std::endl;
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">As you know, if you reference an element past the end of an array
with <tt>operator[]</tt>, the operator does what you have
told it to and fetches whatever is at that memory location.
That's not good because either your program crashes
from accessing memory it shouldn't, or it silently
updates memory that belongs to another heap object, which is usually
worse. <tt>operator[]</tt> works the same way for
<tt>vector</tt>, but at least you can use
<tt>at</tt> when you need to be safe.</p>
<p class="docText">So that's the crash course in
<tt>vector</tt>s. But what <span class="docEmphasis">is</span> a
<tt>vector</tt>? If you are writing in C++, you are
probably performance-aware, and don't want to be
given something and simply told that it works. Fair enough.
See


 Recipe
Recipe 6.2 for a discussion of how
<tt>vector</tt>s work and tips for using them efficiently.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ETVAI">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 6.2</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
