<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 6.3. Copying a vector</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 6.3. Copying a vector</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EDQAI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You need to copy the



contents of one <tt>vector</tt> into another.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EIRAI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">There are a couple of ways to do this. You can use a copy constructor
when you create a <tt>vector</tt>, or you can use the
<tt>assign</tt> member function. Example 6-3 shows how to do both.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EZRAI">Example 6-3. Copying vector contents</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;vector&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;algorithm&gt;

using namespace std;

// Util function for printing vector contents
template&lt;typename T&gt;
void vecPrint (const vector&lt;T&gt;&amp; vec) {
   cout &lt;&lt; "{";
   for (typename vector&lt;T&gt;::const_iterator p = vec.begin( );
       p != vec.end( ); ++p) {
      cout &lt;&lt; "{" &lt;&lt; *p &lt;&lt; "} ";
   }
   cout &lt;&lt; "}" &lt;&lt; endl;
}

int main( ) {

   vector&lt;string&gt; vec(5);
   string foo[] = {"My", "way", "or", "the", "highway"};

   vec[0] = "Today";
   vec[1] = "is";
   vec[2] = "a";
   vec[3] = "new";
   vec[4] = "day";

   vector&lt;string&gt; vec2(vec);
   vecPrint(vec2);

   vec.at(0) = "Tomorrow";

   vec2.assign(vec.begin( ), vec.end( )); // Copy each element over
   vecPrint(vec2);                      // with assign
   
   vec2.assign(&amp;foo[0], &amp;foo[5]); // Assign works for anything that
   vecPrint(vec2);                // behaves like an iterator

   vector&lt;string&gt;::iterator p;

   p = find(vec.begin( ), vec.end( ), "new");

   vec2.assign(vec.begin( ), p); // Copy a subset of the full range
   vecPrint(vec2);              // of vec
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ECSAI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">Copying a <tt>vector</tt> is easy; there are two ways to do
it. You can copy construct one <tt>vector</tt> from
another, just like any other object, or you can use the
<tt>assign</tt> member function. There is little to say
about the copy constructor; just pass in the
<tt>vector</tt> you want it to clone, and
you're done.</p>
<pre>vector&lt;string&gt; vec2(vec);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In this case, <tt>vec2</tt> will contain the same number of
elements that are in <tt>vec</tt>, and each one of those
elements will be a copy of its corresponding index in
<tt>vec</tt>. Each element is copied with
<tt>string</tt>'s copy constructor. Since
this is construction, <tt>vec2</tt>'s
buffer is sized at least large enough to hold everything in
<tt>vec</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText"><tt>assign</tt> works similarly, except that there is some
additional work that goes on behind the scenes, since now you are
dealing with a target <tt>vector</tt> that may already have
data in it. First, the objects that are in the way, so to speak, must
be destroyed. <tt>assign</tt> first calls the destructor
for each of the objects that <tt>vec2</tt> already
contains. Once they are gone, it checks
<tt>vec2</tt>'s buffer size to ensure it
is big enough to hold what it is about to receive from
<tt>vec</tt>. If not, <tt>assign</tt> resizes the
buffer to accommodate the new data. Finally, it copies each element
over.</p>
<p class="docText">Additionally, you can use <tt>assign</tt> for copying a
subset of a sequence. For example, if you just want to assign a
subset of the elements in <tt>vec</tt>, just specify the
range you want to pull when calling <tt>assign</tt>:</p>
<pre>vector&lt;string&gt;::iterator p;
p = std::find(vec.begin( ), vec.end( ), "new");
vec2.assign(vec.begin( ), p);
vecPrint(vec2);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In this case, <tt>assign</tt> will copy everything up to,
but not including, <tt>p</tt>. This is because, as is the
convention in all standard library containers and algorithms,
<tt>assign(first</tt>, <tt>last)</tt> copies the
element pointed to by <tt>first</tt> up to, but not
including, the element pointed to by <tt>last</tt>. Such a
range, that includes the first element but not the last element, is
often denoted as <span class="docEmphasis">[first, last)</span>.</p>
<p class="docText">Use <tt>assign</tt> or the copy constructor instead of
looping yourself. That is, don't copy each element
by looping through <tt>vec</tt> and pushing each element on
the back of <tt>vec2</tt>. This requires more (redundant)
code on your part, and disallows any optimizations the implementer of
your standard library may


 have used when writing
<tt>assign</tt> or the copy constructor.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
