<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 6.4. Storing Pointers in a vector</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 6.4. Storing Pointers in a vector</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EIRAI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">For efficiency or
other


 reasons, you can't
store copies of your objects in a <tt>vector</tt>, but you
need to keep track of them somehow.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EKSAI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Store pointers to your objects in a <tt>vector</tt> instead
of copies of the objects themselves. But if you do,
don't forget to <tt>delete</tt> the
objects that are pointed to, because the <tt>vector</tt>
won't do it for you. Example 6-4
shows how to declare and work with <tt>vector</tt>s of
pointers.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E6SAI">Example 6-4. Using vectors of pointers</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;vector&gt;

using namespace std;

static const int NUM_OBJECTS = 10;

class MyClass { /*...*/ };

int main( ) {

   vector&lt;MyClass*&gt; vec;

   MyClass* p = NULL;

   // Load up the vector with MyClass objects
   for (int i = 0; i &lt; NUM_OBJECTS; i++) {
      p = new MyClass( );
      vec.push_back(p);
   }

   // Do something useful with this data, then delete the objects when
   // you're done
   for (vector&lt;MyClass*&gt;::iterator pObj = vec.begin( );
        pObj != vec.end( ); ++pObj) {
      delete *pObj; // Note that this is deleting what pObj points to,
                    // which is a pointer
   }

   vec.clear( ); // Purge the contents so no one tries to delete them
                // again
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EITAI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">You can store pointers in a <tt>vector</tt> just like you
would anything else. Declare a <tt>vector</tt> of pointers
like this:</p>
<pre>vector&lt;MyClass*&gt; vec;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The important thing to remember is that a <tt>vector</tt>
stores <span class="docEmphasis">values</span> without regard for what those
values represent. It, therefore, doesn't know that
it's supposed to <tt>delete</tt> pointer
values when it's destroyed. If you allocate memory,
then put pointers to that memory in a <tt>vector</tt>, you
have to delete the memory yourself when you are done with it.
Don't be fooled by the term
"container" into thinking that
somehow when you store a pointer in a <tt>vector</tt> that
it assumes ownership.</p>
<p class="docText">You should also explicitly empty the <tt>vector</tt> after
you have deleted the pointers for the same reason that you should set
pointer variables to NULL when you're done with
them. This will prevent them from erroneously being deleted again.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
