<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 6.6. Mapping strings to Other Things</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 6.6. Mapping strings to Other Things</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EWUAI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have objects that you need to store in



 memory, and you want to store them by
their <tt>string</tt> keys. You need to be able to add,
delete, and retrieve items quickly (with, at most, logarithmic
complexity).</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E5VAI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use the standard container <tt>map</tt>, declared in
<tt>&lt;map&gt;</tt>, to map keys
(<tt>string</tt>s) to values (any type that obeys value
semantics). Example 6-6 shows how.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ERWAI">Example 6-6. Creating a string map</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;map&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;

using namespace std;

int main( ) {

   map&lt;string, string&gt; strMap;

   strMap["Monday"]    = "Montag";
   strMap["Tuesday"]   = "Dienstag";
   strMap["Wednesday"] = "Mittwoch";
   strMap["Thursday"]  = "Donnerstag";
   strMap["Friday"]    = "Freitag";
   strMap["Saturday"]  = "Samstag";
   // strMap.insert(make_pair("Sunday", "Sonntag"));
   strMap.insert(pair&lt;string, string&gt;("Sunday", "Sonntag"));

   for (map&lt;string, string&gt;::iterator p = strMap.begin( );
      p != strMap.end( ); ++p ) {
         cout &lt;&lt; "English: " &lt;&lt; p-&gt;first
              &lt;&lt; ", German: " &lt;&lt; p-&gt;second &lt;&lt; endl;
   }

   cout &lt;&lt; endl;

   strMap.erase(strMap.find("Tuesday"));

   for (map&lt;string, string&gt;::iterator p = strMap.begin( );
      p != strMap.end( ); ++p ) {
         cout &lt;&lt; "English: " &lt;&lt; p-&gt;first
              &lt;&lt; ", German: " &lt;&lt; p-&gt;second &lt;&lt; endl;
   }
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E1WAI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">A <tt>map</tt> is an associative container that maps keys
to values, provides logarithmic complexity for inserting and finding,
and constant time for erasing single elements. It is common for
developers to use a map to keep track of objects by using a
<tt>string</tt> key. This is what Example 6-6 does; in this case, the mapped type happens to
be a string, but it could be nearly anything.</p>
<p class="docText">A map is
declared
like this:</p>
<pre>map&lt;typename Key,                          // The type of the key
    typename Value,                        // The type of the value
    typename LessThanFun = std::less&lt;Key&gt;, // The function/functor
                                           // used for sorting
    typename Alloc = std::allocator&lt;Key&gt; &gt; // Memory allocator</pre><br/>
<p class="docText"><tt>Key</tt> and <tt>Value</tt> are the types of
the key and associated value that will be stored in the map.
<tt>LessThanFun</tt> is a function or functor that takes
two arguments and returns true if the first is less than the second;
the standard functor <tt>less</tt> is used by default.
<tt>Alloc</tt> is the memory allocator, which defaults to
the standard allocator.</p>
<p class="docText">Using a <tt>map</tt> is easy enough. Declare the type of
the key and value like this:</p>
<pre>map&lt;string, string&gt; strMap;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This creates a <tt>map</tt> where both the key and the
value are <tt>string</tt>s. Put objects in your map with
<tt>operator[]</tt>, which is intuitive and easy to read:</p>
<pre>strMap["Monday"]    = "Montag";
strMap["Tuesday"]   = "Dienstag";
strMap["Wednesday"] = "Mittwoch"; // ...</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This inserts elements into the <tt>map</tt> with the index
(e.g., "<tt>Monday</tt>") as the key and the righthand side
as the value. They are stored in order according to the
<tt>LessThanFun</tt> template parameter, if you supplied
one; if not, <tt>map</tt> uses
<tt>std::less&lt;Key&gt;</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">To get values out of a <tt>map</tt>, use
<tt>operator[]</tt> on the righthand side of assignment,
like this:</p>
<pre>wedInGerman = strMap["Wednesday"];</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In the manner of all standard containers, the value associated with
the key "<tt>Wednesday</tt>" is copied into the object
<tt>wedInGerman</tt> using <tt>operator=</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText"><tt>operator[]</tt> is a convenient way to insert or update
items in, or retrieve values from a <tt>map</tt>, but it
has subtle behavior that might not be what you expect. Strictly
speaking, <tt>operator[k]</tt> returns a reference to the
value associated with <tt>k</tt>—whether
<tt>k</tt> exists in the <tt>map</tt> or not. If
the <tt>k</tt> is in the <tt>map</tt> already,
its associated value object is returned. If it
doesn't, <tt>k</tt> is inserted and the
value type's default constructor is used to create a
value object for that key. To make this concrete, consider what the
following code does:</p>
<pre>map&lt;string, string&gt; mapZipCodes;  // There are zero elements now

string myZip = mapZipCodes["Tempe"];  // Nothing is in the map yet,
                                      // but what is count( ) now?</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">What's in <tt>myZip</tt>, and how many
elements are in <tt>mapZipCodes</tt> now? Since
<tt>operator[]</tt> inserts the key you give it if it
doesn't already exist, <tt>myZip</tt> is
an empty <tt>string</tt> and there is now one element in
<tt>mapZipCodes</tt>. This might not be the behavior you
expect, but whether it is or not, be aware that
<tt>operator[]</tt> is not a <tt>const</tt>
member function: there is always the possibility that it will change
the state of the <tt>map</tt> by adding a node.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>insert</tt> member function provides an alternative
for adding pairs to the map. <tt>insert</tt> performs a
strict insert, not an insert/update as <tt>operator[]</tt>
does. If you are using a <tt>map</tt> (and not a
<tt>multimap</tt>, which can have duplicate keys),
<tt>insert</tt> does nothing if the key already exists. By
comparison, <tt>operator[]</tt> replaces the value object
for the key you supply if it already exists.</p>
<p class="docText">But the syntax of insert requires a little more work than
<tt>operator[]</tt>, and this has to do with how a
<tt>map</tt> stores your data. Consider this line from
Example 6-6:</p>
<pre>strMap.insert(std::make_pair("Sunday", "Sonntag"));</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">A <tt>map</tt> stores your key/value pairs in a
<tt>pair</tt> object. A <tt>pair</tt> is a simple
utility class template (declared in
<tt>&lt;utility&gt;</tt> and included by
<tt>&lt;map&gt;</tt>) that holds two values of two types.
To declare a <tt>pair</tt> of <tt>string</tt>s,
do this:</p>
<pre>pair&lt;string, string&gt; myPair;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The first and second elements in the <tt>pair</tt> are
accessible by the public members <tt>first</tt> and
<tt>second</tt>. If you use <tt>operator[]</tt>
to access elements in a <tt>map</tt>, then you
don't usually have to deal with
<tt>pair</tt>s directly, but with many of the other member
functions you do, so it's good to know how to create
and reference <tt>pair</tt> objects. Iterators, for
example, simply dereference to a <tt>pair</tt> object, so
when you use them, as I did in Example 6-6, you
ought to know how to get at the key and its value.</p>
<pre>for (map&lt;string, string&gt;::iterator p = strMap.begin( );
   p != strMap.end( ); ++p )
      cout &lt;&lt; "English: " &lt;&lt; p-&gt;<b>first</b>
           &lt;&lt; ", German: " &lt;&lt; p-&gt;<b>second</b> &lt;&lt; endl;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The key is stored in <tt>first</tt> and the value is stored
in <tt>second</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">This doesn't explain why I used
<tt>make_pair</tt>, though. <tt>make_pair</tt> is
a helper function template that creates a <tt>pair</tt>
object out of the arguments you give it. Some prefer this to calling
the <tt>pair</tt> constructor because a class template
can't use argument deduction to figure out its
template parameters, whereas a function template can. Thus, these two
lines of code are functionally equivalent:</p>
<pre>strMap.insert(std::make_pair("Sunday", "Sonntag"));
strMap.insert(std::pair&lt;string, string&gt;("Sunday", "Sonntag"));</pre><br/>
<p class="docText"><tt>map</tt>s prohibit duplicate keys. If you want to allow
duplicate keys, you have to use a <tt>multimap</tt>, which
is a <tt>map</tt> that permits multiple equivalent keys.
Its interface is identical to <tt>map</tt>, but the
behavior of the member functions is necessarily different. Table 6-1 lists the member functions that are in one but
not the other, and explains any behavioral differences in the common
member functions. <tt>map</tt>




s and
<tt>multimap</tt>s have some <tt>typedef</tt>s
that describe the different values that are stored in them. In Table 6-1, I use them as follows:</p>
<dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">key_type</span></span></span></p></dt>
<dd>
<p class="docList">This is the type of the key. In a <tt>string</tt>
<tt>map</tt> declared as <tt>map&lt;string,
MyClass*&gt;</tt>, <tt>key_type</tt> would be
<tt>string</tt>.</p>
</dd>
<dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">mapped_type</span></span></span></p></dt>
<dd>
<p class="docList">This is the type of the value that the key maps to. In a
<tt>string</tt>
<tt>map</tt> declared as
<tt>map&lt;string, MyClass*&gt;</tt>,
<tt>mapped_type</tt> would be <tt>MyClass*</tt>.</p>
</dd>
<dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">value_type</span></span></span></p></dt>
<dd>
<p class="docList">This is the type of the object that contains a key and a value,
which, in a <tt>map</tt> or <tt>mutimap</tt>, is
a <tt>pair&lt;const key_type, mapped_type&gt;</tt>.</p>
</dd>
</dl>
<p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 6-1. map versus multimap</h5></caption><colgroup span="3"><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Member function
								</th><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									map, multimap, or both
								</th><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Behavior
								</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<pre>T&amp; operator[]
  (const key_type&amp; k)</pre><br/>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>map</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Returns a reference to the value object stored with key
<tt>k</tt>. If <tt>k</tt> is not already in the
<tt>map</tt>, it is added and a value object is created
with its default constructor.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<pre>iterator
  insert(const value_type&amp; v)
pair&lt;iterator, bool&gt;
  insert(const value_type&amp; v)</pre><br/>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Both
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									The first version inserts <tt>v</tt> into the
<tt>mutimap</tt> and returns an iterator that points to the
inserted <tt>pair</tt>. The second version inserts
<tt>v</tt> into a <tt>map</tt> if there is not
already a key in the map equivalent to the key of
<tt>v</tt>. The <tt>pair</tt> returned contains
an iterator that points to the <tt>pair</tt> that was
inserted, if any, and a <tt>bool</tt> indicating whether
the insert was successful or not.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<pre>iterator
  find(const key_type&amp; k)</pre><br/>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Both
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Returns an iterator or a <tt>const_iterator</tt> that
points to the <tt>mapped_type</tt> that corresponds to
<tt>k</tt>. In a <tt>multimap</tt>, the iterator
returned is not guaranteed to point to the first value equivalent to
<tt>k</tt>. If there is no key equivalent to
<tt>k</tt>, the returned iterator is equivalent to
<tt>end( )</tt>.
								</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">Table 6-1 also shows the behavioral differences
between <tt>map</tt> and <tt>multimap</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">If <tt>operator[]</tt> doesn't work for
you, there are other ways to find things in a <tt>map</tt>.
You can use the <tt>find</tt> member function:</p>
<pre>map&lt;string, string&gt;::const_iterator p
   = strMap.find("Thursday");

if (p != strMap.end( ))
    cout &lt;&lt; "Thursday = " &lt;&lt; p-&gt;second &lt;&lt; endl;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Just be aware that when you are using a <tt>multimap</tt>,
the item returned isn't guaranteed to be the
<span class="docEmphasis">first</span> element that is equivalent to the search
key. If you want the first element that is not less than some value
or not more than some value, use <tt>lower_bound</tt> or
<tt>upper_bound</tt>. <tt>lower_bound</tt>
returns an iterator to the first key/value pair equal to or greater
than its <tt>key_type</tt> argument. In other words, if
your <tt>map</tt> is filled with days of the week as in
Example 6-6, the following will return an iterator
that points to the pair containing "<tt>Friday</tt>" and
"<tt>Freitag</tt>":</p>
<pre>p = strMap.lower_bound("Foo");

if (p != strMap.end( ))
    cout &lt;&lt; p-&gt;first &lt;&lt; " = " &lt;&lt; p-&gt;second &lt;&lt; endl;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This is because "<tt>Friday</tt>" is the first key greater
than or equal to "<tt>Foo</tt>".
<tt>upper_bound</tt> works the same way, but in the
opposite manner.</p>
<p class="docText">I mentioned at the beginning of this discussion that the elements in
a <tt>map</tt> are stored in sorted order according to
their keys, so if you iterate from <tt>begin</tt> to
<tt>end</tt>, each element is
"greater" than the previous element
(in a <tt>multimap</tt> it is greater than or equal to).
But if you aren't using something as trivial as
<tt>string</tt>s or numbers as your keys, you may have to
specify how keys are compared when the map has to determine what
should be inserted where.</p>
<p class="docText">By default, keys are sorted using the
standard

functor <tt>less</tt> (declared in
<tt>&lt;functional&gt;</tt>). <tt>less</tt> is a
binary function (takes two arguments of the same type) that returns a
<tt>bool</tt> indicating whether the first argument is less
than the second. In other words, <tt>less(a</tt>,
<tt>b)</tt> returns <tt>a</tt>
<tt>&lt;</tt>
<tt>b</tt>. If this is not what you
want, create your own functor and declare the <tt>map</tt>
using it instead. For example, if you have a
<tt>Person</tt> object as your key, and each
<tt>Person</tt> has a last name and a first name, you may
want to compare last names and first names. Example 6-7 presents one way to do this.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EPJBI">Example 6-7. Using your own sorting functor</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;map&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;

using namespace std;

class Person {
   friend class PersonLessThan;
public:
   Person(const string&amp; first, const string&amp; last) :
      lastName_(last), firstName_(first) {}
   // ...
   string getFirstName( ) const {return(firstName_);}
   string getLastName( ) const {return(lastName_);}
private:
   string lastName_;
   string firstName_;
};

class PersonLessThan {
public:
   bool operator( )(const Person&amp; per1,
                   const Person&amp; per2) const {
      if (per1.lastName_ &lt; per2.lastName_)          // Compare last
         return(true);                              // names, then
      else if (per1.lastName_ == per2.lastName_)    // first
         return(per1.firstName_ &lt; per2.firstName_);
      else
         return(false);
   }
};

int main( ) {

   map&lt;Person, string, PersonLessThan&gt; personMap;

   Person per1("Billy", "Silly"),
      per2("Johnny", "Goofball"),
      per3("Frank", "Stank"),
      per4("Albert", "Goofball");

   personMap[per1] = "cool";
   personMap[per2] = "not cool";
   personMap[per3] = "not cool";
   personMap[per4] = "cool";

   for (map&lt;Person, string, PersonLessThan&gt;::const_iterator p =
        personMap.begin( ); p != personMap.end( ); ++p) {
      cout &lt;&lt; p-&gt;first.getFirstName( ) &lt;&lt; " " &lt;&lt; p-&gt;first.getLastName( )
           &lt;&lt; " is " &lt;&lt; p-&gt;second &lt;&lt; endl;
   }
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText"><tt>map</tt>s are a great way to store key/value pairs.
Once you understand the subtle behavior, such as how
<tt>operator[]</tt> works and how the pairs are actually
stored (as <tt>pair&lt;Key, Value&gt;</tt> objects),
<tt>map</tt>s provide great ease of use and 



good performance.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E2KBI">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 6.7</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
