<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 6.8. Storing Objects in Sorted Order</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 6.8. Storing Objects in Sorted Order</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EUZAI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have to store a set of



 objects in order,
perhaps because you frequently need to access ordered ranges of these
objects and you don't want to pay for resorting them
each time you do this.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E41AI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use the associative container <tt>set</tt>, declared in
<tt>&lt;set&gt;</tt>, which stores items in sorted order.
It uses the standard <tt>less</tt> class template, (which
invokes <tt>operator&lt;</tt> on its arguments) by default,
or you can supply your own sorting predicate. Example 6-10 shows how to store strings in a
<tt>set</tt>.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EU2AI">Example 6-10. Storing strings in a set</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;set&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;

using namespace std;

int main( ) {

   set&lt;string&gt; setStr;
   string s = "Bill";

   setStr.insert(s);
   s = "Steve";
   setStr.insert(s);
   s = "Randy";
   setStr.insert(s);
   s = "Howard";
   setStr.insert(s);

   for (set&lt;string&gt;::const_iterator p = setStr.begin( );
        p != setStr.end( ); ++p)
      cout &lt;&lt; *p &lt;&lt; endl;
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Since the values are stored in sorted order, the output will look
like this:</p>
<pre>Bill
Howard
Randy
Steve</pre><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EB3AI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">A <tt>set</tt> is an associative container that provides
logarithmic complexity insertion and find, and constant-time deletion
of elements (once you have found the element you want to delete).
<tt>set</tt>s are unique associative containers, which
means that no two elements can be equivalent, though you can use a
<tt>multiset</tt> if you need to store multiple instances
of equivalent elements. You can think of a <tt>set</tt> as
a set in the mathematical sense, that is, a collection of items, with
the added bonus that order is maintained among the elements.</p>
<p class="docText">You can insert and find elements, but, like a list, a set does not
allow random access to elements. If you want something in a set, you
have to look for it with the find member function, or iterate through
the elements using <tt>set&lt;T&gt;::iterator</tt> or
<tt>set&lt;T&gt;::const_iterator</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">The declaration of a set should look familiar:</p>
<pre>set&lt;typename Key,                          // The type of the element
    typename LessThanFun = std::less&lt;Key&gt;, // The function/functor
                                           // used for sorting
    typename Alloc = std::allocator&lt;Key&gt; &gt; // Memory allocator</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">You always have to specify the <tt>Key</tt>, you sometimes
should supply your own <tt>LessThanFun</tt>, and you should
rarely need to supply your own allocator (so I won't
discuss how to write an allocator here).</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>Key</tt> template parameter is, as is usually the
case with the other standard containers, the type of the element that
will be stored. It is <tt>typedef</tt>'d
on the <tt>set</tt> as
<tt>set&lt;Key&gt;::key_type</tt>, so you have access to
the type at runtime. The <tt>Key</tt> class has to support
copy construction and assignment, and you're all
set.</p>
<p class="docText">Example 6-10 shows how to use a set with strings.
Using a set to store objects of any other class works the same way;
declare the set with the class name as the template parameter:</p>
<pre>std::set&lt;MyClass&gt; setMyObjs;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This is all you have to do to use a set in the simplest way possible.
But most of the time, life won't be so simple. For
example, if you are storing pointers in the set, you
can't rely on the default sorting predicate because
it's just going to sort the objects by their
address. To make sure elements are sorted properly, you will have to
supply your own predicate for making


less-than comparisons. Example 6-11 shows how.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EP5AI">Example 6-11. Storing pointers in a set</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;set&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;functional&gt;
#include &lt;cassert&gt;

using namespace std;

// Class for comparing strings given two string pointers
struct strPtrLess {
   bool operator( )(const string* p1,
                   const string* p2) {
   assert(p1 &amp;&amp; p2);
   return(*p1 &lt; *p2);
   }
};

int main( ) {
   set&lt;string*, <b>strPtrLess</b>&gt; setStrPtr;  // Give it my special
                                              // less-than functor
   string s1 = "Tom";
   string s2 = "Dick";
   string s3 = "Harry";

   setStrPtr.insert(&amp;s1);
   setStrPtr.insert(&amp;s2);
   setStrPtr.insert(&amp;s3);

   for (set&lt;string*, strPtrLess&gt;::const_iterator p =
        setStrPtr.begin( ); p != setStrPtr.end( ); ++p)
      cout &lt;&lt; **p &lt;&lt; endl;  // Dereference the iterator and what
                            // it points to
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText"><tt>strPtrLess</tt> returns true if the string pointed to
by <tt>p1</tt> is less than the one pointed to by
<tt>p2</tt>. This makes it a binary predicate, because it
takes two arguments and returns a <tt>bool</tt>. Since
<tt>operator&lt;</tt> is defined for
<tt>string</tt>s, I can just use that to make the
comparison. In fact, if you want to take a more generic approach, use
a class template for your comparison predicate:</p>
<pre>template&lt;typename T&gt;
class ptrLess {
public:
   bool operator( )(const T* p1,
                   const T* p2) {
   assert(p1 &amp;&amp; p2);
   return(*p1 &lt; *p2);
   }
};</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This will work for pointers to anything that has
<tt>operator&lt;</tt> defined. You can declare a set with
it like this:</p>
<pre>set&lt;string*, <b>ptrLess&lt;string&gt;</b> &gt; setStrPtr;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText"><tt>set</tt>s support many of the same functions as the
standard sequence containers (e.g., <tt>begin</tt>,
<tt>end</tt>, <tt>size</tt>,
<tt>max_size</tt>), and other associative containers (e.g.,
<tt>insert</tt>, <tt>erase</tt>,
<tt>clear</tt>, <tt>find</tt>).</p>
<p class="docText">When you are using a <tt>set</tt>, remember that you pay
for the sorting every time you modify the state of the
<tt>set</tt>. When the number of elements is large, the
logarithmic complexity of adding or deleting elements can add
up—do you really need the objects to be sorted all the time? If
not, you may get better performance by storing items in a
<tt>vector</tt> or a <tt>list</tt> and sorting
them only when you have to, which 



can usually be done in n*log(n)
complexity.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
