<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 6.9. Storing Containers in Containers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 6.9. Storing Containers in Containers</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EF2AI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have a number of instances

 of a standard container
(<tt>list</tt>s, <tt>set</tt>s, etc.), and you
want to keep track of them by storing them in yet another container.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EF3AI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Store pointers to your containers in a single, master container. For
example, you can use a <tt>map</tt> to store a
<tt>string</tt> key and a pointer to a
<tt>set</tt> as its value. Example 6-12
presents a simple transaction log class that stores its data as a
<tt>map</tt> of
<tt>string</tt>-<tt>set</tt> pointer pairs.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E53AI">Example 6-12. Storing set pointers in a map</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;set&gt;
#include &lt;map&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;

using namespace std;

typedef set&lt;string&gt; SetStr;
typedef map&lt;string, SetStr*&gt; MapStrSetStr;

// Dummy database class
class DBConn {
public:
   void beginTxn( ) {}
   void endTxn( ) {}
   void execSql(string&amp; sql) {}
};

class SimpleTxnLog {

public:
   SimpleTxnLog( ) {}
  ~SimpleTxnLog( ) {purge( );}

   // Add an SQL statement to the list
   void addTxn(const string&amp; id,
               const string&amp; sql) {
      SetStr* pSet = log_[id];      // This creates the entry for
      if (pSet == NULL) {           // this id if it isn't there
         pSet = new SetStr( );
         log_[id] = pSet;
      }
      pSet-&gt;insert(sql);
   }

   // Apply the SQL statements to the database, one transaction
   // at a time
   void apply( ) {
      for (MapStrSetStr::iterator p = log_.begin( );
           p != log_.end( ); ++p) {
         conn_-&gt;beginTxn( );

         // Remember that a map iterator actually refers to an object
         // of pair&lt;Key,Val&gt;.  The set pointer is stored in p-&gt;second.
         for (SetStr::iterator pSql = p-&gt;second-&gt;begin( );
              pSql != p-&gt;second-&gt;end( ); ++pSql) {
            string s = *pSql;
            conn_-&gt;execSql(s);
            cout &lt;&lt; "Executing SQL: " &lt;&lt; s &lt;&lt; endl;
         }

         conn_-&gt;endTxn( );
         delete p-&gt;second;
      }
      log_.clear( );
   }

   void purge( ) {
      for (MapStrSetStr::iterator p = log_.begin( );
           p != log_.end( ); ++p)
        delete p-&gt;second;

      log_.clear( );
   }
  // ...

private:
   MapStrSetStr log_;
   DBConn* conn_;
};

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EH4AI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">Example 6-12 offers one situation where you might
need to store containers within a container. Imagine that you need to
store a series of SQL statements in batches, to be executed against a
relational database all at once sometime in the future.
That's what <tt>SimpleTxnLog</tt> does. It
could stand to have a few more member functions to make it useful,
and some exception handling to make it safe, but the purpose of the
example is to show how to store one kind of container in another.</p>
<p class="docText">To begin with, I created some <tt>typedef</tt>s to make the
code easier to read:</p>
<pre>typedef std::set&lt;std::string&gt; SetStr;
typedef std::map&lt;std::string, SetStr*&gt; MapStrSetStr;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">When you are using templates of templates (of templates . . . ad
nauseam), the declarations will get very long, which makes them hard
to read, so make your life easier by employing
<tt>typedef</tt>. Furthermore, using
<tt>typedef</tt> makes it easier to change something about
the template declaration without having to search and replace through
multiple source files.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>DBConn</tt> class is a dummy class that is supposed
to represent a connection to a relational database. The interesting
part comes when we get into the definition of
<tt>SimpleTxnLog</tt>, in the <tt>addTxn</tt>
member function. At the beginning of the function, I do this to see
if there is already a set object for the <tt>id</tt> that
was passed in:</p>
<pre>SetStr* pSet = log_[id];</pre><br/>
<p class="docText"><tt>log_</tt> is a <tt>map</tt> (see Recipe 6.6), so <tt>operator[]</tt> does a
lookup of <tt>id</tt> to see if there is a data object
associated with it. If there is, the data object is returned and
<tt>pSet</tt> is non-<tt>NULL</tt>; if there
isn't, it creates it and returns the associated
pointer, which will be <tt>NULL</tt>. Then, I can check to
see if <tt>pSet</tt> points to anything to determine if I
need to create another set:</p>
<pre>if (pSet == NULL) {
   pSet = new SetStr( );  // SetStr = std::set&lt;std::string&gt;
   log_[id] = pSet;
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Once I create the <tt>set</tt>, I have to assign it back to
the associated key in the <tt>map</tt>, since
<tt>pSet</tt> is a copy of the data object stored in the
<tt>map</tt> (a set pointer), not the value itself. Once I
do that, all that's left is to add an element to the
set and return:</p>
<pre>pSet-&gt;insert(sql);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">With the above steps, I added a pointer to an address of one
container (a <tt>set</tt>) to another (a
<tt>map</tt>). What I didn't do was add a
<tt>set</tt>
<span class="docEmphasis">object</span> to a
<tt>map</tt>. The difference is important. Since containers
have copy-in, copy-out semantics, doing the following would copy the
entire set <tt>s</tt> into the <tt>map</tt>:</p>
<pre>set&lt;string&gt; s;
// Load up s with data...
log_[id] = s; // Copy s and add the copy to log_</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This will cause a lot of extra copying that you probably
don't want. Therefore, the general rule to follow
when using 

containers of containers is to use
containers of <span class="docEmphasis">pointers</span> to containers.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
