<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Introduction</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Introduction</h3>
<p class="docText">This chapter describes how to work with the standard algorithms and
how to use them on the standard containers. These algorithms were
originally part of what is often referred to as the Standard Template
Library (STL), which is the set of algorithms, iterators, and
containers that now belong to the standard library (Chapter 6 contains recipes for working with the
standard containers). I will refer to these simply as the standard
algorithms, iterators, and containers, but keep in mind that they are
the same ones that other authors' refer to as part
of the STL. One of the pillars of the standard library is iterators,
so the first recipe explains what they are and how to use them. After
that, there are a number of recipes that explain how to use and
extend the standard algorithms. Finally, if what you need
isn't in the standard library, Recipe 7.10 explains how to write your own algorithm.</p>
<p class="docText">The recipes presented here are largely biased toward working with the
standard containers for two reasons. First, the standard containers
are ubiquitous, and it's better to learn the
standard than to reinvent the wheel. Second, the algorithms in the
standard library implementations provide a good model to follow for
interoperability and performance. If you watch how the pros do it in
the standard library code, you are likely to learn a few valuable
lessons along the way.</p>
<p class="docText">All standard algorithms use iterators. Even if you are already
familiar with the concept of iterators, which is the subject of the
first recipe, take a look at Table 7-1, which
contains a list of the conventions I use in the rest of the chapter
when listing function declarations for the standard algorithms.</p>
<p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 7-1. Iterator category abbreviations</h5></caption><colgroup span="2"><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
								Abbreviation
							</th><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
								Meaning
							</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>In</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
								Input <tt>iterator</tt>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>Out</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
								Output <tt>iterator</tt>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>Fwd</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
								Forward <tt>iterator</tt>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>Bid</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
								Bidirectional <tt>iterator</tt>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>Rand</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
								Random-access <tt>iterator</tt>
</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">The standard algorithms also make use of function objects,
or
<span class="docEmphasis">functors</span>. A function object is a class that has
overridden <tt>operator( )</tt> so that it can be called
like a function. A functor that returns a <tt>bool</tt>
(and does not maintain state, and is therefore called
<span class="docEmphasis">pure</span>) is called a
<span class="docEmphasis">predicate</span>,
and they are another regular feature in the standard algorithms.
Generally, a predicate takes one or two arguments: if it takes one
argument, it is an
<span class="docEmphasis">unary</span> predicate; and if it takes two, it
is called a <span class="docEmphasis">binary</span> predicate. For the sake of
brevity, I use the abbreviations listed in Table 7-2
when listing function declarations.</p>
<p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 7-2. Functor 
types</h5></caption><colgroup span="2"><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
								Type Name
							</th><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
								Description
							</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>UnPred</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
								An unary predicate. Takes one argument and returns a bool.
							</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>BinPred</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
								A binary predicate. Takes two arguments and returns a bool.
							</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>UnFunc</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
								An unary function. Takes one argument and returns anything.
							</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>BinFunc</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
								A binary function. Takes two arguments and returns anything.
							</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">In most cases, a function pointer can be used when a functor argument
is required. When I use the term functor, I also mean function
pointer unless otherwise noted.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
