<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 7.2. Removing Objects from a Container</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 7.2. Removing Objects from a Container</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E1ABI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You want to




remove objects from a container.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EECBI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use the container's
<tt>erase</tt>

 member
function to erase a single element or a range of elements, and
possibly use one of the standard algorithms to make the job easier.
Example 7-2 shows a couple of different ways to
remove elements from a sequence.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EADBI">Example 7-2. Removing elements from a container</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;list&gt;
#include &lt;algorithm&gt;
#include &lt;functional&gt;
#include "utils.h" // For printContainer( ): see 7.10

using namespace std;

int main( ) {

   list&lt;string&gt; lstStr;

   lstStr.push_back("On");
   lstStr.push_back("a");
   lstStr.push_back("cloudy");
   lstStr.push_back("cloudy");
   lstStr.push_back("day");

   list&lt;string&gt;::iterator p;

   // Find what you want with find
   p = find(lstStr.begin( ), lstStr.end( ), "day");

   p = lstStr.erase(p); // Now p points to the last element

   // Or, to erase all occurrences of something, use remove
   lstStr.erase(remove(lstStr.begin( ), lstStr.end( ), "cloudy"),
                lstStr.end( ));
   printContainer(lstStr); // See 7.10
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EJDBI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">Use a container's <tt>erase</tt> member
function to remove one or more elements from it. All containers have
two overloads of <tt>erase</tt>: one that takes a single
<tt>iterator</tt> argument that points to the element you
want to delete, and another that takes two
<tt>iterator</tt>s that represent a range of elements you
want deleted. To erase a single element, obtain an
<tt>iterator</tt> referring to that element and pass the
<tt>iterator</tt> to <tt>erase</tt>, as in Example 7-2:</p>
<pre>p = find(lstStr.begin( ), lstStr.end( ), "day");
p = lstStr.erase(p);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This will <tt>delete</tt> the object that
<tt>p</tt> refers to by calling its destructor, and then do
any necessary reorganization of the remaining elements in the range.
The reorganization that happens depends on the type of container, and
therefore the complexity of the operation will vary from one kind of
container to another. The signature and behavior also differs
slightly when you are using a sequence container versus an
associative container.</p>
<p class="docText">In sequences, <tt>erase</tt> returns an
<tt>iterator</tt> that refers to the first element
immediately following the last element that was deleted, which may be
<tt>end</tt> if the last element in the sequence was the
last one deleted. The complexity of the operation is different for
each container because sequences are implemented in different ways.
For example, since all elements in a <tt>vector</tt> are
stored in a contiguous chunk of memory, removing an element from
anywhere except the end requires shifting all the elements following
it toward the beginning to fill the gap. This is a hefty performance
penalty (linear), which is why you shouldn't use a
<tt>vector</tt> if you have to delete (or insert, for that
matter) elements anywhere except at the end. I discuss this very
matter in more detail in Recipe 6.2.</p>
<p class="docText">In associative containers, <tt>erase</tt> returns
<tt>void</tt>. The complexity is amortized constant if you
are deleting a single element, and logarithmic plus the number of
elements deleted if you are deleting a range of elements. This is
because associative containers are often implemented as balanced
trees (e.g., red-black tree).</p>
<p class="docText"><tt>erase</tt> is handy, but not very interesting. If you
want more flexibility in how you express what should be deleted, you
will have to turn to the standard algorithms (in
<tt>&lt;algorithm&gt;</tt>). Consider this line from Example 7-2:</p>
<pre>lstStr.erase(std::remove(lstStr.begin( ), lstStr.end( ), "cloudy"),
             lstStr.end( ));</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Notice that I am still using <tt>erase</tt>, but this time,
for my own reasons, I want to delete all occurrences of the word
"cloudy" from my
<tt>list&lt;string&gt;</tt>. <tt>remove</tt>
returns an <tt>iterator</tt>, which I pass to
<tt>erase</tt> as the beginning of the doomed range, and I
pass <tt>end</tt> to erase as the end point for the range.
This deletes each object <tt>obj</tt> (by calling its
<tt>delete</tt> method) in the range for which
<tt>obj</tt>
<tt>==</tt>
"<tt>cloudy</tt>" is true. But it may not behave exactly as
you expect. Here is where I need to clarify some terminology.</p>
<p class="docText"><tt>remove</tt>

doesn't actually <span class="docEmphasis">remove</span>
anything. It moves everything that isn't equal to
the value you specify to the beginning of the sequence, and returns
an <tt>iterator</tt> that refers to the first element
following them. Then, it is up to you to actually call
<tt>erase</tt> on the container to delete the objects
between <tt>[p, end)</tt>, where <tt>p</tt> is
the <tt>iterator</tt> returned by
<tt>remove</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText"><tt>remove</tt> has some
variants, too. What if you want to
<tt>remove</tt> elements that satisfy some predicate, and
not simply those equal to some value? Use
<tt>remove_if</tt>. For example, imagine you have a class
named <tt>Conn</tt> that represents some sort of
connection. If the connection has an idle time greater than some
value, you want to <tt>remove</tt> it. First, create a
functor as follows:</p>
<pre>struct IdleConnFn :
   public std::unary_function&lt;const Conn, bool&gt; {  // Include this line
   bool operator( ) (const Conn&amp; c) const {         // so it works with
      if (c.getIdleTime( ) &gt; TIMEOUT) {             // other stuff in
         return(true);                             // &lt;functional&gt;
      }
      else
         return(false);
   }
} idle;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Then you can call <tt>remove_if</tt> with
<tt>erase</tt> and pass in your functor, like this:</p>
<pre>vec.erase(std::remove_if(vec.begin( ), vec.end( ), idle), vec.end( ));</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">You want to derive such functors from
<tt>unary_function</tt> for a good reason.
<tt>unary_function</tt> defines some
<tt>typedef</tt>s that are used by other functors in
<tt>&lt;functional&gt;</tt>, and if they
aren't there, the other functors
won't compile. For example, if you are particularly
malicious, and you want to remove connections that
aren't idle, you can employ the
<tt>not1</tt> functor with your

idle-checking
functor:</p>
<pre>vec.erase(std::remove_if(vec.begin( ), vec.end( ), <b>std::not1</b>(idle)),
          vec.end( ));</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Finally, you may want to leave the original sequence alone (maybe
it's <tt>const</tt>) and copy the results
minus some elements into a new sequence. You can do that with
<tt>remove_copy</tt> and <tt>remove_copy_if</tt>,
which work the same way as <tt>remove</tt> and
<tt>remove_if</tt>, except that there is also an output
<tt>iterator</tt> you pass in where the resulting data is
supposed to go. For example, to copy strings from one list to
another, do this:</p>
<pre>std::remove_copy(lstStr.begin( ), lstStr.end( ), <b>lstStr2</b>, "cloudy");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The thing you have to remember when using
<tt>remove_copy</tt>, or any standard algorithm that writes
to an output range, is that the output range must already be large
enough to accommodate the elements that are about to be written to
it.</p>
<p class="docText"><tt>erase</tt> and <tt>remove</tt> (and its
family of related algorithms) offer a convenient way to
<tt>erase</tt> certain elements from a sequence. They
provide a clean, ready-made alternative to looping yourself to find
all the elements



 you want, then erasing them one by
one.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EWKBI">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 6.2 and Recipe 7.1</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
