<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 7.3. Randomly Shuffling Data</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 7.3. Randomly Shuffling Data</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ELCBI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have a sequence of data,


and you need to jumble it into
some random order.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EDDBI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use the <tt>random_shuffle</tt> standard algorithm, defined
in <tt>&lt;algorithm&gt;</tt>.
<tt>random_shuffle</tt> takes two random-access
<tt>iterator</tt>s, and (optionally) a random-number
generation functor, and rearranges the elements in the range at
random. Example 7-3 shows how to do this.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EYDBI">Example 7-3. Shuffling a sequence at random</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;vector&gt;
#include &lt;algorithm&gt;
#include &lt;iterator&gt;
#include "utils.h" // For printContainer( ): see 7.10

using namespace std;

int main( ) {

   vector&lt;int&gt; v;
   back_insert_iterator&lt;std::vector&lt;int&gt; &gt; p =
      back_inserter(v);

   for (int i = 0; i &lt; 10; ++i)
     *p = i;

   printContainer(v, true);

   random_shuffle(v.begin( ), v.end( ));

   printContainer(v, true);
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Your output might look like this:</p>
<pre>-----
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
-----
8 1 9 2 0 5 7 3 4 6</pre><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EFEBI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText"><tt>random_shuffle</tt> is intuitive to use. Give it a
range, and it will shuffle the range at random. There are two
versions, and their prototypes look like this:</p>
<pre>void random_shuffle(RndIter first, RndIter last);
void random_shuffle(RndIter first, RndIter last, RandFunc&amp; rand);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In the first version, the "random"
is using an implementation-specific random-number generation
function, which should be sufficient for most of your needs. If it
isn't—perhaps you want a nonuniform
distribution, e.g., Gaussian—you can write your own and supply
that instead using the second version.</p>
<p class="docText">Your 
random-number
generator must be a functor that a single argument and returns a
single value, both of which are convertible to
<tt>iterator_traits&lt;RndIter&gt;::difference_type</tt>.
In most cases, an integer will do. For example,
here's my knock-off random-number generator:</p>
<pre>struct RanNumGenFtor {
   size_t operator( )(size_t n) const {
      return(rand( ) % n);
   }
} rnd;

random_shuffle(v.begin( ), v.end( ), <b>rnd</b>);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The applications to <tt>random_shuffle</tt> are limited to
sequences that provide random-access <tt>iterator</tt>s
(<tt>string</tt>s, <tt>vector</tt>s, and
<tt>deque</tt>s), arrays, or your custom containers that do
the same. You can't randomly shuffle an associative
container because its contents are stored in sorted order. In fact,
you can't use any algorithm that modifies its range
(often referred to as a <span class="docEmphasis">mutating</span> algorithm) on
an associative container.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
