<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 7.4. Comparing Ranges</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 7.4. Comparing Ranges</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EEDBI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have two ranges, and 

you
need to compare them for equality or you need to see which one comes
first based on some ordering on the elements.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EAEBI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Depending on what kind of comparison you want to do, use one of the
standard algorithms <tt>equal</tt>,
<tt>lexicographical_compare</tt>, or
<tt>mismatch</tt>, defined in
<tt>&lt;algorithm&gt;</tt>. Example 7-4
shows several of them in action.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EVEBI">Example 7-4. Different kinds of comparisons</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;vector&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;algorithm&gt;
#include "utils.h"

using namespace std;
using namespace utils;

int main( ) {

   vector&lt;string&gt; vec1, vec2;

   vec1.push_back("Charles");
   vec1.push_back("in");
   vec1.push_back("Charge");

   vec2.push_back("Charles");
   vec2.push_back("in");
   vec2.push_back("charge");  // Note the small "c"

   if (<b>equal</b>(vec1.begin( ), vec1.end( ), vec2.begin( ))) {
      cout &lt;&lt; "The two ranges are equal!" &lt;&lt; endl;
   } else {
      cout &lt;&lt; "The two ranges are NOT equal!" &lt;&lt; endl;
   }

   string s1 = "abcde";
   string s2 = "abcdf";
   string s3 = "abc";

   cout &lt;&lt; boolalpha  // Show bools as "true" or "false"
        &lt;&lt; <b>lexicographical_compare</b>(s1.begin( ), s1.end( ),
                                   s1.begin( ), s1.end( )) &lt;&lt; endl;
   cout &lt;&lt; <b>lexicographical_compare</b>(s1.begin( ), s1.end( ),
                                   s2.begin( ), s2.end( )) &lt;&lt; endl;
   cout &lt;&lt; <b>lexicographical_compare</b>(s2.begin( ), s2.end( ),
                                   s1.begin( ), s1.end( )) &lt;&lt; endl;
   cout &lt;&lt; <b>lexicographical_compare</b>(s1.begin( ), s1.end( ),
                                   s3.begin( ), s3.end( )) &lt;&lt; endl;
   cout &lt;&lt; <b>lexicographical_compare</b>(s3.begin( ), s3.end( ),
                                   s1.begin( ), s1.end( )) &lt;&lt; endl;

   pair&lt;string::iterator, string::iterator&gt; iters =
      <b>mismatch</b>(s1.begin( ), s1.end( ), s2.begin( ));

   cout &lt;&lt; "first mismatch  = " &lt;&lt; *(iters.first) &lt;&lt; endl;
   cout &lt;&lt; "second mismatch = " &lt;&lt; *(iters.second) &lt;&lt; endl;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The output of Example 7-4 looks like this:</p>
<pre>The two sequences are NOT equal!
false
true
false
false
true
first mismatch  = e
second mismatch = f</pre><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EWFBI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">Use <tt>equal</tt> to compare two sequences for equality.
It takes three or four arguments, depending on the version you use.
Here's how <tt>equal</tt> is declared:</p>
<pre>bool equal(In1 first1, In1 last1, In2 first2);
bool equal(In1 first1, In1 last1, In2 first2, BinPred pred);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText"><tt>equal</tt> compares each element between
<tt>first1</tt> and <tt>last1</tt> with each
element starting at <tt>first2</tt> using
<tt>operator==</tt>. If you supply <tt>pred</tt>,
<tt>equal</tt> uses that to test equality instead. Ensure
that the sequences each have the same length before calling
<tt>equal</tt>; it assumes the second range is at least as
long as the first, and if it isn't, the behavior is
undefined.</p>
<p class="docText">If you want to know more about how or where two sequences differ, you
can use <tt>lexicographical_compare</tt> or
<tt>mismatch</tt>.
<tt>lexicographical_compare</tt> compares two sequences and
returns true if the first is <tt>lexicographically</tt>
less than the second, which means that each pair of elements in the
two sequences is compared using the <tt>&lt;</tt> operator.
The declaration of <tt>lexicographical_compare</tt> looks
like this:</p>
<pre>bool lexicographical_compare(In1 first1, In1 last1,
                             In2 first2, In2 last2);
bool lexicographical_compare(In1 first1, In1 last1,
                             In2 first2, In2 last2,
                             Compare comp);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">As soon as <tt>operator&lt;</tt> returns true, or the first
sequence ends before the second, true is returned. Otherwise, false
is returned. Consider the character sequences in Example 7-4:</p>
<pre>string s1 = "abcde";
string s2 = "abcdf";
string s3 = "abc";

lexicographical_compare(s1.begin( ), s1.end( ),  // abcde &lt; abcde
                        s1.begin( ), s1.end( )); // = false
lexicographical_compare(s1.begin( ), s1.end( ),  // abcde &lt; abcdf
                        s2.begin( ), s2.end( )); // = true
lexicographical_compare(s2.begin( ), s2.end( ),  // abcdf &lt; abcde
                        s1.begin( ), s1.end( )); // = false
lexicographical_compare(s1.begin( ), s1.end( ),  // abcde &lt; abc
                        s3.begin( ), s3.end( )); // = false
lexicographical_compare(s3.begin( ), s3.end( ),  // abc &lt; abcde
                        s1.begin( ), s1.end( )); // = true</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The complexity of <tt>lexicographical_compare</tt> is
linear and will do a number of comparisons equal to the minimum of
the two sequence lengths, or until the first time an element in one
of the sequences is less than the corresponding element in the other.
The comparisons are implemented entirely using
<tt>operator&lt;</tt>, so if <tt>iter1</tt> and
<tt>iter2</tt> are <tt>iterator</tt>s into the
two sequences, the comparison stops as soon as
<tt>*iter1</tt>
<tt>&lt;</tt>
<tt>*iter2</tt> or <tt>*iter2 &lt; *iter1</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText"><tt>mismatch</tt> will tell you where two sequences differ.
Its declaration is a little different than <tt>equal</tt>
and <tt>lexicographical_compare</tt>, though, because it
returns a <tt>pair&lt;&gt;</tt> of
<tt>iterator</tt>s instead of a <tt>bool</tt>.
Here it is:</p>
<pre>pair&lt;In1, In2&gt; mismatch(In1 first1, In1 last1, In2 first2);
pair&lt;In1, In2&gt; mismatch(In1 first1, In1 last1, In2 first2, BinPred);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The two <tt>iterator</tt>s returned point to the differing
elements in each of the sequences. Consider Example 7-4:</p>
<pre>string s1 = "abcde";
string s2 = "abcdf";
pair&lt;string::iterator, string::iterator&gt; iters =
   mismatch(s1.begin( ), s1.end( ), s2.begin( ));

cout &lt;&lt; "first mismatch  = " &lt;&lt; *(iters.first) &lt;&lt; '\n'; // 'e'
cout &lt;&lt; "second mismatch = " &lt;&lt; *(iters.second) &lt;&lt; '\n';// 'f'</pre><br/>
<p class="docText"><a name="second range"></a>You have to ensure that the second range is at least as long as the
first. If the second sequence is shorter than the first,
<tt>mismatch</tt> has no way to know it and will continue
making comparisons to elements past the end of the second sequence,
which has undefined behavior if it extends past the end of the second
sequence. Additionally, if there is no mismatch, the first
<tt>iterator</tt> will be pointing to
<tt>last1</tt>, which may not be valid (e.g., if you passed
in <tt>end( )</tt> as <tt>last1</tt>).</p>
<p class="docText">You may have noticed from the declarations of each of these
algorithms that the types of the <tt>iterator</tt>s for
each of the two sequences are different. This means that the two
sequences can be containers of different types, so long as the type
of the element those <tt>iterator</tt>s refer to have
<tt>operator&lt;</tt> defined for them. For example, you
may want to compare a <tt>string</tt> to a
<tt>vector&lt;char&gt;</tt>:</p>
<pre>string s = "Coke";
vector&lt;char&gt; v;

v.push_back('c');
v.push_back('o');
v.push_back('k');
v.push_back('e');

std::cout &lt;&lt; std::lexicographical_compare(s.begin( ), s.end( ),
                                          v.begin( ), v.end( )) &lt;&lt; '\n';</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This compares each of the characters in the two sequences without
regard for the type of container that holds them.</p>
<p class="docText">The C++ standard library provides several different ways to compare
sequences. If none of these suits your needs, look at the source code
for them; it will provide a good example of how you can write your
own


efficient, generic algorithm.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ETKBI">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 7.1</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
