<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 7.5. Merging Data</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 7.5. Merging Data</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EBFBI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have two sorted sequences and 

you
need to merge them.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E3FBI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use either the <tt>merge</tt> or
<tt>inplace_merge</tt> function template.
<tt>merge</tt> merges two sequences and puts the results in
a third, and <tt>inplace_merge</tt> merges two contiguous
sequences. Example 7-5 shows how.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ERGBI">Example 7-5. Merging two sequences</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;list&gt;
#include &lt;vector&gt;
#include &lt;algorithm&gt;
#include &lt;iterator&gt;
#include "utils.h" // For printContainer( ): see 7.10

using namespace std;

int main( ) {

   vector&lt;string&gt; v1, v2, v3;

   v1.push_back("a");
   v1.push_back("c");
   v1.push_back("e");

   v2.push_back("b");
   v2.push_back("d");
   v2.push_back("f");

   v3.reserve(v1.size( ) + v2.size( ) + 1);

   // Use a back_inserter from iterator to avoid having to put
   // a bunch of default objects in the container.  But this doesn't
   // mean you don't have to use reserve!
   merge(v1.begin( ), v1.end( ),
         v2.begin( ), v2.end( ),
         back_inserter&lt;vector&lt;string&gt; &gt;(v3));

   printContainer(v3);

   // Now make a mess
   random_shuffle(v3.begin( ), v3.end( ));
   sort(v3.begin( ), v3.begin( ) + v3.size( ) / 2);
   sort(v3.begin( ) + v3.size( ) / 2, v3.end( ));

   printContainer(v3);

   inplace_merge(v3.begin( ), v3.begin( ) + 3, v3.end( ));

   printContainer(v3);

   // If you are using two lists, though, use list::merge instead.
   // As a general rule, blah blah... 
   list&lt;string&gt; lstStr1, lstStr2;

   lstStr1.push_back("Frank");
   lstStr1.push_back("Rizzo");
   lstStr1.push_back("Bill");
   lstStr1.push_back("Cheetoh");

   lstStr2.push_back("Allie");
   lstStr2.push_back("McBeal");
   lstStr2.push_back("Slick");
   lstStr2.push_back("Willie");

   lstStr1.sort( );  // Sort these or merge makes garbage!
   lstStr2.sort( );

   lstStr1.merge(lstStr2); // Note that this only works with other
                           // lists of the same type

   printContainer(lstStr1);
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The output of Example 7-5 looks like this:</p>
<pre class="preFixedHeight">-----
a
b
c
d
e
f
-----
b
d
e
a
c
f
-----
a
b
c
d
e
f
-----
Allie
Bill
Cheetoh
Frank
McBeal
Rizzo
Slick
Willie

					  </pre><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EDHBI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText"><tt>merge</tt> merges two sorted sequences and places the
result into a third, optionally using a caller-supplied comparison
functor to determine when one element is less than another—it
uses <tt>operator&lt;</tt> by default. The complexity is
linear: the number of comparisons performed during the
<tt>merge</tt> is the sum of the two sequence lengths minus
one. The types of the elements in each sequence must be comparable
with <tt>operator&lt;</tt> (or the comparison functor you
supply), and they must be convertible to the type of element in the
output sequence via copy constructor or assignment; or there must be
conversion operators defined such that the type of the element in the
output sequence has assignment and copy construction defined for both
types.</p>
<p class="docText">The declarations for <tt>merge</tt> look like this:</p>
<pre>void merge(In1 first1, In1 last1, In2 first2, In2 last2, Out result)
void merge(In1 first1, In1 last1, In2 first2, In2 last2, Out result,
           BinPred comp)</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Using <tt>merge</tt> is simple enough. Both sequences must
be sorted (or the output will be garbage), and neither is modified by
<tt>merge</tt>. The output iterator where the results are
going to go must have enough room to accommodate the sum of the
lengths of each input sequence. You can do this by explicitly
reserving enough storage, or, as I did in Example 7-5, by using a <tt>back_inserter</tt>:</p>
<pre>merge(v1.begin( ), v1.end( ),
      v2.begin( ), v2.end( ),
      back_inserter(v3));</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">A <tt>back_inserter</tt>

is a class defined in <tt>&lt;iterator&gt;</tt> that
provides a convenient way to create an output iterator that calls
<tt>push_back</tt> on a sequence every time you assign a
value to it. This way, you don't have to explicitly
size the output sequence. The following call creates a
<tt>back_inserter</tt> for a
<tt>vector&lt;string&gt;</tt> named <tt>v3</tt>.</p>
<pre>back_inserter(v3);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">You don't have to specify the template arguments
because a <tt>back_inserter</tt> is a function template,
not a class template, so the type of the call arguments can be
deduced. An equivalent call with explicit template arguments would
look like this:</p>
<pre>back_inserter&lt;vector&lt;string&gt; &gt;(v3);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Note, however, that sometimes you ought to explicitly size
the

output sequence, especially when the output sequence is a
<tt>vector</tt>. A <tt>vector</tt> may need to
keep resizing itself if you simply add items to it with
<tt>push_back</tt>, and resizing is an expensive operation.
See Recipe 6.2 for more details.</p>
<p class="docText">If there are two equivalent elements in the sequences, the one from
the first sequence will precede the one
 from the second. Therefore, if you call
<tt>merge</tt> twice with the input sequences switched, the
resulting output sequences may be different (predictable and correct,
but different).</p>
<p class="docText">Merging <tt>list</tt>s is a good example of a situation
where you can use a sequence's member function or a
similar standard algorithm. You should prefer a member function over
a standard algorithm that does the same thing, but this
doesn't always work, and here's an
example of why.</p>
<p class="docText">Consider your list of strings from Example 7-5:</p>
<pre>lstStr1.sort( );  // Sort these or merge makes garbage!
lstStr2.sort( );
lstStr1.merge(lstStr2); // This is list::merge</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">There are two reasons why this is different than calling
<tt>std::merge</tt>. To begin with, both
<tt>list</tt>s must have the same type of elements. This is
because <tt>list::merge</tt> is declared like this:</p>
<pre>void merge(list&lt;T, Alloc&gt;&amp; lst)
template &lt;typename Compare&gt;
void merge(list&lt;T, Alloc&gt;&amp; lst, Compare comp)</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Where <tt>T</tt> is the same type as in the list class
template itself. So you can't, for example, merge a
list of null-terminated character arrays into a list of
<tt>string</tt>s.</p>
<p class="docText">The other thing that's different is that
<tt>list::merge</tt> erases the input sequence, while
<tt>std::merge</tt> leaves the two input sequences
untouched. Most likely, <tt>list::merge</tt> will have
better performance, since in most cases the elements in the list are
relinked instead of copied; but relinking is not guaranteed, so step
into the source or experiment to be sure.</p>
<p class="docText">You can also merge two contiguous sequences with
<tt>inplace_merge</tt>. <tt>inplace_merge</tt> is
different from <tt>merge</tt> because it
<tt>merge</tt>s its two sequence arguments, well, in place.
In other words, if you have two sequences that are contiguous (i.e.,
they are parts of the same sequence), and they are sorted, and you
want the entire sequence sorted, you can use
<tt>inplace_merge</tt> instead of a sort algorithm. The
advantage is that <tt>inplace_merge</tt> can run in linear
time if there is enough additional memory available. If there
isn't, it runs in <span class="docEmphasis">n</span> log
<span class="docEmphasis">n</span>, which is the average complexity of sort
anyway.</p>
<p class="docText">The declaration for <tt>inplace_merge</tt> is a little
different from <tt>merge</tt>:</p>
<pre>void inplace_merge(Bid first, Bid mid, Bid last)
void inplace_merge(Bid first, Bid mid, Bid last, BinPred comp)</pre><br/>
<p class="docText"><tt>inplace_merge</tt> requires bidirectional iterators, so
you can't use it interchangeably with
<tt>merge</tt>, but in most cases either should work. Like
<tt>merge</tt>, it uses <tt>operator&lt;</tt> by
default to determine elements' relative order, and
<tt>comp</tt>


if you supply it.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
