<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 7.6. Sorting a Range</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 7.6. Sorting a Range</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E5GBI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have a range of elements that 


you
need to sort.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EBIBI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">There are a handful of algorithms you can use for sorting a range.
You can do a conventional sort (ascending or descending order) with
<tt>sort</tt>, defined in
<tt>&lt;algorithm&gt;</tt>, or you can use one of the other
sorting functions, such as
<tt>partial_sort</tt>
.
Have a look at Example 7-6 to see how.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E3IBI">Example 7-6. Sorting</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;istream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;list&gt;
#include &lt;vector&gt;
#include &lt;algorithm&gt;
#include &lt;iterator&gt;
#include "utils.h" // For printContainer( ): see 7.10

using namespace std;

int main( ) {

   cout &lt;&lt; "Enter a series of strings: ";
   istream_iterator&lt;string&gt; start(cin);
   istream_iterator&lt;string&gt; end; // This creates a "marker"
   vector&lt;string&gt; v(start, end);

   // The sort standard algorithm will sort elements in a range.  It
   // requires a random-access iterator, so it works for a vector.
   sort(v.begin( ), v.end( ));
   printContainer(v);

   random_shuffle(v.begin( ), v.end( )); // See 7.2

   string* arr = new string[v.size( )];

   // Copy the elements into the array
   copy(v.begin( ), v.end( ), &amp;arr[0]);

   // Sort works on any kind of range, so long as its arguments
   // behave like random-access iterators.
   sort(&amp;arr[0], &amp;arr[v.size( )]);
   printRange(&amp;arr[0], &amp;arr[v.size( )]);

   // Create a list with the same elements
   list&lt;string&gt; lst(v.begin( ), v.end( ));

   lst.sort( ); // The standalone version of sort won't work; you have
               // to use list::sort.  Note, consequently, that you
               // can't sort only parts of a list.

   printContainer(lst);
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">A run of Example 7-6 might look like this:</p>
<pre>Enter a series of strings: a z b y c x d w
^Z
-----
a b c d w x y z
-----
w b y c a x z d
-----
a b c d w x y z
-----
a b c d w x y z</pre><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EOJBI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">Sorting is a common thing, and there are two ways you can
<tt>sort</tt> a sequence. You can keep elements in sorted
order by using an associative container, but then you pay logarithmic
time for insertions. Or, you can <tt>sort</tt> them only as
needed, for which you have several options.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>sort</tt> standard algorithm does just what
you'd expect: it <tt>sort</tt>s the
elements in a range in ascending order using
<tt>operator&lt;</tt>. Its declaration looks like this:</p>
<pre>void sort(Rnd first, Rnd last);
void sort(Rnd first, Rnd last, BinPred comp);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">As with most other algorithms, you can supply your own comparison
operator for sorting if <tt>operator&lt;</tt>
isn't what you want. Complexity is, in the average
case, <span class="docEmphasis">n</span> log <span class="docEmphasis">n</span>. It can be
quadratic in the worst case.</p>
<p class="docText">If you require that equivalent elements retain their relative order,
use <tt>stable_sort</tt>. It has the same signature, but
guarantees that equivalent elements will not have their relative
order changed. Its complexity is also a little different in that it
is <span class="docEmphasis">n</span> log <span class="docEmphasis">n</span> in the worst
case, as long as there is memory available. If there
isn't enough extra memory available, it can be at
most <span class="docEmphasis">n</span> (log
<span class="docEmphasis">n</span>)<sup>2</sup>.</p>
<p class="docText"><tt>sort</tt> doesn't work for any
container, though. It requires random-access
<tt>iterator</tt>s, so if you are using a container that
doesn't provide them, it won't
work. The standard sequence containers <tt>deque</tt>,
<tt>vector</tt>, and
<tt>string</tt>/<tt>wstring</tt> (which are not
containers, but satisfy almost all of the sequence container
requirements), all provide random access iterators.
<tt>list</tt> is the only one that
doesn't. If you need to sort a list, you can use
<tt>list::sort</tt>. For example, in Example 7-6 you will probably notice that
<tt>list::sort</tt> takes no arguments:</p>
<pre>lst.sort( );</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This makes it distinct from <tt>std::sort</tt>, in that you
can't sort only parts of a <tt>list</tt>.
If you need to sort parts of a sequence, you may be better off using
a sequence other than a <tt>list</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">The concept of sorting is pretty straightforward, but there are a few
variations on the theme that are implemented in the standard library.
The following list describes each of them:</p>
<dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">partial_sort</span></span>
</span></p></dt>
<dd>
<p class="docList">Takes three random-access <tt>iterator</tt>s:
<tt>first</tt>, <tt>middle</tt>, and
<tt>last</tt>, and optionally a comparison functor. It has
two postconditions: the elements in the range
(<tt>first</tt>, <tt>middle</tt>) are all less
than those in the range (<tt>middle</tt>,
<tt>last</tt>), and the range (<tt>first</tt>,
<tt>middle</tt>) is sorted according to
<tt>operator&lt;</tt> or your comparison functor. In other
words, it sorts until the first <span class="docEmphasis">n</span> elements are
sorted.</p>
</dd>
<dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">partial_sort_copy</span></span>
</span></p></dt>
<dd>
<p class="docList">Does the same thing as <tt>partial_sort</tt>, but places
the results in an output range. It takes the first
<span class="docEmphasis">n</span> elements from the source range and copies them
into the destination range in sorted order. If the destination range
(<span class="docEmphasis">n</span>) is shorter than the source range
(<span class="docEmphasis">m</span>), only <span class="docEmphasis">n</span> items are
copied into the destination range.</p>
</dd>
<dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">nth_element</span></span>
</span></p></dt>
<dd>
<p class="docList">Takes three random-access <tt>iterator</tt> arguments:
<tt>first</tt>, <tt>nth</tt>, and
<tt>last</tt>, and an optional comparison functor It puts
the element referred to by <tt>nth</tt> at the index where
it would be if the entire range were sorted. Consequently, all
elements in the range (<tt>first</tt>,
<tt>nth</tt>) are less than the element at the
<tt>nth</tt> position (those in (<tt>nth</tt>,
<tt>last</tt>) are not sorted, but are all greater than the
ones preceding <tt>nth</tt>). You would use this if you
only want one or a few elements sorted in a range, but you
don't want to pay for sorting the entire range if
you don't have to.</p>
</dd>
</dl>
<p class="docText">You can also partition the elements in a range according to your own
criterion (functor), and that is the 


subject of Recipe 7.7.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ETQBI">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 7.7</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
