<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 7.9. Transforming Elements in a Sequence</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 7.9. Transforming Elements in a Sequence</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EFLBI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have a sequence of 


elements and you have to do
something to each one, either in place or as it is copied to another
sequence.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EHMBI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use the <tt>transform</tt> or <tt>for_each</tt>
standard algorithms. Both are simple, but allow you to do almost
anything you want to the elements in your sequence. See Example 7-9 for an illustration.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EYMBI">Example 7-9. Transforming data</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;istream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;list&gt;
#include &lt;algorithm&gt;
#include &lt;iterator&gt;
#include &lt;cctype&gt;
#include "utils.h" // For printContainer( ): see 7.10

using namespace std;

// Convert a string to upper case
string strToUpper(const string&amp; s) {
   string tmp;
   for (string::const_iterator p = s.begin( ); p != s.end( ); ++p)
      tmp += toupper(*p);
   return(tmp);
}

string strAppend(const string&amp; s1, const string&amp; s2) {
   return(s1 + s2);
}

int main( ) {

   cout &lt;&lt; "Enter a series of strings: ";
   istream_iterator&lt;string&gt; start(cin);
   istream_iterator&lt;string&gt; end;
   list&lt;string&gt; lst(start, end), out;

   // Use transform with an unary function...
   transform(lst.begin( ), lst.end( ),
             back_inserter(out),
             strToUpper);

   printContainer(out);

   cin.clear( );

   cout &lt;&lt; "Enter another series of strings: ";
   list&lt;string&gt; lst2(++start, end);
   out.clear( );

   // ...or a binary function and another input sequence.
   transform(lst.begin( ), lst.end( ), lst2.begin( ),
             back_inserter(out),
             strAppend);

   printContainer(out);
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EBNBI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">The obvious function for transforming data is
<tt>transform</tt>. It has two forms. The first form takes
a sequence, an output <tt>iterator</tt>, and an unary
functor. It applies the functor to each element in the sequence and
assigns the return value to the next element pointed to by the output
<tt>iterator</tt>. The output <tt>iterator</tt>
can be another sequence or the beginning of the originating sequence.
In this respect, <tt>transform</tt> handles both copy-style
or in-place transformations.</p>
<p class="docText">Here's what the declarations for
<tt>transform</tt> look like:</p>
<pre>Out transform(In first, In last, Out result, UnFunc f);
Out transform(In first1, In last1, In first2, In last2,
              Out result, BinFunc f);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Both versions return an <tt>iterator</tt> that refers to
one past the end of the result sequence.</p>
<p class="docText">Using either version is straightforward. To copy strings from one
sequence to another, but in uppercase, do as I did in Example 7-9:</p>
<pre>std::transform(lst.begin( ), lst.end( ),
               std::back_inserter(out), strToUpper);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">If you want to modify the originating sequence, just pass in the
beginning of the sequence as the result <tt>iterator</tt>:</p>
<pre>std::transform(lst.begin( ), lst.end( ),
               lst.begin( ), strToUpper);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Using two sequences and a binary operation works the same way, and
you can use either one of the input sequences as the output sequence.</p>
<p class="docText">If you want to transform elements in place, you might want to avoid
the overhead of assigning each element to the return value of some
function. Or if the functor you want to use modifies its source
object, you can use <tt>for_each</tt> instead:</p>
<pre>void strToUpperInPlace(string&amp; s) {
   for (string::iterator p = s.begin( ); p != s.end( ); ++p)
      *p = std::toupper(*p);
}
// ...
std::for_each(lst.begin( ), lst.end( ), strToUpperInPlace);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">If what you want to do is change the sequence itself and not
necessarily change each of its elements, see Recipe 7.6, where I describe many of the standard
algorithms for rearranging the elements in a


 sequence.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EVPBI">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 7.1 and Recipe 7.6</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EGQBI">Discussion</h4>
</div>
</body>
</html>
