<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 7.10. Writing Your Own Algorithm</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 7.10. Writing Your Own Algorithm</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EKMBI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You need to execute an algorithm on a

range and none of the standard algorithms meets your requirements.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E6MBI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Write your algorithm as a function template and advertise your
iterator requirements with the names of your template parameters. See
Example 7-10 for a variation on the
<tt>copy</tt> standard algorithm.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EONBI">Example 7-10. Writing your own algorithm</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;istream&gt;
#include &lt;iterator&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;functional&gt;
#include &lt;vector&gt;
#include &lt;list&gt;
#include "utils.h" // For printContainer( ): see 7.10

using namespace std;

template&lt;typename In, typename Out, typename UnPred&gt;
Out copyIf(In first, In last, Out result, UnPred pred) {
   for ( ;first != last; ++first)
      if (pred(*first))
         *result++ = *first;
   return(result);
}

int main( ) {

   cout &lt;&lt; "Enter a series of strings: ";
   istream_iterator&lt;string&gt; start(cin);
   istream_iterator&lt;string&gt; end; // This creates a "marker"
   vector&lt;string&gt; v(start, end);

   list&lt;string&gt; lst;

   copyIf(v.begin( ), v.end( ), back_inserter&lt;list&lt;string&gt; &gt;(lst),
      bind2nd(less&lt;string&gt;( ), "cookie"));

   printContainer(lst);
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">A sample run of Example 7-10 will look something like
this:</p>
<pre>Enter a series of strings: apple banana danish eclaire
^Z
-----
apple banana</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">You can see that it only copies values less than
"cookie" into the destination
range.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ECOBI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">The standard library contains the <tt>copy</tt> function
template, which copies elements from one range to another, but there
is no standard version that takes a <tt>predicate</tt> and
conditionally copies each element (i.e., a <tt>copy_if</tt>
algorithm), so that's what I have implemented in
Example 7-10. The behavior is simple enough: given a
source range and the beginning of the destination range, copy
elements to the destination range for which my unary predicate
functor returns <tt>true</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">The algorithm is simple, but there's more going on
with the implementation than meets the eye. Starting with the
declaration, you can see that there are three template parameters:</p>
<pre>template&lt;typename In, typename Out, typename UnPred&gt;
Out copyIf(In first, In last, Out result, UnPred pred) {</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The first template parameter, <tt>In</tt>, is the type of
the input <tt>iterator</tt>. Since this is the input range,
all <tt>copyIf</tt> needs to be able to do is extract the
dereferenced value from the <tt>iterator</tt> and increment
the <tt>iterator</tt> to the next element. This describes
the input <tt>iterator</tt> category
(<tt>iterator</tt> categories are described in Recipe 7.1), so that's the kind of
<tt>iterator</tt> we will advertise we need by naming the
template parameter <tt>In</tt>. There is no standard
convention (<tt>In</tt> and <tt>Out</tt> are my
conventions, which I described in the first recipe of this chapter),
but it's easy enough to get your point across with
similar naming conventions: <tt>InIter</tt>,
<tt>Input_T</tt>, or even <tt>InputIterator</tt>.
The second template parameter, <tt>Out</tt>, is the type of
the <tt>iterator</tt> that refers to the range where
elements will be copied to. <tt>copyIf</tt> needs to be
able to write to the dereferenced value of the output
<tt>iterator</tt> and increment the
<tt>iterator</tt>, which is the description of an output
<tt>iterator</tt>. By advertising your
<tt>iterator</tt> requirements with the template parameter
names, you make the calling conventions of the algorithm
self-documenting. But why use two different
<tt>iterator</tt> categories?</p>
<p class="docText">There are at least a couple of reasons why I used two different
<tt>iterator</tt> categories in <tt>copyIf</tt>.
First, the operations on each range are slightly different, and since
I will never need to go backward in the input range, or assign to it,
all I need is an input <tt>iterator</tt>. Similarly, I will
never need to read from the output range, so all I need there is an
output <tt>iterator</tt>. There are requirements for each
of the <tt>iterator</tt>s that do not apply to the other,
so it would make no sense to (for example) have one bidirectional
<tt>iterator</tt> type and use that for both ranges.
Second, using two different <tt>iterator</tt> types lets
the caller read from one kind of range and write to another. In Example 7-10, I read from a <tt>vector</tt> and
wrote to a <tt>list</tt>:</p>
<pre>vector&lt;string&gt; v(start, end);
list&lt;string&gt; lst;

copyIf(v.begin( ), v.end( ), back_inserter&lt;list&lt;string&gt; &gt;(lst),
   bind2nd(less&lt;string&gt;( ), "cookie"));</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">If you try doing this using a single <tt>iterator</tt> type
on your algorithm, it won't compile.</p>
<p class="docText">In Example 7-10, I passed a
<tt>back_inserter</tt> as the beginning of the output range
instead of, say, the <tt>iterator</tt> returned from
<tt>lst.begin</tt>. I did this because
<tt>lst</tt> has no elements in it, and in this algorithm
(as in the copy standard algorithm), the destination range has to be
big enough to hold all of the elements that will be copied to it.
Otherwise, incrementing the output <tt>iterator</tt>
<tt>result</tt> inside <tt>copyIf</tt> will have
undefined behavior. A back inserter returns an output
<tt>iterator</tt> that calls <tt>push_back</tt>
on its container whenever you increment the
<tt>iterator</tt>. This increases the size of
<tt>lst</tt> by one each time the output
<tt>iterator</tt> result is incremented. I describe the
<tt>back_inserter</tt> class template in more detail in
Recipe 7.5.</p>
<p class="docText">When writing your own algorithm for working with ranges (i.e., the
standard containers), you should work with
<tt>iterator</tt> arguments and not container arguments.
You may be tempted, for example, to declare <tt>copyIf</tt>
to take two container arguments instead of a source range and
destination output <tt>iterator</tt>, but this is a less
general solution than using ranges. You can't work
with only a subset of elements in a container if you take container
arguments, for one. Furthermore, in the body of
<tt>copyIf</tt>, you would depend on the
containers' <tt>begin</tt> and
<tt>end</tt> member functions to get the range you were
after, and the return type would depend on the type of container used
as the output range. This means that using nonstandard ranges will
not work with <tt>copyIf</tt>, such as built-in arrays or
your own custom containers. These, and other reasons, are why the
standard algorithms all operate on ranges.</p>
<p class="docText">Finally, if you do write your own algorithm, double-check the
standard algorithms for what you need. They may seem like very simple
algorithms at first glance, but their apparent simplicity is because
of their generality, and nine times out of ten they can be extended
in some fashion to meet your needs. Reusing the standard algorithms
is something you should strive for, since it
 goes along way in
ensuring portability and efficiency.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ETTBI">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 7.5</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
