<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Introduction</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Introduction</h3>
<p class="docText">This chapter contains solutions to common problems related to working
with C++ classes. The recipes are mostly independent, but they are
organized into two parts, which each make up about half the chapter.
The first half of the chapter contains solutions to common problems
you may experience when constructing objects of a class, such as
using a function to create objects (which is often called a Factory
pattern) or using constructors and destructors to manage resources.
The second half contains solutions to problems post-construction,
such as determining an object's type at runtime, and
miscellaneous implementation techniques, such as how to create an
interface with an abstract base class.</p>
<p class="docText">Classes are, of course, the central feature of C++ that supports
object-oriented programming, and there are lots of different things
you can do with classes. This chapter does not contain recipes that
explain the basics of classes: virtual functions (polymorphism),
inheritance, and encapsulation. I assume you are already familiar
with these general object-oriented design principles, whether
it's with C++ or another language such as Java or
Smalltalk. Rather, the purpose of this chapter is to provide recipes
for some of the mechanical difficulties you may run into when
implementing object-oriented designs with C++.</p>
<p class="docText">Object-oriented design and the related design patterns is a huge
subject, and the literature on the subject is vast and comprehensive.
I mention only a few design patterns by name in this chapter, and
they are the ones for which C++ facilities provide an elegant or
perhaps not-so-obvious solution. If you are unfamiliar with the
concept of design patterns, I recommend you read <span class="docEmphasis">Design
Patterns</span> by Gamma, et al (Addison Wesley), because it is a
useful thing to know in software engineering; however, it is not a
prerequisite for this chapter.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
