<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 8.2. Using a Function to Create Objects (a.k.a. Factory Pattern)</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 8.2. Using a Function to Create Objects (a.k.a. Factory Pattern)</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EMSBI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">Instead of creating a heap 


object with
<tt>new</tt>, you need a function (member or standalone) to
do the creation for you so that the type of the object being created
is decided dynamically. This sort of behavior is what the

Abstract Factory design pattern
achieves.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E2TBI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">You have a couple of choices here. You can:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">Have the function create an instance of the object on the heap, and
return a pointer to the object (or update a pointer that was passed
in with the new object's address)</p></li><li><p class="docList">Have the function create and return a temporary object</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">Example 8-2 shows how to do both of these. The
<tt>Session</tt> class in the example could be any class
that you don't want application code to create
directly (i.e., with <tt>new</tt>), but rather you want
creation managed by some other class; in this example, the managing
class is <tt>SessionFactory</tt>.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EZUBI">Example 8-2. Functions that create objects</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;

class Session {};

class SessionFactory {

public:
   Session Create( );
   Session* CreatePtr( );
   void Create(Session*&amp; p);
   // ...
};

// Return a copy of a stack object 
Session SessionFactory::Create( ) {
   Session s;
   return(s);
}

// Return a pointer to a heap object
Session* SessionFactory::CreatePtr( ) {
   return(new Session( ));
}

// Update the caller's pointer with the address
// of a new object
void SessionFactory::Create(Session*&amp; p) {
   p = new Session( );
}

static SessionFactory f; // The one factory object

int main( ) {
   Session* p1;
   Session* p2 = new Session( );

   *p2 = f.Create( );   // Just assign the object returned from Create
   p1 = f.CreatePtr( ); // or return a pointer to a heap object
   f.Create(p1);       // or update the pointer with the new address
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ECVBI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">Example 8-2 shows a few different ways to write a
function that returns an object. You may want to do this instead of
using <tt>new</tt> if the object being allocated is coming
from a pool, is tied to hardware, or you want destruction of the
objects to be managed by something other than the caller. There are
many reasons to use this approach (which is why, incidentally, there
is a design pattern for it); I have given only a few. Thankfully,
implementation of the Factory pattern in C++ is straightforward.</p>
<p class="docText">Returning the address of a new heap object or updating a reference to
a pointer argument are the most common ways to do this. Their
implementation is shown in Example 8-2, and it is
trivial, so there is no more to explain here. Less common, however,
is returning an entire object from a function, most likely because it
brings some caveats.</p>
<p class="docText">Returning a temporary

object
works by creating the object on the stack within the body of the
function. When the function returns, the compiler copies the data
from the temporary object to another temporary object that is
actually returned by the function. Finally, the object in the calling
function is assigned the value of the temporary object with its
assignment operator. What this means is that two objects are actually
created: the object in the factory function, and a temporary object
that is returned from the function, and <span class="docEmphasis">then</span> its
contents are copied to the target object. This is a lot of extra
copying (although the compiler may optimize the temporary object
away), so be aware of what's going on especially if
you're working with large objects or frequent calls
to this factory member function.</p>
<p class="docText">Also, this technique of copying a temporary object only works for
objects that can behave as <span class="docEmphasis">value objects</span>,
meaning that
when

one is copied the new version is equivalent to the original. For most
objects this makes sense, but for others it doesn't.
For example, consider creating an object of a class that listens on a
network port. When you instantiate the object, it may begin listening
on the target port, so you don't want to copy it to
a new object because then you will have two objects attempting to
listen on the same port. In this case, you would want to return the
address of a heap object.</p>
<p class="docText">You should also take a look at Recipe 8.12 if
you are writing a function or member function to create objects. With
function templates, you can write a single function that returns a
new object of any type. For example:</p>
<pre>template&lt;typename T&gt;
T* createObject( ) {
   return(new T( ));
}

MyClass* p1 = createObject( );
MyOtherClass* p2 = createObject( );
// ...</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This approach is handy if you want a single factory function to be
able to create objects of any number of classes (or a group of
related classes) in the same way, without having to write a redundant
factory function


 multiple times.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EVXBI">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 8.12</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
