<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 8.3. Using Constructors and Destructors to Manage Resources (or RAII)</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 8.3. Using Constructors and Destructors to Manage Resources (or RAII)</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ERTBI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">For a class that represents some resource, you want to use its
constructor to acquire it and the destructor to release it. This
technique is often referred to as <span class="docEmphasis">resource acquisition is
initialization</span>





 (RAII).</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ECVBI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Allocate or acquire the resource in the constructor, and free or
release the resource in the destructor. This reduces the amount of
code a user of the class must write to deal with exceptions. See
Example 8-3 for a simple illustration of this
technique.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EPVBI">Example 8-3. Using constructors and destructors</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;

using namespace std;

class Socket {
public:
   Socket(const string&amp; hostname) {}
};

class HttpRequest {
public:
   HttpRequest (const string&amp; hostname) :
      sock_(new Socket(hostname)) {}
   void send(string soapMsg) {sock_ &lt;&lt; soapMsg;}
  ~HttpRequest ( ) {delete sock_;}
private:
   Socket* sock_;
};

void sendMyData(string soapMsg, string host) {
   HttpRequest req(host);
   req.send(soapMsg);
   // Nothing to do here, because when req goes out of scope
   // everything is cleaned up.
}

int main( ) {
   string s = "xml";
   sendMyData(s, "www.oreilly.com");
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EYVBI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">The guarantees made by constructors and destructors offer a nice way
to let the compiler clean up after you. Typically, you initialize an
object and allocate any resources it uses in the constructor, and
clean them up in the destructor. This is normal. But programmers have
a tendency to use the create-open-use-close sequence of events, where
the user of the class is required to do explicit
"opening" and
"closing" of resources. A file
class is a good example.</p>
<p class="docText">The usual argument for RAII goes something like this. I could easily
have designed my <tt>HttpRequest</tt> class in Example 8-3 to make the user do a little more work. For
example:</p>
<pre>class HttpRequest {
public:
   HttpRequest ( );
   void open(const std::string&amp; hostname);
   void send(std::string soapMsg);
   void close( );
  ~HttpRequest ( );
private:
   Socket* sock_;
};</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">With this approach, a responsible version of
<tt>sendMyData</tt> might look like this:</p>
<pre>void sendMyData(std::string soapMsg, std::string host) {
   HttpRequest req;

   try {
      req.open( );
      req.send(soapMsg);
      req.close( );
   }
   catch (std::exception&amp; e) {
      req.close( );
      // Do something useful...
   }
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This is more work without any benefit. This sort of design forces the
user to write more code and to deal with exceptions by cleaning up
your class (assuming you don't call
<tt>close</tt> in your destructor).</p>
<p class="docText">The RAII approach has wide applicability, especially when you want a
guarantee that something will be undone if an exception is thrown
without having to put <tt>try</tt>/<tt>catch</tt>
code all over the place. Consider a desktop application that wants to
display a message on the status bar or title bar while some work is
being done:</p>
<pre>void MyWindow::thisTakesALongTime( ) {
   StatusBarMessage("Copying files...");
   // ...
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">All the
<tt>StatusBarMessage</tt>

class has to do is update the appropriate window with status
information when it is constructed, and reset it back to the empty
string (or whatever message was there previously) when it is
destroyed. Here's the key point: if the function
returns or an exception is thrown <tt>StatusBarMessage</tt>
still gets its work done. The compiler
<span class="docEmphasis">guarantees</span> that the destructor will be called
for a stack variable whose scope has exited. Without this approach,
the author of <tt>thisTakesALongTime</tt> needs to
carefully account for every control path so the wrong message
doesn't remain on the window if the operation fails,
the user cancels it, etc. Once again, this results in less code and
fewer errors for the author of the calling function.</p>
<p class="docText">RAII is no panacea, but if you have not used it before, chances are
you can find a number of places where it is useful. Another good
example is locking. If you are using RAII to manage locks on
resources such as threads, pooled objects, network connections, etc.,
you will find that this approach allows for stronger exception-safety
and less code. In fact, this is how the Boost multithreading library
implements locks to make for clean programming on the part of the
user. See Chapter 12 for a discussion of the
Boost Threads 





library.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
