<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 8.4. Automatically Adding New Class Instances to a Container</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 8.4. Automatically Adding New Class Instances to a Container</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ECVBI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You need to store all



instances of a class in a single
container without requiring the users of the class to do anything
special.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E6VBI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Include in the class a static member that is a container, such as a
<tt>list</tt>, defined in <tt>&lt;list&gt;</tt>.
Add an object's address to the container at
construction and remove it upon destruction. Example 8-4 shows

how.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EZWBI">Example 8-4. Keeping track of objects</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;list&gt;
#include &lt;algorithm&gt;

using namespace std;

class MyClass {
protected:
   int value_;
public:
   static list&lt;MyClass*&gt; instances_;
   MyClass(int val);
  ~MyClass( );
   static void showList( );
};

list&lt;MyClass*&gt; MyClass::instances_;

MyClass::MyClass(int val) {
   instances_.push_back(this);
   value_ = val;
}

MyClass::~MyClass( ) {
   list&lt;MyClass*&gt;::iterator p =
      find(instances_.begin( ), instances_.end( ), this);
   if (p != instances_.end( ))
      instances_.erase(p);
}

void MyClass::showList( ) {
   for (list&lt;MyClass*&gt;::iterator p = instances_.begin( );
        p != instances_.end( ); ++p)
      cout &lt;&lt; (*p)-&gt;value_ &lt;&lt; endl;
}

int main( ) {
   MyClass a(1);
   MyClass b(10);
   MyClass c(100);
   MyClass::showList( );
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Example 8-4 will create output like this:</p>
<pre>1
10
100</pre><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EKXBI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">The approach in Example 8-4 is straightforward: use
a <tt>static</tt>
<tt>list</tt> to hold pointers
to objects. When an object is created, add its address to the
<tt>list</tt>; when it's destroyed, remove
it. There are a couple of things to remember.</p>
<p class="docText">As with any <tt>static</tt> data member, you have to
declare it in the class header and define it in an implementation
file. Example 8-4 is all in one file, so it
doesn't apply here, but remember that you should
define the <tt>static</tt> variable in an implementation
file, not a header. See Recipe 8.5
for an explanation of why.</p>
<p class="docText">You don't have to use a <tt>static</tt>
member. You can, of course, use a global object, but then the design
is not self-contained. Furthermore, you have to allocate the global
object somewhere else, pass it in to <tt>MyClass</tt> at
construction, and, in general, do a bit more bookkeeping.</p>
<p class="docText">Be aware that the shared use of a global container like Example 8-4 will not work if multiple threads are
instantiating objects of <tt>MyClass</tt>. You need to
serialize access to the shared object through mutexes; see Chapter 12 for recipes relating to this and other
multithreading techniques.</p>
<p class="docText">If you want to keep track of all instances of a class, you may also
want to use a Factory pattern. Essentially, this approach would mean
that clients call a function to get a new object instead of using the
<tt>new</tt> operator. See Recipe 8.2 for more details on how to do this.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EMZBI">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 8.2</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
