<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 8.5. Ensuring a Single Copy of a Member Variable</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 8.5. Ensuring a Single Copy of a Member Variable</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EHWBI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have a
member



variable that you want only one instance of, no matter how many
instances of the class are created. This kind of member variable is
generally called a <tt>static</tt> member or a
<span class="docEmphasis">class</span> variable, as opposed to an
<span class="docEmphasis">instance</span> variable, which is one that is
instantiated with every object of a class.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EMXBI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Declare the member
 variable with the
<tt>static</tt> keyword, then initialize it in a separate
source file (not the header file where you declared it) as in Example 8-5.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EEYBI">Example 8-5. Using a static member variable</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// Static.h
class OneStatic {
public:
    int getCount( ) {return count;}
    OneStatic( );
protected:
    static int count;
};

// Static.cpp
#include "Static.h"

int OneStatic::count = 0;

OneStatic::OneStatic( ) {
   count++;
}

// StaticMain.cpp
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include "static.h"

using namespace std;

int main( ) {
   OneStatic a;
   OneStatic b;
   OneStatic c;

   cout &lt;&lt; a.getCount( ) &lt;&lt; endl;
   cout &lt;&lt; b.getCount( ) &lt;&lt; endl;
   cout &lt;&lt; c.getCount( ) &lt;&lt; endl;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ENYBI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText"><tt>static</tt> is C++'s way of allowing
only one copy of something. If you declare a member variable
<tt>static</tt>, only one of it will ever be constructed,
regardless of the number of objects of that class that are
instantiated. Similarly, if you declare a variable
<tt>static</tt> in a function, it is constructed at most
once and retains its value from one function call to another. With
member variables, you have to do a little extra work to make sure
member variables are allocated properly, though. This is why there
are three files in Example 8-5.</p>
<p class="docText">First, you have to use the <tt>static</tt> keyword when you
declare the variable. This is easy enough: add this keyword in the
class header in the header file <i>Static.h</i>:</p>
<pre>protected:
   <b>static</b> int count;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Once you have done that, you have to define the variable in a source
file somewhere. This is what allocates storage for it. Do this by
fully qualifying the name of the variable and assigning it a value,
like this:</p>
<pre>int OneStatic::count = 0;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In Example 8-5, I put this definition in the file
<i>Static.cpp</i>. This is what you have to do; you
should not put the definition in the header file. If you do, storage
will be allocated in each implementation file that includes the
header file, and either you will get a linker error or, worse, there
will be several instances of this member variable in memory. This is
not what you want if you need a <tt>static</tt> member
variable.</p>
<p class="docText">In the main file, <i>StaticMain.cpp</i>, you can see
what happens. Several instances of the class
<tt>OneStatic</tt> are created, and the default constructor
of <tt>OneStatic</tt> increments the
<tt>static</tt> member variable by one each time. As a
result, the output from <tt>main</tt> in
<i>StaticMain.cpp</i> is:</p>
<pre>3
3
3</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Each call to <tt>getCount</tt> returns the same integer
value, even though each is invoked on a different instance of the
class.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
