<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 8.6. Determining an Object's Type at Runtime</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 8.6. Determining an Object's Type at Runtime</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EAXBI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">At runtime, you need 


to interrogate dynamically
the type of particular class.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ECYBI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use 
runtime type identification
(commonly referred to as RTTI) to query the address of the object for
the type of object it points to. Example 8-6 shows
how.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EXYBI">Example 8-6. Using runtime type identification</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;typeinfo&gt;

using namespace std;

class Base {};
class Derived : public Base {};

int main( ) {

   Base b, bb;
   Derived d;

   // Use typeid to test type equality
   if (typeid(b) == typeid(d)) { // No
      cout &lt;&lt; "b and d are of the same type.\n";
   }
   if (typeid(b) == typeid(bb)) { // Yes
      cout &lt;&lt; "b and bb are of the same type.\n";
   }
   if (typeid(d) == typeid(Derived)) { // Yes
      cout &lt;&lt; "d is of type Derived.\n";
   }
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EAZBI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">Example 8-6 shows you how to use the operator
<tt>typeid</tt> to determine and compare the type of an
object. <tt>typeid</tt> takes an expression or a type and
returns a reference to an object of <tt>type_info</tt> or a
subclass of it (which is implementation defined). You can use what is
returned to test for equality or retrieve a string representation of
the type's name. For example, you can compare the
types of two objects like this:</p>
<pre>if (typeid(b) == typeid(d)) {</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This will return true if the <tt>type_info</tt> objects
returned by both of these are equal. This is because
<tt>typeid</tt> returns a reference to a static object, so
if you call it on two objects that are the same type, you will get
two references to the same thing, which is why the equality test
returns true.</p>
<p class="docText">You can also use <tt>typeid</tt> with the type itself, as
in:</p>
<pre>if (typeid(d) == typeid(Derived)) {</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This allows you to explicitly test for a particular type.</p>
<p class="docText">Probably the most common use of <tt>typeid</tt> is for
debugging. To write out the name of the type, use
<tt>type_info::name</tt>, like this:</p>
<pre>std::cout &lt;&lt; typeid(d).name( ) &lt;&lt; std::endl;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">When you are passing objects around of varying types, this can be a
useful debugging aid. The null-terminated string returned by name is
implementation defined, but you can expect (but not depend on) the
name of the type most of the time. This works for native types, too.</p>
<p class="docText">Do not abuse this technique by basing program logic on type
information unless you absolutely have to. In general, it is
considered bad design to have logic that does something along the
lines of:</p>
<p class="docText">If <tt>obj</tt> has a type of X, do something else, if
<tt>obj</tt> has a type of Y, do something else.</p>
<p class="docText">This approach is a bad design because the client code now contains
superfluous dependencies on the type of the object being used. It
also results in a lot of messy if/then code that is duplicated
everywhere you want particular behavior for an object of type X or Y.
Object-oriented programming and polymorphic behavior exist in large
part so you don't have to write this kind of logic.
If you want type-specific, dynamic behavior for some family of
related classes, then they should all subclass the same base class
and use virtual functions to dynamically invoke potentially different
behavior based on the type.</p>
<p class="docText">RTTI adds overhead, so compilers don't usually
enable it by default. Chances are your compiler has a command-line
parameter to turn on RTTI. Also, this isn't the only
way you can query type information, see 


Recipe 8.7 for
another technique.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EV2BI">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 8.7</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
