<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 8.7. Determining if One Object's Class Is a Subclass of Another</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 8.7. Determining if One Object's Class Is a Subclass of Another</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EFYBI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have two objects, and you 

need to know if
their respective classes have a base class/derived class relationship
or if they are unrelated.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EAZBI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use the
<tt>dynamic_cast</tt>

operator to attempt to downcast from one type to another. The result
tells you about the
class's

relationships. Example 8-7 presents some code for
doing this.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EA1BI">Example 8-7. Determining class relationships</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;typeinfo&gt;

using namespace std;

class Base {
public:
   virtual ~Base( ) {} // Make this a polymorphic class
};
class Derived : public Base {
public:
   virtual ~Derived( ) {}
};

int main( ) {

   Derived d;

   // Query the type relationship
   if (dynamic_cast&lt;Base*&gt;(&amp;d)) {
      cout &lt;&lt; "Derived is a subclass of Base" &lt;&lt; endl;
   }
   else {
      cout &lt;&lt; "Derived is NOT a subclass of Base" &lt;&lt; endl;
   }
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EJ1BI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">Use the <tt>dynamic_cast</tt> operator to query the
relationship between two types. <tt>dynamic_cast</tt> takes
a pointer or reference to a given type and tries to convert it to a
pointer or reference of a derived type, i.e., casting down a class
hierarchy. If you have a <tt>Base*</tt> that points to a
<tt>Derived</tt> object,
<tt>dynamic_cast&lt;Base*&gt;(&amp;d)</tt> returns a
pointer of type <tt>Derived</tt>
<span class="docEmphasis">only
if</span>
<tt>d</tt> is an object of a type
that's derived from <tt>Base</tt>. If this
is not possible (because <tt>Derived</tt> is not a
subclass, directly or indirectly, of <tt>Base</tt>), the
cast fails and <tt>NULL</tt> is returned if you passed
<tt>dynamic_cast</tt> a pointer to a derived object. If it
is a reference, then the standard exception
<tt>bad_cast</tt> is thrown. Also, the base class must be
publicly inherited and it must be unambiguous. The result tells you
if one class is a descendant of another. Here's what
I did in Example 8-7:</p>
<pre>if (dynamic_cast&lt;Base*&gt;(&amp;d)) {</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This returns a non-<tt>NULL</tt> pointer because
<tt>d</tt> is an object of a class that is a descendant of
<tt>Base</tt>. Use this on any pair of classes to determine
their relationship. The only requirement is that the object argument
is a <span class="docEmphasis">polymorphic</span>

type, which means that it has at least one virtual function. If it
does not, it won't compile. This
doesn't usually cause much of a headache though,
because a class hierarchy without virtual functions is uncommon.</p>
<p class="docText">If the syntax is too messy for you, you can use a macro to hide some
of the details:</p>
<pre>#define IS_DERIVED_FROM(baseClass, x) (dynamic_cast&lt;baseClass*&gt;(&amp;(x)))
//...
if (IS_DERIVED_FROM(Base, l)) { // ...</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This type information is not free, though, because
<tt>dynamic_cast</tt> must traverse the class hierarchy at
runtime to determine if one class is a descendant of another, so be
smart about where you use it. Additionally, compilers
don't include this information by default since
there is overhead required for RTTI, and not everyone uses this
feature, so you may have to enable it with a compiler

 switch.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E63BI">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 8.6</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
