<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 8.8. Giving Each Instance of a Class a Unique Identifier</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 8.8. Giving Each Instance of a Class a Unique Identifier</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EKZBI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You want each object of a 

class to have a
unique identifier.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ED1BI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use a static member variable to keep track of the next available
identifier to use. In the constructor, assign the next available
value to the current object and increment the static member. See
Example 8-8 to get an idea of how this works.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EQ1BI">Example 8-8. Assigning unique identifiers</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;

class UniqueID {
protected:
   static int nextID;
public:
   int id;
   UniqueID( );
   UniqueID(const UniqueID&amp; orig);
   UniqueID&amp; operator=(const UniqueID&amp; orig);
};

int UniqueID::nextID = 0;

UniqueID::UniqueID( ) {
   id = ++nextID;
}

UniqueID::UniqueID(const UniqueID&amp; orig) {
   id = orig.id;
}

UniqueID&amp; UniqueID::operator=(const UniqueID&amp; orig) {
   id = orig.id;
   return(*this);
}
    
int main( ) {
   UniqueID a;
   std::cout &lt;&lt; a.id &lt;&lt; std::endl;
   UniqueID b;
   std::cout &lt;&lt; b.id &lt;&lt; std::endl;
   UniqueID c;
   std::cout &lt;&lt; c.id &lt;&lt; std::endl;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EZ1BI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">Use a <tt>static</tt> variable to keep track of the next
identifier to use. In Example 8-8, I used a
<tt>static</tt>
<tt>int</tt>, but you can use
anything as the unique identifier, so long as you have a function
that can generate the unique values.</p>
<p class="docText">In this case, the identifiers are not reused until you reach the
maximum size of an int. Once you delete an object, that
object's unique value is gone until the program
restarts or the identifier value maxes out and flips over. This
uniqueness throughout the program can have some interesting
advantages. For example, if you're working with a
memory management library that shuffles memory around and invalidates
pointers, you can be assured that the unique value will remain the
same per object. If you use the unique values in conjunction with
Recipe 8.4, but use a <tt>map</tt>
instead of a <tt>list</tt>, you can easily locate your
objects given the unique identifier. To do this, you would simply
<tt>map</tt> unique IDs to object instances, like so:</p>
<pre>static map&lt;int, MyClass*&gt; instmap;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This way, any code that keeps track of an object's
identifier can find it later without having to maintain a reference
to it.</p>
<p class="docText">But that's not the whole story. Consider the case
where you need to add one of these objects to a standard container
(<tt>vector</tt>, <tt>list</tt>,
<tt>set</tt>, etc.). The standard containers store copies
of the objects you add to them, not references or pointers to the
objects themselves (unless, of course, it is a container of
pointers). Thus, the standard containers expect objects they contain
to behave as <span class="docEmphasis">value</span> objects, which means objects
that, when assigned with the assignment operator, or copied with a
copy constructor, create new versions that are equal to the old
versions.</p>
<p class="docText">This means that you have to make a decision on how you want your
unique objects to behave. When you create an object with a unique
identifier and add it to a container you then have two objects with
the same identifier unless you've done something
different in your assignment operator. You need to deal with the
unique value in your assignment operator and copy constructor in a
way that makes sense. Does it make sense for the object in the
container to be equal to the original object? If so, the standard
copy constructor and assignment operators will get the job done, but
you should be explicit so users of your class know you did it that
way on purpose and didn't just forget how containers
work and get lucky. For example, to use the same identifier values
your copy constructor and assignment operator would look like this:</p>
<pre>UniqueID::UniqueID(const UniqueID&amp; orig) {
   id = orig.id;
}

UniqueID&amp; UniqueID::operator=(const UniqueID&amp; orig) {
   id = orig.id;
   return(*this);
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">But maybe it makes more sense to create another unique value for the
object in the container in the context of your application. In that
case, just use the static variable again as you did in the ordinary
constructor, like this:</p>
<pre>UniqueID::UniqueID(const UniqueID&amp; orig) {
   id = ++nextID;
}

UniqueID&amp; UniqueID::operator=(const UniqueID&amp; orig) {
   id = ++nextID;
   return(*this);
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">You may still not be in the clear though. If
<tt>UniqueID</tt> will be used by multiple threads, you are
going to run into trouble because access to the static variable is
not synchronized. See Chapter 12 for
more


information on making resources usable by multiple threads.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EK4BI">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 8.3</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
