<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 8.9. Creating a Singleton Class</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 8.9. Creating a Singleton Class</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EP1BI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have a class that must only 


ever be instantiated once, and you
need to provide a way for clients to access that class in such a way
that the same, single object is returned each time. This is commonly
referred to as a <span class="docEmphasis">singleton</span> pattern, or a
singleton class.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ES2BI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Create a <tt>static</tt> member that is a pointer to the
current class, restrict the use of constructors to create the class
by making them <tt>private</tt>, and provide a public
<tt>static</tt> member function that clients can use to
access the single, static instance. Example 8-9
demonstrates how to do this.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EF3BI">Example 8-9. Creating a singleton class</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;

using namespace std;

class Singleton {
public:
   // This is how clients can access the single instance
   static Singleton* getInstance( );

   void setValue(int val) {value_ = val;}
   int  getValue( )           {return(value_);}

protected:
   int value_;

private:
   static Singleton* inst_;   // The one, single instance
   Singleton( ) : value_(0) {} // private constructor
   Singleton(const Singleton&amp;);
   Singleton&amp; operator=(const Singleton&amp;);
};

// Define the static Singleton pointer
Singleton* Singleton::inst_ = NULL;

Singleton* Singleton::getInstance( ) {
   if (inst_ == NULL) {
      inst_ = new Singleton( );
   }
   return(inst_);
}

int main( ) {

   Singleton* p1 = Singleton::getInstance( );

   p1-&gt;setValue(10);
    
   Singleton* p2 = Singleton::getInstance( );

   cout &lt;&lt; "Value = " &lt;&lt; p2-&gt;getValue( ) &lt;&lt; '\n';
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EO3BI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">There are many situations where you want at most one instance of a
class—this is why <tt>Singleton</tt> is a design
pattern. With a few simple steps, it's easy to
implement a singleton class in C++.</p>
<p class="docText">When you decide that you only want one instance of something, the
<tt>static</tt> keyword should come to mind. As I described
in Recipe 8.5, a
<tt>static</tt> member variable is one such that there is
at most one instance of it in memory. Use a <tt>static</tt>
member variable to keep track of the one object of your singleton
class, as I did in Example 8-9:</p>
<pre>private:
   static Singleton* inst_;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Keep it <tt>private</tt> to keep client code from knowing
about it. Be sure to initialize it to <tt>NULL</tt> with a
static variable definition in an implementation file:</p>
<pre>Singleton* Singleton::inst_ = NULL;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">To keep clients from instantiating this class, make the constructors
private, especially the default constructor.</p>
<pre>private:
   Singleton( ) {}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This way, if anyone tries to create a new singleton class on the heap
or the stack, they'll get a friendly compiler error.</p>
<p class="docText">Now that you've created a static variable to keep
track of the one <tt>Singleton</tt> object, and
you've prohibited creation of
<tt>Singleton</tt> objects by restricting their
constructors, all that's left is to provide a way
for clients to access the one instance of the
<tt>Singleton</tt> object. Do this with a
<tt>static</tt> member function:</p>
<pre>Singleton* Singleton::getInstance( ) {
   if (inst_ == NULL) {
      inst_ = new Singleton( );
   }
   return(inst_);
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">You can see how this works. If the <tt>static</tt>
<tt>Singleton</tt> pointer is <tt>NULL</tt>,
create the object. If it has already been created, just return its
address. Clients can access the one instance of
<tt>Singleton</tt> by calling this
<tt>static</tt> member:</p>
<pre>Singleton* p1 = Singleton::getInstance( );</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">And if you don't want clients to deal with pointers,
you can return a reference, too:</p>
<pre>Singleton&amp; Singleton::getInstance( ) {
   if (inst_ == NULL) {
      inst_ = new Singleton( );
   }
   return(*inst_);
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The point here is that in both cases you have prevented clients from
creating instances of a <tt>Singleton</tt> object and
provided 


a single
interface through which they can gain access.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EV6BI">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 8.3</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
