<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 8.10. Creating an Interface with an Abstract Base Class</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 8.10. Creating an Interface with an Abstract Base Class</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EA3BI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You need to define an interface


 that subclasses will implement, but the
concept that the interface defines is just an abstraction, and is not
something that should be instantiated itself.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EB4BI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Create an abstract class that defines the interface by declaring at
least one of its functions as pure <tt>virtual</tt>.
Subclass this abstract class by clients who will use different
implementations to fulfill the same interface guarantees. Example 8-10 shows how you might define an abstract class
for reading a configuration file.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EQ4BI">Example 8-10. Using an abstract base class</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;fstream&gt;

using namespace std;

class AbstractConfigFile {

public:
   virtual ~AbstractConfigFile( ) {}

   virtual void getKey(const string&amp; header,
                       const string&amp; key,
                             string&amp; val) const = 0;
   virtual void exists(const string&amp; header,
                       const string&amp; key,
                             string&amp; val) const = 0;
};

class TXTConfigFile : public AbstractConfigFile {

public:
            TXTConfigFile( ) : in_(NULL) {}
            TXTConfigFile(istream&amp; in) : in_(&amp;in) {}
   virtual ~TXTConfigFile( ) {}

   virtual void getKey(const string&amp; header,
                       const string&amp; key,
                             string&amp; val) const {}
   virtual void exists(const string&amp; header,
                       const string&amp; key,
                             string&amp; val) const {}

protected:
   istream* in_;
};

class MyAppClass {
public:
   MyAppClass( ) : config_(NULL) {}
  ~MyAppClass( ) {}
   void setConfigObj(const AbstractConfigFile* p) {config_ = p;}
   void myMethod( );

private:
   const AbstractConfigFile* config_;
};

void MyAppClass::myMethod( ) {

   string val;
   config_-&gt;getKey("Foo", "Bar", val);
   // ...
}

int main( ) {

   ifstream in("foo.txt");
   TXTConfigFile cfg(in);

   MyAppClass m;

   m.setConfigObj(&amp;cfg);

   m.myMethod( );
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EZ4BI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">An abstract base class (often referred to as an ABC) is a class that
can't be instantiated and, therefore, serves only as
an interface. A class is abstract if it declares at least one pure
virtual function or inherits one without implementing it. Thus, if a
subclass of an ABC needs to be instantiated, it has to implement each
of the virtual functions, which means that it supports the interface
declared by the ABC.</p>
<p class="docText">A subclass that inherits an ABC (and implements all of its pure
virtuals) upholds the contract defined by the interface. Consider the
classes <tt>MyAppClass</tt> and
<tt>TXTConfigFile</tt> in Example 8-10.
<tt>MyAppClass</tt> has a pointer member that points to an
object of type <tt>AbstractConfigFile</tt>:</p>
<pre>const AbstractConfigFile* config_;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">(I made it <tt>const</tt> because
<tt>MyAppClass</tt> should not be changing the config file,
only reading from it.) Users can set the config file for
<tt>MyAppClass</tt> with a setter member function,
<tt>setConfigObj</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">When it is time to use the config file for
<tt>MyAppClass</tt>, as
<tt>MyAppClass::myMethod</tt> does, it can call any of the
functions declared on <tt>AbstractConfigFile</tt> without
regard for the actual kind of config file that was used. It could be
a <tt>TXTConfigFile</tt>, <tt>XMLConfigFile</tt>,
or anything else that inherits from
<tt>AbstractConfigFile</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">This polymorphic behavior is the benefit of inheritance in general:
if your code refers to a base class object, invoking virtual
functions on it will dynamically use the correct versions of
subclasses of that class, so long as the actual object
you're referring to is an object of that subclass.
But this is the case whether the base class is an ABC or not, so
what's the difference?</p>
<p class="docText">There are two differences. A 
pure interface class (an ABC that
provides no implementation) serves only as a contract that subclasses
must obey if they want to be instantiated. Often, this means that the
is-a test for a subclass of a pure interface class may fail (meaning
you can't say that an object of the subclass is an
object of the base class), but that the behaves-like-a test succeeds.
This permits you to have some separation of what something is versus
what it can do. Think of Superman. He is a person, but he is also a
superhero. Superheroes can fly like a bird, but it is not correct to
say that a superhero is a bird. You might design a class hierarchy
for Superman like I did in Example 8-11.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E56BI">Example 8-11. Using a pure interface</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">class Person {
public:
   virtual void eat( )   = 0;
   virtual void sleep( ) = 0;
   virtual void walk( )  = 0;
   virtual void jump( )  = 0;
};

class IAirborne {
public:
   virtual void fly( )  = 0;
   virtual void up( )   = 0;
   virtual void down( ) = 0;
};

class Superhero : public Person,     // A superhero *is* a person
                  public IAirborne { // and flies
public:
   virtual void eat( );
   virtual void sleep( );
   virtual void walk( );
   virtual void jump( );
   virtual void fly( );
   virtual void up( );
   virtual void down( );
   virtual ~Superhero( );
};

void Superhero::fly( ) {
   // ...
}

// Implement all of the pure virtuals in Superhero's superclasses...

int main( ) {

   Superhero superman;
   superman.walk( ); // Superman can walk like a person
   superman.fly( );  // or fly like a bird
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Lots of different kinds of things fly, though, so you
don't want an interface called, for example,
<tt>IBird</tt>. <tt>IAirborne</tt> indicates that
anything that supports this interface can fly. All it does is allow
client code to rest assured that if it is working with an object
derived from <tt>IAirborne</tt>, the client code can call
<tt>fly</tt>, <tt>up</tt>, and
<tt>down</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">The second difference is that an ABC can define an abstract entity
that makes no sense as an object because it is inherently general. In
this case, the is-a test holds for the inheritance, but the ABC is
abstract because, by itself, it has no implementation that can be
instantiated as an object. Consider the
<tt>AbstractConfigFile</tt> class in Example 8-10: Does it make any sense to instantiate an
<tt>AbstractConfigFile</tt>? No, it only makes sense to
instantiate different <span class="docEmphasis">kinds</span> of config files that
have concrete representation.</p>
<p class="docText">Here is a quick list of rules regarding

 abstract classes and pure virtual
functions. A class is abstract if:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">It declares at least one pure virtual function</p></li><li><p class="docList">It inherits, but does not implement, at least one pure virtual
function</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">An abstract class cannot be instantiated. However, with an abstract
class you can:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">Have data members</p></li><li><p class="docList">Have nonvirtual member functions</p></li><li><p class="docList">Provide implementations for pure virtual functions</p></li><li><p class="docList">Do most of the things you can in an ordinary class</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">In other words, you can do just about everything you can do with an
ordinary class except instantiate it.</p>
<p class="docText">Using ABCs in C++ requires discretion when it comes to
implementation. Whether you use an ABC as a pure interface or not is
up to you. For example, assume for a moment that in the superhero
example I decided that the <tt>Person</tt> class should be
abstract, but since every kind of person has a first and last name, I
want to add those members to the class and the associated getter and
setter member functions so that authors of subclasses
don't have to.</p>
<pre>class Person {
public:
   virtual void   eat( )   = 0;
   virtual void   sleep( ) = 0;
   virtual void   walk( )  = 0;
   virtual void   jump( )  = 0;
   <span class="docEmphBold">virtual void   setFirstName(const string&amp; s) {firstName_ = s;}</span>
					<span class="docEmphBold">virtual void   setLastName(const string&amp; s) {lastName_ = s;}</span>
					<span class="docEmphBold">virtual string getFirstName( ) {return(firstName_);}</span>
					<span class="docEmphBold">virtual string getLastName( ) {return(lastName_);}</span> 
protected:
   <span class="docEmphBold">string firstName_;</span>
					<span class="docEmphBold">string lastName_;</span>
};</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Now, if the <tt>Superhero</tt> subclass wants to override
one of these functions, it can. All it has to do is use the base
class name to qualify which version it is invoking. For example:</p>
<pre>string Superhero::getLastName( ) {
   return(<b>Person::getLastName( )</b> + " (Superhero)");
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Incidentally, you can still make these functions pure and provide a
default implementation. You just have to use the <tt>=</tt>
<tt>0</tt> syntax following the declaration and put the
actual definition somewhere else, like this:</p>
<pre>class Person {
// ...
virtual void   setFirstName(const string&amp; s) = 0;
// ...
Person::setFirstName(const string&amp; s) {
   firstName_ = s;
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">By doing this, you force subclasses to override it, but they can
still call the default version if they want to by using the fully
qualified class name.</p>
<p class="docText">Finally, if you provide a virtual destructor in your base class (pure
or not), you have to provide a body for it. This is because the
subclass destructor will call the base class destructor


 automatically.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
