<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 8.11. Writing a Class Template</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 8.11. Writing a Class Template</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E44BI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have a class whose

 members need to be different types
in different situations, and using conventional polymorphic behavior
is cumbersome or redundant. In other words, as the class designer,
you want a class user to be able to choose the types of various parts
of your class when he instantiates it, rather than setting them all
in the original definition of the class.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EY5BI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use a class template to parameterize types that can be used to
declare class members (and much more). That is, write your class with
placeholders for types; thus, leaving it to the user of the class
template to choose which types to use. See Example 8-12 for an example of a tree node that can point
to any type.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EF6BI">Example 8-12. Writing a class template</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;

using namespace std;

template&lt;typename T&gt;
class TreeNode {
public:
   TreeNode(const T&amp; val) : val_(val), left_(NULL), right_(NULL) {}
  ~TreeNode( ) {
      delete left_;
      delete right_;
   }

   const T&amp; getVal( ) const {return(val_);}
   void setVal(const T&amp; val) {val_ = val;}
   void addChild(TreeNode&lt;T&gt;* p) {
      const T&amp; other = p-&gt;getVal( );
      if (other &gt; val_)
         if (right_)
            right_-&gt;addChild(p);
         else
            right_ = p;
      else
         if (left_)
            left_-&gt;addChild(p);
         else
            left_ = p;
   }
   const TreeNode&lt;T&gt;* getLeft( ) {return(left_);}
   const TreeNode&lt;T&gt;* getRight( ) {return(right_);}

private:
   T val_;
   TreeNode&lt;T&gt;* left_;
   TreeNode&lt;T&gt;* right_;
};

int main( ) {

   TreeNode&lt;string&gt; node1("frank");
   TreeNode&lt;string&gt; node2("larry");
   TreeNode&lt;string&gt; node3("bill");

   node1.addChild(&amp;node2);
   node1.addChild(&amp;node3);
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EO6BI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">Class templates provide a way for a class designer to parameterize
types, so that they can be supplied by a user of the class at the
point the class is instantiated. Templates might be a bit confusing
though, so let me go through the example before coming back to how it
works.</p>
<p class="docText">Consider the declaration of the <tt>TreeNode</tt> class
template in Example 8-12:</p>
<pre>template&lt;typename T&gt;
class TreeNode { //...</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>template&lt;typename T&gt;</tt> part is what makes
this a class template and not an ordinary class. What this line says
is that <tt>T</tt> is the name of a type that will be given
when the class is used, but not right now where it is declared. The
parameter <tt>T</tt> can then be used throughout the
declaration and definition of <tt>TreeNode</tt> as if it
were any other type, native or user defined. For example, I have a
private member named <tt>val_</tt> that I want to be of
type <tt>T</tt>, so I declare it like this:</p>
<pre>T val_;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This simply declares a class member named <tt>val_</tt> of
some type that will be determined later in the same way I would
declare an <tt>int</tt>, <tt>float</tt>,
<tt>MyClass</tt>, or <tt>string</tt> named
<tt>val_</tt>. In this respect, you can think of it as
something like a macro (i.e., using <tt>#define</tt>),
although the similarity with macros is little more than that.</p>
<p class="docText">Your type parameter can be used in any way you would use an ordinary
parameter: return values, pointers, member function parameters, and
so on. Consider my getter and setter methods for
<tt>val_</tt>:</p>
<pre>const T&amp; getVal( ) const {return(val_);}
void setVal(const T&amp; val) {val_ = val;}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText"><tt>getVal</tt> returns a <tt>const</tt>
reference to <tt>val_</tt>, which is of type
<tt>T</tt>, and <tt>setVal</tt> takes a reference
to a <tt>T</tt> and sets <tt>val_</tt> equal to
it. Things get a little messier when it comes to the
<tt>getLeft</tt> and <tt>getRight</tt> member
functions, so I'll come back to those in a minute.
Bear with me.</p>
<p class="docText">Now that <tt>TreeNode</tt> has been declared with a type
placeholder, some client code somewhere has to use it.
Here's how.</p>
<p class="docText"><tt>TreeNode</tt> is a simple implementation of a


binary tree. To create a tree that stores
string values, create your nodes like this:</p>
<pre>TreeNode&lt;string&gt; node1("frank");
TreeNode&lt;string&gt; node2("larry");
TreeNode&lt;string&gt; node3("bill");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The type between the angle brackets is what gets used for
<tt>T</tt> when this class template is
<span class="docEmphasis">instantiated</span>. Template instantiation is the
process the compiler goes through when it builds a version of
<tt>TreeNode</tt> where <tt>T</tt> is
<tt>string</tt>. A binary, physical representation of
<tt>TreeNode&lt;string&gt;</tt> is created when it is
instantiated (and only when it is instantiated). What you get is a
memory layout that is equivalent to if you had just written
<tt>TreeNode</tt> without the template keyword and type
parameter, and used a string everywhere you used a
<tt>T</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Instantiation
of a template for a given type parameter is analogous to
instantiation of an object of a class. The key difference is that
template instantiation occurs at <span class="docEmphasis">compile</span> time,
while object instantiation occurs at runtime. This means that if,
instead of a <tt>string</tt>, you wanted your binary tree
to store <tt>int</tt>s, you would declare nodes like this:</p>
<pre>TreeNode&lt;int&gt; intNode1(7);
TreeNode&lt;int&gt; intNode2(11);
TreeNode&lt;int&gt; intNode3(13);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">As with the <tt>string</tt> version, a binary entity is
created for the <tt>TreeNode</tt> class template using
<tt>int</tt> as the internal type.</p>
<p class="docText">A minute ago, I said I would revisit the <tt>getLeft</tt>
and <tt>getRight</tt> member functions. Now that you are
familiar with template instantiations (if you
weren't already), the declaration and definition of
<tt>getLeft</tt> and <tt>getRight</tt> may make
more sense:</p>
<pre>const TreeNode&lt;T&gt;* getLeft( ) {return(left_);}
const TreeNode&lt;T&gt;* getRight( ) {return(right_);}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">What this says is that each of these member functions returns a
pointer to an instantiation of <tt>TreeNode</tt> for
<tt>T</tt>. Therefore, when <tt>TreeNode</tt> is
instantiated for, say, a <tt>string</tt>,
<tt>getLeft</tt> and <tt>getRight</tt> are
instantiated like this:</p>
<pre>const TreeNode&lt;string&gt;* getLeft( ) {return(left_);}
const TreeNode&lt;string&gt;* getRight( ) {return(right_);}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">You aren't limited to one template parameter though.
You can use a bunch of them, if you like. Imagine that you want to
keep track of the number of children below a given node, but users of
your class may be pressed for space and not want to use an
<tt>int</tt> if they can get away with a
<tt>short</tt>. Similarly, they may want to supply
something other than a simple, built-in type to tally the node usage,
like their own number class. In any case, you can allow them to do so
with another template parameter:</p>
<pre>template&lt;typename T, typename N = short&gt;
class TreeNode {
// ...
   N getNumChildren( );

private:
   TreeNode( ) {}
   T val_;
   N numChildren_;
// ...</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This way, the person using your class can supply an
<tt>int</tt>, <tt>short</tt>, or anything else he
wants to keep track of subtree size on each node.</p>
<p class="docText">You can also supply default arguments for template parameters, as I
just did in the example, with the same syntax you would use to
declare default function parameters:</p>
<pre>template&lt;typename T, typename N = short&gt;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">As with default function arguments, you can only supply them for a
given parameter if it is either the last parameter or each parameter
to the right of it has a default argument.</p>
<p class="docText">In Example 8-12, the definition for the template is
given in the same place as the declaration. Usually, I do this to
conserve space in example code, but, in this case, there is another
reason. Templates (classes or functions—see Recipe 8.12) are only compiled into binary form when they
are instantiated. Thus, you cannot have the template declaration in a
header file and its implementation in a source file (i.e.,
<i>.cpp</i>). The reason is that there is nothing to
compile! There are exceptions to this, but, generally speaking, if
you are writing a class template, you should put its implementation
in the header file or in an inline file that is included by the
header.</p>
<p class="docText">If you do this, you will need to use a syntax that is a little
unfamiliar. Declare the member functions and the rest of the class
template as you would an ordinary class, but when you are defining
the member functions, you have to include some extra tokens to tell
the compiler that this is for a class template. For example, you
would define <tt>getVal</tt> like this (compare this to
Example 8-12):</p>
<pre><span class="docEmphBold">template&lt;typename T&gt;</span>
const T&amp; <b>TreeNode&lt;T&gt;</b>::getVal( ) const {
   return(val_);
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The body of the function looks the same.</p>
<p class="docText">Be careful with templates though, because if you write one that is
used everywhere, you can
get

<span class="docEmphasis">code
bloat</span>, which is what happens when the same template with
the same parameters (e.g., <tt>TreeNode&lt;int,
short&gt;</tt>) is compiled into separate object files.
Essentially, the same binary representation of an instantiated
template is in multiple files, and this can make your library or
executable much larger than it needs to be.</p>
<p class="docText">One way to avoid this is to use explicit instantiation, which is a
way to tell the compiler that it needs to instantiate a version of
the class template for a particular set of template arguments. If you
do this in a place that is a common location that will be linked to
by multiple clients, you can avoid code bloat. For example, if I know
that throughout my application I will be using
<tt>TreeNode&lt;string&gt;</tt>, I would put a line like
this in a common source file:</p>
<pre>// common.cpp
template class TreeNode&lt;string&gt;;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Build a shared library with that file and then code that uses
<tt>TreeNode&lt;string&gt;</tt> can use the library
dynamically without having to contain its own compiled version. Other
code can include the header for the class template, then link to this
library and therefore avoid needing its own copy. This requires some
experimentation though, because not all compilers have the same
problems with code bloat to the same degree, but this is the general
approach you can use to minimize it.</p>
<p class="docText">C++ templates (both class and function) are a vast subject, and there
is a long list of mind-bending techniques for powerful, efficient
designs that use templates. A great example of applications of class
templates is the standard library containers, e.g.,
<tt>vector</tt>, <tt>list</tt>,
<tt>set</tt>, etc., which is the subject of Chapter 15. Most of the interesting developments that
are happening in the C++ literature have to do with templates. If you
are interested in the subject, you should check out the newsgroups
<i>comp.lang.std.c++</i> and
<i>comp.lang.c++</i>. There are always interesting
questions 

and answers there.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ESICI">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 8.12</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
