<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 8.12. Writing a Member Function Template</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 8.12. Writing a Member Function Template</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EGACI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have a single member



 function that needs to
take a parameter that can be of any type, and you
can't or don't want to be
constrained to a particular type or category of types (by using a
base class pointer parameter).</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ENBCI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use a member function template and declare a template parameter for
the type of object the function parameter is supposed to have. See
Example 8-13 for a short example.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E1BCI">Example 8-13. Using a member function template</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">class ObjectManager {
public:
   template&lt;typename T&gt;
   T* gimmeAnObject( );

   template&lt;typename T&gt;
   void gimmeAnObject(T*&amp; p);
};

template&lt;typename T&gt;
T* ObjectManager::gimmeAnObject( ) {
   return(new T);
}

template&lt;typename T&gt;
void ObjectManager::gimmeAnObject(T*&amp; p) {
   p = new T;
}

class X { /* ... */ };
class Y { /* ... */ };

int main( ) {
   ObjectManager om;

   X* p1 = om.gimmeAnObject&lt;X&gt;( ); // You have to specify the template
   Y* p2 = om.gimmeAnObject&lt;Y&gt;( ); // parameter

   om.gimmeAnObject(p1);  // Not here, though, since the compiler can
   om.gimmeAnObject(p2);  // deduce T from the arguments
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EDCCI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">When talking about function or class templates, the words parameter
and argument have some ambiguity. There are two kinds of each:
template and function. Template parameters are the parameters in the
angle brackets, e.g., <tt>T</tt> in Example 8-13, and function parameters are parameters in the
conventional sense.</p>
<p class="docText">Consider the <tt>ObjectManager</tt> class in Example 8-13. It is a simplistic version of the Factory
pattern discussed in Recipe 8.2, so I have
defined the member function <tt>gimmeAnObject</tt> as
something that creates new objects that client code would use instead
of calling <tt>new</tt> directly. I can do this by either
returning a pointer to a new object or by modifying a pointer passed
in by the client code. Let's take a look at each
approach.</p>
<p class="docText">Declaration of a template member function requires that you provide
the <tt>template</tt> keyword and the template parameters.</p>
<pre>template&lt;typename T&gt;
T* gimmeAnObject( );

template&lt;typename T&gt;
void gimmeAnObject(T*&amp; p);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Both of these member functions happen to use <tt>T</tt> as
the template parameter, but they don't need to; they
each represent the template parameter for that member function only,
so the names are unrelated. You have to do the same thing for your
template member function definition, i.e., use the template keyword
and list all the template parameters. Here's what my
definitions look like:</p>
<pre>template&lt;typename T&gt;
T* ObjectManager::gimmeAnObject( ) {
   return(new T);
}

template&lt;typename T&gt;
void ObjectManager::gimmeAnObject(T*&amp; p) {
   p = new T;
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">There are a couple of ways to call template member functions. First,
you can invoke them with explicit use of the template parameter, like
this:</p>
<pre>X* p1 = om.gimmeAnObject&lt;X&gt;( );</pre><br/>
<p class="docText"><tt>X</tt> is just some class name. Or, you can let the
compiler deduce the arguments for the template parameters by passing
in arguments of the type(s) of the template parameters. For example,
you can invoke the second form of <tt>gimmeAnObject</tt>
without passing in anything in angle brackets:</p>
<pre>om.gimmeAnObject(p1);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This is because the compiler can deduce <tt>T</tt> by
looking at <tt>p1</tt> and recognizing that
it's an <tt>X*</tt>. Template deduction
only works for function templates (member or not) and only works when
the template parameters are deduced from the
<span class="docEmphasis">function</span> arguments.</p>
<p class="docText">Member function templates aren't the most popular
feature in C++, but they come in handy from time to time, so
it's good to know how to write one. I often see the
need crop up when I want a member function to work for types that are
not related by inheritance. For example, if I have a member function
<tt>foo</tt> that I want to take a single argument that is
always going to be a class that inherits from some base class, I
don't need a template: I can just make the parameter
type a base class pointer or reference. Then, any objects of
subclasses of the parameter class will work just fine—such is
the way of C++.</p>
<p class="docText">But you may want a function that operates on parameters that
don't all inherit from the same base class(es). In
this case, you can either write the same member function several
times—once for each type—or make it a template member
function. Using templates also permits specialization, which is a way
of providing implementations of templates
for particular template arguments. But
that's beyond the scope of a single recipe, so I
won't discuss it further here, but
it's a powerful technique, so if template
programming appeals to you, I encourage 



you check it out.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EQFCI">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 8.11</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
