<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 8.13. Overloading the Increment and Decrement Operators</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 8.13. Overloading the Increment and Decrement Operators</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EXBCI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have a class where the




 familiar increment and decrement
operators make sense, and you want to overload
<tt>operator++</tt> and <tt>operator--</tt> to
make incrementing and decrementing objects of your class easy and
intuitive to users.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EIDCI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Overload the prefix and postfix forms of <tt>++</tt> and
<tt>--</tt> to do what you want. Example 8-14 shows the conventional technique for
overloading the increment and decrement operators.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EZDCI">Example 8-14. Overloading increment and decrement</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;

using namespace std;

class Score {
public:
   Score( ) : score_(0) {}
   Score(int i) : score_(i) {}

   Score&amp; operator++( ) { // prefix
      ++score_;
      return(*this);
   }
   const Score operator++(int) { // postfix
      Score tmp(*this);
      ++(*this); // Take advantage of the prefix operator
      return(tmp);
   }
   Score&amp; operator--( ) {
      --score_;
      return(*this);
   }
   const Score operator--(int x) {
      Score tmp(*this);
      --(*this);
      return(tmp);
   }
   int getScore( ) const {return(score_);}

private:
   int score_;
};

int main( ) {
   Score player1(50);

   player1++;
   ++player1; // score_ = 52
   cout &lt;&lt; "Score = " &lt;&lt; player1.getScore( ) &lt;&lt; '\n';
   (--player1)--; // score_ = 50
   cout &lt;&lt; "Score = " &lt;&lt; player1.getScore( ) &lt;&lt; '\n';
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ECECI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">The increment and decrement operators often make sense for classes
that represent some sort of integer value. They are easy to use, as
long as you understand the difference between prefix and postfix and
you follow the conventions for return values.</p>
<p class="docText">Think about incrementing an integer. For some integer
<tt>i</tt>, there are two ways to do it with the
<tt>++</tt> operator:</p>
<pre>i++; // postfix
++i; // prefix</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Both increment <tt>i</tt>: the first version creates a
temporary copy of <tt>i</tt> increments
<tt>i</tt>, then returns the temporary value, the second
increments <tt>i</tt> then returns it. C++ allows operator
overloading, which means you can make your favorite user-defined type
(a class or an <tt>enum</tt>) behave like an
<tt>int</tt> in this regard.</p>
<p class="docText">Overload <tt>operator++</tt> and
<tt>operator--</tt> to get what you want. Example 8-14 illustrates how to overload both the prefix
and postfix versions:</p>
<pre>Score&amp; operator++( ) { // prefix
   ++score_;
   return(*this);
}
const Score operator++(int) { // postfix
   Score tmp(*this);
   ++(*this);
   return(tmp);
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Prefix appears as you would expect, but for the compiler to
distinguish between the two, an <tt>int</tt> parameter is
included as part of the postfix operator declaration. It has no
semantic use; at runtime, it is always passed as zero so you can
ignore it.</p>
<p class="docText">Once you do this, you can use the <tt>Score</tt> class as
you would an <tt>int</tt>:</p>
<pre>Score player1(50);

player1++;
++player1; // score_ = 52</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">You probably noticed that the signatures for the prefix version of
<tt>operator++</tt> return a reference to the current
class. You should do this (instead of, say, returning
<tt>void</tt>) so that the object that is being incremented
or decremented can be used in other expressions. Consider this line
from the example:</p>
<pre>(--player1)--;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Strange, yes, but it illustrates a point. If prefix
<tt>operator--</tt> didn't return anything
meaningful, then this expression would not compile. Another example
would be a function call:</p>
<pre>foo(--player1);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The function <tt>foo</tt> expects an argument of type
<tt>Score</tt>, and that's exactly what
you have to return from prefix <tt>operator--</tt> for this
to compile.</p>
<p class="docText">Operator overloading is a powerful feature that lets you use the same
operators on user-defined types that you would on built-in types.
Proponents of other languages that do not allow operator overloading
bemoan the potential for confusion and complexity, and admittedly,
lots of operators can be overloaded for any kind of custom behavior.
But when it comes to simple increment and decrement,
it's nice to be able to customize your
classes' 




behavior to your liking.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EXHCI">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 8.14</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
