<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 8.14. Overloading Arithmetic and Assignment Operators for Intuitive Class Behavior</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 8.14. Overloading Arithmetic and Assignment Operators for Intuitive Class Behavior</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E3CCI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have a class for which




 some of C++'s unary or binary
operators make sense, and you want users of your class to be able to
use them when working with objects of your class. For example, if you
have a class named <tt>Balance</tt> that contains,
essentially, a floating-point value (i.e., an account balance), it
would be convenient if you could use <tt>Balance</tt>
objects with some standard C++ operators, like this:</p>
<pre>Balance checking(50.0), savings(100.0);

checking += 12.0;
Balance total = checking + savings;</pre><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EPECI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Overload the operators you want to use as member functions and
standalone functions to allow arguments 




of various types for which the
given operator makes sense, as in Example 8-15.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EYFCI">Example 8-15. Overloading unary and binary operators</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;

using namespace std;

class Balance {
   // These have to see private data
   friend const Balance operator+(const Balance&amp; lhs, const Balance&amp; rhs);
   friend const Balance operator+(double lhs, const Balance&amp; rhs);
   friend const Balance operator+(const Balance&amp; lhs, double rhs);

public:
   Balance( ) : val_(0.0) {}
   Balance(double val) : val_(val) {}
  ~Balance( ) {}

   // Unary operators
   Balance&amp; operator+=(const Balance&amp; other) {
      val_ += other.val_;
      return(*this);
   }
   Balance&amp; operator+=(double other) {
      val_ += other;
      return(*this);
   }
   
   double getVal( ) const {return(val_);}

private:
   double val_;
};

// Binary operators
const Balance operator+(const Balance&amp; lhs, const Balance&amp; rhs) {
   Balance tmp(lhs.val_ + rhs.val_);
   return(tmp);
}

const Balance operator+(double lhs, const Balance&amp; rhs) {
   Balance tmp(lhs + rhs.val_);
   return(tmp);
}

const Balance operator+(const Balance&amp; lhs, double rhs) {
   Balance tmp(lhs.val_ + rhs);
   return(tmp);
}

int main( ) {

   Balance checking(500.00), savings(23.91);

   checking += 50;
   Balance total = checking + savings;

   cout &lt;&lt; "Checking balance: " &lt;&lt; checking.getVal( ) &lt;&lt; '\n';
   cout &lt;&lt; "Total balance: "    &lt;&lt; total.getVal( ) &lt;&lt; '\n';
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EBGCI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">The most common case for operator overloading is assignment and
arithmetic. There are all sorts of classes for which arithmetic and
assignment operators (addition, multiplication, modulo, left/right
bit shift) make sense, whether you are using them for math or
something else. Example 8-15 shows the fundamental
techniques for overloading these operators.</p>
<p class="docText">Let's start with what is probably the most common
operator to be overloaded, the assignment operator. The assignment
operator is what's used when you assign one object
to another, as in the following statement:</p>
<pre>Balance x(0), y(32);
x = y;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The second line is a shorthand way of calling
<tt>Balance::operator=(y)</tt>. The assignment operator is
different than most other operators because a default version is
created for you by the compiler if you don't supply
one. The default version simply copies each member from the target
object to the current object, which, of course, is not always what
you want, so you can override it to provide your own behavior, or
overload it to allow assignment of types other than the current type.</p>
<p class="docText">For the <tt>Balance</tt> class in Example 8-15, you might define the assignment operator like
this:</p>
<pre>Balance&amp; operator=(const Balance&amp; other) {
   val_ = other.val_;
   return(*this);
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The first thing that may jump out at you, if you're
not familiar with operator overloading, is the
<tt>operator=</tt> syntax. This is the way all operators
are declared; you can think of each operator as a function named
<tt>operator[</tt><tt><i>symbol</i></tt><tt>]</tt>,
where the symbol is the operator you are overloading. The only
difference between operators and ordinary functions is the calling
syntax. In fact, you can call operators using this syntax if you feel
like doing a lot of extra typing and having ugly code:</p>
<pre>x.operator=(y);  // Same thing as x = y, but uglier</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The operation of my assignment operator implementation is simple. It
updates the <tt>val_</tt> member on the current object with
the value from the <tt>other</tt> argument, and then
returns a reference to the current object. Assignment operators
return the current object as a reference so that callers can use
assignment in expressions:</p>
<pre>Balance x, y, z;
// ...
x = (y = z);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This way, the return value from <tt>(y</tt>
<tt>=</tt>
<tt>z)</tt> is the modified object
<tt>y</tt>, which is then passed to the assignment operator
for the object <tt>x</tt>. This is not as common with
assignment as it is with arithmetic, but you should return a
reference to the current object just to stick with convention (I
discuss the issue as it relates to arithmetic operators shortly).</p>
<p class="docText">Simple assignment is only the beginning though; most likely you will
want to use the other arithmetic operators to define more interesting
behavior. Table 8-1 lists all of the arithmetic
and assignment operators.</p>
<p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 8-1. Arithmetic and assignment operators</h5></caption><colgroup span="2"><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Operator
								</th><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Behavior
								</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>=</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Assignment (must be member function)
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>++=</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Addition
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>--=</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Subtraction
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>**=</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Multiplication or dereferencing
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>//=</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Division
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>%%=</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Modulo
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>++</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Increment
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>--</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Decrement
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>^^=</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Bitwise exclusive or
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>~</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Bitwise complement
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>&amp;&amp;=</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Bitwise and
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>||=</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Bitwise or
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>&lt;&lt;&lt;&lt;=</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Left shift
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;=</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Right shift
								</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">For most of the operators in Table 8-1 there are
two tokens: the first is the version of the operator that is used in
the conventional manner, e.g., 1 + 2, and the second is the version
that also assigns the result of an operation to a variable, e.g., x
+= 5. Note that the increment and decrement operators
<tt>++</tt> and <tt>--</tt> are covered in Recipe
Recipe 8.13.</p>
<p class="docText">Implementing each of the arithmetic or assignment operators is pretty
much the same, with the exception of the assignment operator, which
can't be a standalone function (i.e., it has to be a
member function).</p>
<p class="docText">The addition operator is a popular choice for overloading, especially
since it can be used in contexts other than math, such as appending
one string to another, so let's consider the
addition assignment operator first. It adds the righthand argument to
the lefthand argument and assigns the resulting value to the lefthand
argument, as in the statements:</p>
<pre>int i = 0;
i += 5;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">After the second line has executed, the <tt>int</tt>
<tt>i</tt> is modified by having <tt>5</tt> added
to it. Similarly, if you look at Example 8-15, you
would expect the same behavior from these lines:</p>
<pre>Balance checking(500.00), savings(23.91);
checking += 50;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">That is, you would expect that after the <tt>+=</tt>
operator is used, the value of <tt>checking</tt> has
increased by <tt>50</tt>. Using the implementation in Example 8-15, this is exactly what happens. Look at the
function definition for the <tt>+=</tt> operator:</p>
<pre>Balance&amp; operator+=(double other) {
   val_ += other;
   return(*this);
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">For an assignment operator, the parameter list is what will be
supplied to the operator as its righthand side; in this case, an
integer. The body of the function is trivial: all we are doing here
is adding the argument to the private member variable. When all the
work is done, return <tt>*this</tt>. You should return
<tt>*this</tt> from assignment and arithmetic member
operators so they can be used as expressions whose results can be the
input to something else. For example, imagine if I had declared
<tt>operator+=</tt> this way:</p>
<pre>void operator+=(double other) { // Don't do this
   val_ += other;
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Then someone wants to use this operator on an instance of my class
somewhere and pass the results to other function:</p>
<pre>Balance moneyMarket(1000.00);
// ...
updateGeneralLedger(moneyMarket += deposit); // Won't compile</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This creates a problem because <tt>Balance::operator+=</tt>
returns <tt>void</tt>, and a function like
<tt>updateGeneralLedger</tt> expects to get a
<tt>Balance</tt> object. If you return the current object
from arithmetic and assignment member operators, then you
won't have this problem. This
doesn't apply to all operators though. Other
operators like the array subscript operator <tt>[]</tt> or
the relational operator <tt>&amp;&amp;</tt>, return an
object other than <tt>*this</tt>, so this guideline holds
for just arithmetic and assignment member operators.</p>
<p class="docText">That takes care of assignment operators that also do some arithmetic,
but what about arithmetic that doesn't do
assignment? The other way to use an arithmetic operator is like this:</p>
<pre>int i = 0, j = 2;
i = j + 5;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In this case, <tt>j</tt> is added to <tt>5</tt>
and the result is assigned to <tt>i</tt> (which, if
<tt>i</tt> were an object and not a native type, would use
<tt>i</tt>'s class's
assignment operator), but <tt>j</tt> is unchanged. If you
want the same behavior from your class, you can overload the addition
operator as a standalone function. For example, you might want
statements like this to make sense:</p>
<pre>Balance checking(500.00), savings(100.00), total(0);
total = checking + savings;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">You can do this in two steps. The first step is to create the
function that overloads the <tt>+</tt> operator:</p>
<pre>Balance operator+(const Balance&amp; lhs, const Balance&amp; rhs) {
   Balance tmp(lhs.val_ + rhs.val_);
   return(tmp);
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This takes two <tt>const</tt>
<tt>Balance</tt>
objects, adds their private members, creates a temporary object, and
returns it. Notice that, unlike the assignment operators, this
returns an object, not an object reference. This is because the
object returned is a temporary, and returning a reference would mean
that the caller has a reference to a variable that is no longer
there. This won't work by itself though, because it
needs access to the private members of its arguments (assuming
you've made the data members nonpublic). To allow
this, the <tt>Balance</tt> class has to declare this
function as a <tt>friend</tt>:</p>
<pre>class Balance {
   // These have to see private data
   friend Balance operator+(const Balance&amp; lhs, const Balance&amp; rhs);
   // ...</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Anything declared as a <tt>friend</tt> has access to all
members of a class, so this does the trick. Just remember to declare
the parameters <tt>const</tt>, since you probably
don't want the objects modified.</p>
<p class="docText">This gets you most of the way, but you're not quite
all the way there yet. Users of your class may put together
expressions like this:</p>
<pre>total = savings + 500.00;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This will work with the code in Example 8-15 because
the compiler can see that the <tt>Balance</tt> class has a
constructor that takes a float, so it creates a temporary
<tt>Balance</tt> object out of <tt>500.00</tt>
using that constructor. There are two problems with this though: the
overhead with creating temporary objects and
<tt>Balance</tt> doesn't have a
constructor for each possible argument that can be used with the
addition operator. Let's say you have a class named
<tt>Transaction</tt> that represents a credit or debit
amount. A user of <tt>Balance</tt> may do something like
this:</p>
<pre>Transaction tx(-20.00);
total = savings + tx;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This won't compile because there is no operator that
adds a <tt>Balance</tt> object and a
<tt>Transaction</tt> object. So create one:</p>
<pre>Balance operator+(const Balance&amp; lhs, const Transaction&amp; rhs) {
   Balance tmp(lhs.val_ + Transaction.amount_);
   return(tmp);
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">There is some extra legwork though. You have to declare this operator
a <tt>friend</tt> of the <tt>Transaction</tt>
class, too, and you have to create an identical version of this that
takes the arguments in the opposite order if you want to be able to
use the arguments to <tt>+</tt> in any order, or if you
want the operation to be commutative, i.e., <tt>x + y = y +
x</tt>:</p>
<pre>Balance operator+(const Transaction&amp; lhs, const Balance&amp; rhs) {
   Balance tmp(lhs.amount_ + rhs.val_);
   return(tmp);
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">By the same token, if you want to avoid the extra temporary object
that is created when a constructor is invoked automatically, you can
create your own operators to deal with any other kind of variable:</p>
<pre>Balance operator+(double lhs, const Balance&amp; rhs) {
   Balance tmp(lhs + rhs.val_);
   return(tmp);
}
Balance operator+(const Balance&amp; lhs, double rhs) {
   Balance tmp(lhs.val_ + rhs);
   return(tmp);
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Again, you need to create two of them to allow expressions like this
to work:</p>
<pre>total = 500.00 + checking;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In this case, the construction of a temporary object is small and,
relatively speaking, inexpensive. But a temporary object is still a
temporary object, and in simple, single statements, it
won't create noticeable overhead, but you should
always consider such minor optimizations in a broader
context—what if a million of these temporary objects are
created because a user wants to increment every element in a
<tt>vector&lt;Balance&gt;</tt>? Your best bet is to know
how the class will generally be used and measure the performance
overhead if you aren't sure.</p>
<p class="docText">It is reasonable to ask, at this point, why we need to create
standalone functions for these nonassignment arithmetic operators,
and not just use member functions as we did with assignment. In fact,
you <span class="docEmphasis">can</span> declare these kinds of operators as
member functions on the class you are interested in, but it
doesn't make for commutative operators. To make an
operator commutative on a user-defined type, you would have to
declare it as a member function on both classes that could be
involved in the operation, and that will work (albeit with each of
the classes knowing about each other classes internal members), but
it won't work for operators that you want to use
with native types unless there are constructors that can be used, and
even in that case, you have to pay for the temporary objects.</p>
<p class="docText">Operator overloading is a powerful feature of C++, and like multiple
inheritance, it has proponents and critics. In fact, most other
popular languages don't support it at all. If you
use it with care, however, it can make for powerful, concise code
that uses your class.</p>
<p class="docText">Most of the standard operators have some conventional meaning, and in
general, you should follow the conventional meanings. For example,
the <tt>&lt;&lt;</tt> operator means left-bit shift, or it
means "put to" if you are dealing
with streams, as in:</p>
<pre>cout &lt;&lt; "This is written to the standard output stream.\n";</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">If you decide to override <tt>&lt;&lt;</tt> for one or more
of your classes, you should make it do one of these two things, or at
least something that is analogous to them. Overloading an operator is
one thing, but giving an operator an entirely new semantic meaning is
another. Unless you are introducing a new convention that is
ubiquitous throughout your application or library (which still
doesn't mean it's a good idea), and
it makes good intuitive sense to someone other than you, you should
stick with the standard meanings.</p>
<p class="docText">To overload operators effectively, there is a lot of legwork. But you
only have to do it once, and it pays off every time you use your
class in a simple expression. If you use operator overloading





conservatively and judiciously, it can
make code easy to write and read.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EKXCI">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 8.13</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
