<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 8.15. Calling a Superclass Virtual Function</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 8.15. Calling a Superclass Virtual Function</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EJGCI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You need to invoke a function on
a

 superclass of a particular class, but
it is overridden in subclasses, so the usual syntax of
<tt>p-&gt;method( )</tt> won't give you
the results you are after.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EDHCI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Qualify the name of the member function you want to call with the
target base class; for example, if you have two classes. (See Example 8-16.)</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EQHCI">Example 8-16. Calling a specific version of a virtual function</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;iostream&gt;

using namespace std;

class Base {
public:
   virtual void foo( ) {cout &lt;&lt; "Base::foo( )" &lt;&lt; endl;}
};

class Derived : public Base {
public:
   virtual void foo( ) {cout &lt;&lt; "Derived::foo( )" &lt;&lt; endl;}
};

int main( ) {
   Derived* p = new Derived( );

   p-&gt;foo( );       // Calls the derived version
   p-&gt;Base::foo( ); // Calls the base version
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EZHCI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">Making a regular practice of overriding C++'s
polymorphic facilities is not a good idea, but there are times when
you have to do it. As with so many techniques in C++, it is largely a
matter of syntax. When you want to call a specific base
class's version of a virtual function, just qualify
it with the name of the class you are after, as I did in Example 8-16:</p>
<pre>p-&gt;Base::foo( );</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This will call the version of <tt>foo</tt> defined for
<tt>Base</tt>, and not the one defined for whatever
subclass of <tt>Base</tt>
<tt>p</tt> points to.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
