<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Introduction</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Introduction</h3>
<p class="docText">This chapter contains recipes for using C++'s
exception-handling features. C++ has strong support for exception
handling, and by employing a few techniques you can write code that
handles exceptional circumstances effectively and is easy to debug.</p>
<p class="docText">The first recipe describes C++'s semantics for
throwing and catching exceptions, then it explains how to write a
class to represent exceptions. This is a good starting point if you
have little or no experience with exceptions. It also describes the
standard exception classes that are defined in
<tt>&lt;stdexcept&gt;</tt> and
<tt>&lt;exception&gt;</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">The rest of the recipes illustrate techniques for using exceptions
optimally, and they define several key terms along the way. Just
throwing an exception when something unexpected happens, or catching
an exception only to print an error message and abort does not make
for good software. To use C++'s exception-handling
facilities effectively, you have to write code that
doesn't leak resources if an exception is thrown,
and that otherwise has well-defined behavior when an exception is
thrown. These are known as the <span class="docEmphasis">basic</span> and
<span class="docEmphasis">strong</span> exception-safety guarantees. I describe
techniques you can use that allow you to make these guarantees for
constructors and various member functions.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
