<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 9.2. Making a Constructor Exception-Safe</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 9.2. Making a Constructor Exception-Safe</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EOKCI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">Your constructor needs to 

uphold basic and strong
exception-safety guarantees. See the discussion that follows for the
definitions of "basic" and
"strong" guarantees.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EJLCI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use <tt>try</tt> and <tt>catch</tt> in the
constructor to clean up properly if an exception is thrown during
construction. Example 9-2 presents examples of the
simple <tt>Device</tt> and <tt>Broker</tt>
classes. <tt>Broker</tt> constructs two
<tt>Device</tt> objects on the heap, but needs to be able
to properly clean them up if an exception is thrown during
construction.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ECMCI">Example 9-2. An exception-safe constructor</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;stdexcept&gt;

using namespace std;

class Device {
public:
   Device(int devno) {
      if (devno == 2)
         throw runtime_error("Big problem");
   }
  ~Device( ) {}
};

class Broker {
  
public:
   Broker (int devno1, int devno2) :
      dev1_(NULL), dev2_(NULL) {
      try {                            
         dev1_ = new Device(devno1);  // Enclose the creation of heap
         dev2_ = new Device(devno2);  // objects in a try block...
      }
      catch (...) {
         delete dev1_;                // ...clean up and rethrow if
         throw;                       // something goes wrong.
      }
   }
  ~Broker( ) {
      delete dev1_;
      delete dev2_;
   }

private:
   Broker( );
   Device* dev1_;
   Device* dev2_;
};

int main( ) {

   try {
      Broker b(1, 2);
   }
   catch(exception&amp; e) {
      cerr &lt;&lt; "Exception: " &lt;&lt; e.what( ) &lt;&lt; endl;
   }
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ELMCI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">To say that a constructor, member function, destructor, or anything
else is "exception-safe" is to
guarantee that it won't leak resources and possibly
that it won't leave its object in an inconsistent
state. In C++, these two kinds of guarantees have been given the
names <span class="docEmphasis">basic</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">strong</span>.</p>
<p class="docText">The
<span class="docEmphasis">basic</span>
exception-safety guarantee, which is quite intuitive, says that if an
exception is thrown, the current operation won't
leak resources and the objects involved in the operation will still
be usable (meaning you can call other member functions and destroy
the object, i.e., it won't be in a corrupt state).
It also means the program will be left in a consistent state,
although it might not be a predictable state. The rules are
straightforward: if an exception is thrown anywhere in the body of
(for example) a member function, heap objects are not orphaned and
the objects involved in the operation can be destroyed or reset by
the caller. The other guarantee, called the
<span class="docEmphasis">strong</span> exception-safety
guarantee, ensures that the object state remains unchanged if the
operation fails. The latter applies to postconstruction operations on
an object, since, by definition, an object that throws an exception
during construction is never fully constructed and therefore never in
a valid state. I will return to the subject of member functions in
Recipe 9.4. For now, let's
focus on construction.</p>
<p class="docText">Example 9-2 defines two classes,
<tt>Device</tt> and <tt>Broker</tt>, that
don't do much, but could easily represent any sort
of device/broker scenario where you have some class that opens a
connection to each of two devices and manages communication between
them. A broker is useless if only one of the devices is available, so
you want transactional semantics when you instantiate a broker, such
that if one of the two throws an exception when it is being acquired,
the other is released. This will ensure memory and other resources
are not leaked.</p>
<p class="docText"><tt>try</tt> and <tt>catch</tt> will do the job.
In the constructor, wrap the allocation of heap objects in a try
block and catch anything that is thrown during their construction
like this:</p>
<pre>try {                            
   dev1_ = new Device(devno1);
   dev2_ = new Device(devno2);
}
catch (...) {
   delete dev1_;
   throw;
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The ellipsis in the <tt>catch</tt> handler means that
anything that is thrown will be caught. This is what you need here,
because all you're doing is cleaning up after
yourself if something goes wrong, then rethrowing regardless of what
sort of exception was thrown. You need to re<tt>throw</tt>
so the client code that is trying to instantiate the
<tt>Broker</tt> object can do something useful with the
exception, like write its error message somewhere.</p>
<p class="docText">I only delete <tt>dev1_</tt> in the catch handler because
the last chance for an exception to be thrown is in the call to
<tt>new</tt> for <tt>dev2_</tt>. If this throws
an exception, than <tt>dev2_</tt> will not be assigned a
value and, therefore, I don't need to
<tt>delete</tt> it. However, if you do something after
<tt>dev2_</tt>'s initialization, you will
need to be sure to clean it up. For example:</p>
<pre>try {                            
   dev1_ = new Device(devno1);
   dev2_ = new Device(devno2);
   <span class="docEmphBold">foo_ = new MyClass( );       // Might throw</span>
}
catch (...) {
   delete dev1_;
   <span class="docEmphBold">delete dev2_;</span>
   throw;
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In this case, you don't need to worry about deleting
pointers that were never assigned real values (as long as you
properly initialized them in the first place), since deleting a
<tt>NULL</tt> pointer has no effect. In other words, if the
assignment to <tt>dev1_</tt> throws an exception, your
<tt>catch</tt> handler still calls
<tt>delete</tt>
<tt>dev2_</tt>, but
that's okay as long as you initialized it to
<tt>NULL</tt> in the initializer list.</p>
<p class="docText">As I said in Recipe 9.1, designing


a sound,
flexible exception strategy can be tricky, and exception-safety is no
different. For a detailed look at designing exception-safe code, see
<span class="docEmphasis">Exceptional C++</span> by Herb Sutter (Addison Wesley).</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EGQCI">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 9.3</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
