<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 9.3. Making an Initializer List Exception-Safe</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 9.3. Making an Initializer List Exception-Safe</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E6LCI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have to initialize

 your data members in
the constructor's initializer list, and, therefore,
cannot use the approach described in Recipe 9.2.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E5MCI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use a special syntax for try and catch that catches exceptions
thrown in the initializer list. Example 9-3 shows
how.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EPNCI">Example 9-3. Handling exceptions in an initializer</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;stdexcept&gt;

using namespace std;

// Some device
class Device {
public:
   Device(int devno) {
      if (devno == 2)
         throw runtime_error("Big problem");
   }
  ~Device( ) {}
private:
   Device( );
};

class Broker {
  
public:
   Broker (int devno1, int devno2)
      try : dev1_(Device(devno1)),   // Create these in the initializer
            dev2_(Device(devno2)) {} // list.
      catch (...) {
         throw; // Log the message or translate the error here (see
                // the discussion)
      }
  ~Broker( ) {}

private:
   Broker( );
   Device dev1_;
   Device dev2_;
};

int main( ) {

   try {
      Broker b(1, 2);
   }
   catch(exception&amp; e) {
      cerr &lt;&lt; "Exception: " &lt;&lt; e.what( ) &lt;&lt; endl;
   }
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EYNCI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">The syntax for handling exceptions in initializers looks a little
different from the traditional C++ syntax because it uses the
<tt>try</tt> block as the constructor body. The critical
part of Example 9-3 is the <tt>Broker</tt>
constructor:</p>
<pre>Broker (int devno1, int devno2)   // Constructor header is the same
   try :                          // Same idea as a try {...} block
         dev1_(Device(devno1)),   // The initializers follow
         dev2_(Device(devno2)) {
       // This is the constructor body.
   }
   catch (...) {                  // The catch handler is *after*
      throw;                      // the constructor body
   }</pre><br/>
<p class="docText"><tt>try</tt> and <tt>catch</tt> behave as you
would expect; the only difference from the usual syntax of a
<tt>try</tt> block is that when you want to catch
exceptions thrown in an initializer list, <tt>try</tt> is
followed by a colon, then the initializer list, and
<span class="docEmphasis">then</span> the <tt>try</tt> block, which is
also the body of the constructor. If anything is thrown in either the
initializer list or the constructor body, the
<tt>catch</tt> handler that follows the constructor body
will get it. You can still embed additional
<tt>try</tt>/<tt>catch</tt> pairs in the body of
the constructor if you have to, but nested
<tt>try</tt>/<tt>catch</tt> blocks usually get
ugly.</p>
<p class="docText">In addition to moving the member initialization to the initializer
list, Example 9-3 is different from Example 9-2 for another reason. The
<tt>Device</tt> object members aren't
created on the heap this time with <tt>new</tt>. I did this
to illustrate a couple of points regarding safety and member objects.</p>
<p class="docText">First, using stack instead of heap objects lets the compiler provide
its built-in safety. If any of the objects in the initializer list
throws an exception during construction, its memory is deallocated
automatically as the stack unwinds in the exception-handling process.
Second, and even better, any other objects that have already been
successfully constructed are destroyed without you having to catch
the exception and <tt>delete</tt> them explicitly.</p>
<p class="docText">But maybe you require or prefer heap members. Consider an approach
like the original <tt>Broker</tt> class in Example 9-2. You can just initialize your pointers in the
initializer list, right?</p>
<pre class="preFixedHeight">class BrokerBad {
  
public:
   BrokerBad (int devno1, int devno2)
      try : dev1_(<b>new Device(devno1)</b>),   // Create heap objects with
            dev2_(<b>new Device(devno2)</b>) {} // initializers
      catch (...) {
         if (dev1_) {
            delete dev1_;                // Shouldn't compile, and
            delete dev2_;                // is a bad approach if it
         }                               // does
         throw; // Rethrow the same exception
      }
  ~BrokerBad( ) {
     delete dev1_;
     delete dev2_;
  }

private:
   BrokerBad( );
   <span class="docEmphBold">Device* dev1_;</span>
					<span class="docEmphBold">Device* dev2_;</span>
};

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText">No. There are two problems here. To begin with, this should not be
allowed by your compiler because the catch block of a constructor
should not allow program code to access member variables—at
that point, they don't exist. Second, even if your
compiler permits it, it is a bad idea. Consider the case where the
construction of <tt>dev1_</tt>'s object
throws an exception. This is the code that will be executed in the
catch handler:</p>
<pre>catch (...) {
   if (dev1_) {     // What value does this contain?
      delete dev1_; // Now you are deleting an undefined value
      delete dev2_;
   }
   throw; // Rethrow the same exception
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">If an exception is thrown during the construction of
<tt>dev1_</tt>, then <tt>new</tt>
doesn't get a chance to return the address to the
newly allocated memory and <tt>dev1_</tt> is unchanged.
Then what does it contain? It's undefined, because
it was never initialized with a value. As a result, when you call
<tt>delete</tt>
<tt>dev1_</tt>, you will probably
be deleting a garbage pointer address, which means your program will
crash, you will get fired, and you will have to live with that shame
for the rest of your life.</p>
<p class="docText">To avoid such a life-altering fiasco, initialize your pointers to
<tt>NULL</tt> in the initializer list, and then create the
heap objects in the constructor. This way it's easy
to catch anything that goes wrong and clean up the mess, since
calling <tt>delete</tt> on <tt>NULL</tt> pointers
is okay.</p>
<pre>BrokerBetter (int devno1, int devno2) :
dev1_(NULL), dev2_(NULL) {
   try {
      dev1_ = new Device(devno1);
      dev2_ = new Device(devno2);
   }
   catch (...) {
      delete dev1_; // This will always be valid
      throw;
   }
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">So, to summarize, if you must use pointer members, initialize them to
<tt>NULL</tt> in the initializer list, then allocate their
objects in the constructor using a
<tt>try</tt>/<tt>catch</tt> block. You can
deallocate any memory in the catch handler. However, if you can work
with automatic members, construct 

them in the initializer list and use
the special <tt>try</tt>/<tt>catch</tt> syntax to
deal with any exceptions.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EKSCI">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 9.2</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
