<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 9.4. Making Member Functions Exception-Safe</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 9.4. Making Member Functions Exception-Safe</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EQNCI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You are writing a member


 function and you need it to uphold the
basic and strong exception-safety guarantees, namely that it
won't leak resources and it won't
leave the object in an invalid state if an exception is thrown.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EROCI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Be aware of what operations can throw exceptions and do them first,
usually in a <tt>try</tt>/<tt>catch</tt> block.
Once the code that can throw exceptions is done executing, then you
can update the object state. Example 9-4 offers one
way to make a member function exception-safe.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ECPCI">Example 9-4. An exception-safe member function</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">class Message {

public:
   Message(int bufSize = DEFAULT_BUF_SIZE) :
      bufSize_(bufSize),
      initBufSize_(bufSize),
      msgSize_(0),
      buf_(NULL) {
      buf_ = new char[bufSize];
   }

  ~Message( ) {
      delete[] buf_;
   }

   // Append character data
   void appendData(int len, const char* data) {
      if (msgSize_+len &gt; MAX_SIZE) {
         throw out_of_range("Data size exceeds maximum size.");
      }
      if (msgSize_+len &gt; bufSize_) {

         int newBufSize = bufSize_;
         while ((newBufSize *= 2) &lt; msgSize_+len);

         char* p = new char[newBufSize];    // Allocate memory
                                            // for new buffer

         copy(buf_, buf_+msgSize_, p);      // Copy old data
         copy(data, data+len, p+msgSize_);  // Copy new data

         msgSize_ += len;
         bufSize_ = newBufSize;

         delete[] buf_;  // Get rid of old buffer and point to new
         buf_ = p;
      }
      else {
         copy(data, data+len, buf_+msgSize_);
         msgSize_ += len;
      }
   }

   // Copy the data out to the caller's buffer
   int getData(int maxLen, char* data) {
      if (maxLen &lt; msgSize_) {
         throw out_of_range("This data is too big for your buffer.");
      }
      copy(buf_, buf_+msgSize_, data);
      return(msgSize_);
   }

private:
   Message(const Message&amp; orig) {}           // We will come to these
   Message&amp; operator=(const Message&amp; rhs) {} // in Recipe 9.5
   int bufSize_;
   int initBufSize_;
   int msgSize_;
   char* buf_;
};

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ERPCI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">The class <tt>Message</tt>

in Example 9-4 is a class for holding character
data; you might use such a thing to wrap text or binary data as it is
passed from one system to another. The member function of interest
here is <tt>appendData</tt>, which appends the
caller's data to the data already in the buffer,
growing the buffer if necessary. It upholds the strong
exception-safety guarantee, though it may not be clear at first
glance why this is the case.</p>
<p class="docText">Look at this part of <tt>appendData</tt>:</p>
<pre>if (msgSize_+len &gt; bufSize_) {

   int newBufSize = bufSize_;
   while ((newBufSize *= 2) &lt; msgSize_+len);

   char* p = new char[newBufSize];</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The point of this block of code is to grow the buffer. I grow the
size of the buffer by doubling it until it's big
enough. This piece of code is safe because the only part that can
throw an exception is the call to <tt>new</tt>, and I
don't update the object state or allocate any other
resources before that happens. It will throw
<tt>bad_alloc</tt> if the operating system is unable to
allocate the requested piece of memory.</p>
<p class="docText">If the memory is allocated successfully, then I can start updating
the state of the object by copying the data and updating the member
variables:</p>
<pre>   copy(buf_, buf_+msgSize_, p);
   copy(data, data+len, p+msgSize_);

   msgSize_ += len;
   bufSize_ = newBufSize;

   delete[] buf_;
   buf_ = p;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">None of these operations can throw exceptions, so we are in the
clear. (This is only because the data in the buffer is a sequence of
chars; see the discussion that follows Example 9-5
for further explanation.)</p>
<p class="docText">This solution is simple, and it is the general strategy for making
member functions strongly exception-safe: Do everything that might
throw an exception first, then, when all of the dangerous work is
over with, take a deep breath and update the object state.
<tt>appendData</tt> just uses a temporary variable to hold
the new buffer size. This solves the problem with the buffer size,
but does it truly uphold the basic guarantee of not leaking
resources? Yes, but barely.</p>
<p class="docText"><tt>copy</tt> calls <tt>operator=</tt> on each
element in the sequence that it is copying. In Example 9-4, each element is a <tt>char</tt>, so
we are safe because a single assignment of one character to another
can't <tt>throw</tt> anything. But I said,
barely, because you shouldn't let the safety of this
special case make you think an exception will never come out of
<tt>copy</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Imagine for a moment that instead of a narrow character buffer, you
have to write a <tt>Message</tt> class that can contain an
array of anything. You might write it as a class template to look
like Example 9-5.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EFSCI">Example 9-5. A generic message class</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">template&lt;typename T&gt;
class MessageGeneric {

public:
   MessageGeneric(int bufSize = DEFAULT_BUF_SIZE) :
      bufSize_(bufSize),
      initBufSize_(bufSize),
      msgSize_(0),
      buf_(new T[bufSize]) {}

  ~MessageGeneric( ) {
      delete[] buf_;
   }

   void appendData(int len, const T* data) {
      if (msgSize_+len &gt; MAX_SIZE) {
         throw out_of_range("Data size exceeds maximum size.");
      }
      if (msgSize_+len &gt; bufSize_) {

         int newBufSize = bufSize_;
         while ((newBufSize *= 2) &lt; msgSize_+len);

         T* p = new T[newBufSize];

         copy(buf_, buf_+msgSize_, p);     // Can these throw?
         copy(data, data+len, p+msgSize_);

         msgSize_ += len;
         bufSize_ = newBufSize;

         delete[] buf_;  // Get rid of old buffer and point to new
         buf_ = p;
      }
      else {
         copy(data, data+len, buf_+msgSize_);
         msgSize_ += len;
      }
   }

   // Copy the data out to the caller's buffer
   int getData(int maxLen, T* data) {
      if (maxLen &lt; msgSize_) {
         throw out_of_range("This data is too big for your buffer.");
      }
      copy(buf_, buf_+msgSize_, data);
      return(msgSize_);
   }

private:
   MessageGeneric(const MessageGeneric&amp; orig) {}
   MessageGeneric&amp; operator=(const MessageGeneric&amp; rhs) {}
   int bufSize_;
   int initBufSize_;
   int msgSize_;
   T* buf_;
};

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Now you have to be more careful, because you can't
make assumptions about the target type. For example, how do you know
that <tt>T::operator=</tt> won't
<tt>throw</tt>? You don't, so you have to
be prepared for that possibility.</p>
<p class="docText">Wrap the calls to copy in a try block:</p>
<pre>try {
   copy(buf_, buf_+msgSize_, p);
   copy(data, data+len, p+msgSize_);
}
catch(...) {   // I don't care what was thrown; all I know
   delete[] p; // is that I have to clean up after myself,
   throw;      // then rethrow.
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Since you are catching any type that is thrown with the ellipsis
operator, you can rest assured that if
<tt>T::operator=</tt>
<tt>throw</tt>s, you will
catch it and be able to clean up the heap memory you just allocated.</p>
<p class="docText">Strictly speaking, <tt>copy</tt> doesn't
actually throw anything, <tt>T::operator=</tt> does. This
is because <tt>copy</tt> (and the rest of the algorithms in
the standard library) are generally
<span class="docEmphasis">exception-neutral</span>, which means that if whatever
it is invoking throws an exception, it will propagate it to the
caller and not eat it (<tt>catch</tt> it and not
re<tt>throw</tt>). It reserves the right to
<tt>catch</tt> exceptions, do some clean-up, then
re<tt>throw</tt> them, but ultimately anything that is
thrown by a class or function the standard library is using will find
its way to the caller.</p>
<p class="docText">Making your member functions exception-safe is tedious work. It
requires that you consider all possible points where an exception can
be thrown and that you deal with them the right way. When can an
exception be thrown? Anywhere a function call is made. Operators for
native data types can't <tt>throw</tt>,
and destructors should <span class="docEmphasis">never</span>
<tt>throw</tt>, but anything else, be it a standalone
function, member function, operator, constructor, and so on, is a
potential source of an exception. Examples Example 9-5 and Example 9-6 provide
examples that use a narrow scope of exceptions. The classes contain
very few member variables, and the behavior of the class is discrete.
As the number of member functions and variables increase, and you
introduce inheritance and virtual functions, remaining strongly
exception-safe becomes more challenging.</p>
<p class="docText">Finally, as with most application requirements, you only need to be
as exception-safe as you need to be. In other words, if you are
writing a dialog-based wizard for generating web pages, your
development schedule will probably preclude the necessary research
and testing for making it strongly exception-safe. Thus, it may be
acceptable to your client for users to encounter the occasional,
ambiguous error message, "Unknown error,
aborting." On the other hand, if you are writing
software that controls the angle of a helicopter rotor, your client
will probably push for more safety assurances than the occasional
"Unknown error, aborting"


 message.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
