<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 9.5. Safely Copying an Object</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 9.5. Safely Copying an Object</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EZPCI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You need the basic class copy 



operations—copy
construction and assignment—to be exception-safe.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ECRCI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Employ the tactics discussed in Recipe 9.4
by doing everything that might <tt>throw</tt> first, then
changing the object state with operations that can't
<tt>throw</tt> only after the hazardous work is complete.
Example 9-6 presents the <tt>Message</tt>
class again, this time with the assignment operator and copy
constructor defined.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E1RCI">Example 9-6. Exception-safe assignment and copy construction</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;

const static int DEFAULT_BUF_SIZE = 3;
const static int MAX_SIZE         = 4096;

class Message {

public:
   Message(int bufSize = DEFAULT_BUF_SIZE) :
      bufSize_(bufSize),
      initBufSize_(bufSize),
      msgSize_(0),
      key_("") {
      buf_ = new char[bufSize]; // Note: now this is in the body
   }

  ~Message( ) {
      delete[] buf_;
   }

   // Exception-safe copy ctor
   Message(const Message&amp; orig) : 
      bufSize_(orig.bufSize_),
      initBufSize_(orig.initBufSize_),
      msgSize_(orig.msgSize_),
      key_(orig.key_) { // This can throw...

      buf_ = new char[orig.bufSize_];  // ...so can this
      copy(orig.buf_, orig.buf_+msgSize_, buf_); // This can't
   }

   // Exception-safe assignment, using the copy ctor
   Message&amp; operator=(const Message&amp; rhs) {

      Message tmp(rhs);   // Copy construct a temporary
      swapInternals(tmp); // Swap members with it
      return(*this);      // When we leave, tmp is destroyed, taking
                          // the original data with it
   }

   const char* data( ) {
      return(buf_);
   }

private:
   void swapInternals(Message&amp; msg) {
      // Since key_ is not a built-in data type it can throw,
      // so do it first.
      swap(key_, msg.key_);

      // If it hasn't thrown, then do all the primitives
      swap(bufSize_,     msg.bufSize_);
      swap(initBufSize_, msg.initBufSize_);
      swap(msgSize_,     msg.msgSize_);
      swap(buf_,         msg.buf_);
   }
   int bufSize_;
   int initBufSize_;
   int msgSize_;
   char* buf_;
   string key_;
};

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EDSCI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">The copy constructor and the private member
<tt>swapInternals</tt> do all the work here. The copy
constructor initializes the primitive members and one of the
nonprimitive members in the initializer list. Then it allocates a new
buffer and copies the data into it. Simple enough, but why do it in
this order? You could argue that all the initialization goes in the
initializer list, but doing so can open the door for subtle bugs.</p>
<p class="docText">For example, you may want to put the buffer allocation in the
initializer list, like this:</p>
<pre>Message(const Message&amp; orig) : 
   bufSize_(orig.bufSize_),
   initBufSize_(orig.initBufSize_),
   msgSize_(orig.msgSize_),
   key_(orig.key_),
   <b>buf_(new char[orig.bufSize_])</b> {
   copy(orig.buf_, orig.buf_+msgSize_, buf_);
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">You might expect that everything will be fine, because if the
<tt>new</tt> in the buffer allocation fails, all the other
fully constructed objects will be destroyed. But this behavior is not
guaranteed, because the members are initialized in the order in which
they are declared in the class header, <span class="docEmphasis">not</span> the
order in which you list them in the initializer list. The order of
the member declaration looks like this:</p>
<pre>int bufSize_;
int initBufSize_;
int msgSize_;
char* buf_;
string key_;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">As a result, <tt>buf_</tt> will be initialized before
<tt>key_</tt>. If the initialization of
<tt>key_</tt> throws something, <tt>buf_</tt>
will not be destroyed and you will have created a hunk of
unreferenced memory. You can guard against this by using a
<tt>try</tt>/<tt>catch</tt> block in the
constructor (see Recipe 9.2), but it is
easier just to put <tt>buf_</tt>'s
initialization in the body of the constructor where it is guaranteed
to be called after the initializer list.</p>
<p class="docText">The call to <tt>copy</tt> won't throw
because it's copying primitive values. But this is
where the subtleties of exception-safety come in: it can
<tt>throw</tt> if it is copying objects (e.g., if this is a
generic container of <tt>T</tt> elements), in which case,
you will need to <tt>catch</tt> it and
<tt>delete</tt> the associated memory.</p>
<p class="docText">The other way you may want to copy an object is by using the
assignment operator, <tt>operator=</tt>. Since it and the
copy constructor have similar needs (e.g., make my members equal to
my argument's members), reuse what you have already
done and make your life easier. The only twist is that you can make
things slick by using a private member to swap member data. I wish I had
invented this technique, but I have to credit Herb Sutter and Stephen
Dewhurst since their writing is where I first saw it.</p>
<p class="docText">It may make sense to you at first glance, but I will explain just in
case it doesn't. Consider the first line, which copy
constructs a temporary object, <tt>tmp</tt>:</p>
<pre>Message tmp(rhs);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Now we have just created a clone of the object we are assigning from.
Essentially, <tt>tmp</tt> is now equivalent to
<tt>rhs</tt>. Now, swap its members with
<tt>*this</tt>'s members:</p>
<pre>swapInternals(tmp);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">I will come back to <tt>swapInternals</tt> in a moment. For
now, all we care about is that now the
<tt>*this</tt>'s members are the same as
<tt>tmp</tt>'s were a second ago. And
<tt>tmp</tt> was a copy of <tt>rhs</tt>, so now
<tt>*this</tt> is equivalent to <tt>rhs</tt>. But
wait: we still have this temporary object hanging around. No problem,
when you return <tt>*this</tt>, <tt>tmp</tt> is
automatically destroyed when it goes out of scope, taking the old
members with it.</p>
<pre>return(*this);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">That's it. But is it exception-safe? Constructing
<tt>tmp</tt> is, since our constructor is exception-safe.
The call to <tt>swapInternals</tt> is what does the
majority of the work, so let's have a look at what
it does to see if it's safe.</p>
<p class="docText"><tt>swapInternals</tt> exchanges each data member in the
current object with those in the object that is passed in. It does
this by using <tt>swap</tt>, which takes two arguments
<span class="docEmphasis">a</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">b</span>, creates a
temporary copy of <span class="docEmphasis">a</span>, assigns
<span class="docEmphasis">b</span> to <span class="docEmphasis">a</span>, and then assigns
the temporary to <span class="docEmphasis">b</span>. As such, it is
exception-safe and exception-neutral because the only exceptions that
come out of it are those that may be thrown by the objects it is
operating on. It uses no dynamic memory, so it upholds the basic
guarantee of not leaking resources.</p>
<p class="docText">Since <tt>key_</tt> isn't a primitive,
which means that operations on it may throw an exception, I swap it
first. That way, if it throws an exception, none of the other member
variables are corrupted. This doesn't guarantee that
<tt>key_</tt> won't be corrupted though.
When working with object members, you are at the mercy of their
exception-safety guarantees. If that doesn't throw,
I'm home free because I know that swapping native
variables won't throw. Therefore,
<tt>swapInternals</tt> is both basically and strongly
exception-safe.</p>
<p class="docText">This brings up an interesting point though. What if you have more
than one object member? If you had two string members, the beginning
of <tt>swapInternals</tt> may look like this:</p>
<pre>void swapInternals(Message&amp; msg) {
   swap(key_, msg.key_);
   swap(myObj_, msg.myObj_);
   // ...</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">There is a problem: If the second swap throws an exception, how can
we safely undo the first swap? In other words, now
<tt>key_</tt> has been updated with the new value, but the
swap of <tt>myObj_</tt> failed, so <tt>key_</tt>
is now corrupt. If the caller catches the exception and wants to
proceed as though nothing happened, he is now working with something
different than what he started with. Copying <tt>key_</tt>
to a temporary string first is one approach, but it
can't guarantee safety because doing that copy may
throw an exception.</p>
<p class="docText">One way to get around this is to use heap objects:</p>
<pre>void swapInternals(Message&amp; msg) {
   // key_ is a string* and myObj_ is a MyClass*
   swap(key_, msg.key_);
   swap(myObj_, msg.myObj_);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Of course, this means that now you have more dynamic memory to
manage, but making exception-safety guarantees will often affect your
design, so it is a good idea to start thinking about it early in the
design process.</p>
<p class="docText">The theme for this recipe is unchanged from the previous recipes
about exception-safety. Do the work that might cause problems first,
wait with a <tt>try</tt>/<tt>catch</tt> block
just in case something goes wrong, and, if something does go wrong,
then clean up after yourself. If nothing goes wrong, pat yourself




on the
back and update the object state.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ENYCI">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 9.2 and Recipe 9.3</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
