<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Introduction</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Introduction</h3>
<p class="docText">Streams are one of the most powerful (and complicated) components of
the C++ standard library. Using them for plain, unformatted input and
output is generally straightforward, but changing the format to suit
your needs with standard manipulators, or writing your own
manipulators, is not. Therefore, the first few recipes describe
different ways to format stream output. The two after that describe
how to write objects of a class to a stream or read them from one.</p>
<p class="docText">Then the recipes shift from reading and writing file content to
operating on the files themselves (and directories). If your program
uses files, especially if it's a daemon or
server-side process, you will probably create files and directories,
clean them up, rename them, and so on. There are a number of recipes
that explain how to do these unglamorous, but necessary, tasks in
C++.</p>
<p class="docText">The last third of the recipes demonstrate how to manipulate file and
pathnames themselves using many of the standard string member
functions. Standard strings contain an abundance of functions for
inspecting and manipulating their contents, and if you have to parse
path and filenames they come in handy. If what you need is not
discussed in these recipes, take a look at Chapter 7, too—what you're
after might be described there.</p>
<p class="docText">File manipulation requires direct interaction with the operating
system (OS), and there are often subtle differences (and occasionally
glaring incompatibilities) between OSs. Many of the typical file and
directory manipulation needs are part of the standard C system calls,
and work the same or similarly on different systems. Where there are
differences between OSs' versions of libraries, I
note it in the recipes.</p>
<p class="docText">As I have discussed in previous chapters, Boost is an open source
project that has generated a number of high-quality, portable
libraries. But since this is a book about C++ and not the Boost
project, I have preferred standard C++ solutions whenever possible.
In many cases, however, (most notably Recipe 10.12) there isn't a Standard C++
solution, so I have used the Boost Filesystem library written by
Beman Dawes, which provides a portable filesystem interface, to give
a portable solution. Take a look at the Boost Filesystem library if
you have to do portable filesystem interaction—you will save
yourself lots of time and effort. For more information on the Boost
project, see www.boost.org.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
