<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 10.1. Lining Up Text Output</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 10.1. Lining Up Text Output</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EFTCI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You need to line up your





 text output vertically. For example, if
you are exporting tabular data, you may want it to look like this:</p>
<pre>Jim            Willcox         Mesa           AZ
Bill           Johnson         San Mateo      CA
Robert         Robertson       Fort Collins   CO</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">You will probably also want to be able to right- or left-justify the
text.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EXUCI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use <tt>ostream</tt> or <tt>wostream</tt>, for
narrow or wide characters, defined in
<tt>&lt;ostream&gt;</tt>, and the standard stream
manipulators to set the field width and justify the text. Example 10-1 shows how.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EKVCI">Example 10-1. Lining up text output</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;iomanip&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;

using namespace std;

int main( ) {

   ios_base::fmtflags flags = cout.flags( );
   string first, last, citystate;
   int width = 20;

   first = "Richard";
   last  = "Stevens";
   citystate = "Tucson, AZ";

   cout &lt;&lt; left                      // Left-justify in each field
        &lt;&lt; setw(width) &lt;&lt; first      // Then, repeatedly set the width
        &lt;&lt; setw(width) &lt;&lt; last       // and write some data
        &lt;&lt; setw(width) &lt;&lt; citystate &lt;&lt; endl;

   cout.flags(flags);
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The output looks like this:</p>
<pre>Richard             Stevens             Tucson, AZ</pre><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EXVCI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">A manipulator is a function that operates on a stream. Manipulators
are applied to a stream with <tt>operator&lt;&lt;</tt>. The
stream's format (input or output) is controlled by a
set of flags and settings on the ultimate base stream class,
<tt>ios_base</tt>. Manipulators exist to provide convenient
shorthand for adjusting these flags and settings without having to
explicitly set them via <tt>setf</tt> or
<tt>flags</tt>, which is cumbersome to write and ugly to
read. The best way to format stream output is to use manipulators.</p>
<p class="docText">Example 10-1 uses two manipulators to line up text
output into columns. The manipulator <tt>setw</tt> sets the
field width, and <tt>left</tt> left-justifies the value
within that field (the counterpart to <tt>left</tt> is, not
surprisingly, <tt>right</tt>). A
"field" is just another way of
saying that you want the output to be padded on one side or the other
to make sure that the value you write is the only thing printed in
that field. If, as in Example 10-1, you left-justify
a value, then set the field width, the next thing you write to the
stream will begin with the first character in the field. If the data
you send to the stream is not wide enough to span the entire field
width, the right side of it will be padded with the
stream's fill character, which is, by default, a
single space. You can change the fill character with the
<tt>setfill</tt> manipulator, like this:</p>
<pre>myostr &lt;&lt; setfill('.') &lt;&lt; "foo";</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">If the value you put in the field is larger than the field width, the
entire value is printed and no padding is added.</p>
<p class="docText">Table 10-1 contains a summary of

manipulators
that operate on any kind of value (text, float, integer, etc.). There
is a set of manipulators that apply only to floating-point output,
and they are described in Recipe 10.2.</p>
<p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 10-1. Text manipulators</h5></caption><colgroup span="3"><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Manipulator
								</th><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Description
								</th><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Sample output
								</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>leftright</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Justify values within the current field width to either the left or
right side, and pad the remaining space with the fill character.
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Left-justified:
									<pre>apple
bananna
cherry</pre><br/>

									Right-justified (with a field width of <tt>10</tt>):
									<pre>apple
bananna
cherry</pre><br/>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>setw(int n)</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Set the width of the field to <tt>n</tt> characters wide.
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									See earlier example.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>setfill(int c)</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Use the character <tt>c</tt> to pad fields that have
remaining space.
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<pre>cout &lt;&lt; setfill('.')
  &lt;&lt; setw(10)
  &lt;&lt; right
  &lt;&lt; "foo"</pre><br/>

									produces:
									<pre>.......foo</pre><br/>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>boolalphanoboolalpha</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Display Boolean values as the current locale's
representation of the words <tt>true</tt> and
<tt>false</tt>, instead of <tt>1</tt> and
<tt>0</tt>.
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<pre>cout &lt;&lt; boolalpha
  &lt;&lt; true</pre><br/>

									produces:
									<pre>true</pre><br/>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>endl</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Write a <tt>newline</tt> to the stream and flush the output
buffer.
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									n/a
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>ends</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Write a <tt>null</tt> character
(`\0') to the stream.
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									n/a
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>flush</tt>
</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Flush the output buffer.
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									n/a
								</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">Some of the manipulators in Table 10-1 (and Table 10-2 in the next recipe) toggle binary stream
flags, and are actually implemented as two manipulators that turn a
flag on or off. Take <tt>boolalpha</tt>, for example. If
you want Boolean values to be displayed as their written equivalents
in the current locale (e.g., "true"
and "false"), use the
<tt>boolalpha</tt> manipulator. To turn this behavior off,
so that <tt>0</tt> and <tt>1</tt> are printed
instead, use <tt>noboolalpha</tt>, which is the default.</p>
<p class="docText">All manipulators have the behavior that they stay in effect until
they are explicitly changed, except for <tt>setw</tt>. In
Example 10-1, you can see that it is called before
each write, but <tt>left</tt> is used only once. This is
because the width is reset to zero after each value is written to the
stream with <tt>operator&lt;&lt;</tt>; to keep the same
width for each field, I had to call <tt>setw</tt> each
time.</p>
<p class="docText">The standard manipulators provide a lot of functionality, but they
don't do everything. If you want to write your own
manipulators, see Recipe 10.2.</p>
<p class="docText">As with all other character-based classes in the standard library,
manipulators work on streams that use narrow or wide characters.
Therefore, you can use them with templates to write formatting
utilities that operate on streams of any kind of character. Example 10-2 presents the class template
<tt>TableFormatter</tt>



, which formats data into
equal-width columns and writes it to a stream.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E1ADI">Example 10-2. A generic class for tabular data</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;iomanip&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;vector&gt;

using namespace std;

// TableFormatter formats data for output to a stream of characters
// of type T.
template&lt;typename T&gt;
class TableFormatter {

public:
   TableFormatter(basic_ostream&lt;T&gt;&amp; os) : out_(os) {}
  ~TableFormatter( ) {out_ &lt;&lt; flush;}

   template&lt;typename valT&gt;
   void writeTableRow(const vector&lt;valT&gt;&amp; v, int width);
   //...

private:
  basic_ostream&lt;T&gt;&amp; out_;
};

template&lt;typename T&gt;    // refers to class template param list
template&lt;typename valT&gt; // refers to mem fn template param list
void TableFormatter&lt;T&gt;::writeTableRow(const std::vector&lt;valT&gt;&amp; v,
                                      int width) {

   ios_base::fmtflags flags = out_.flags( );

   out_.flush( );
   out_ &lt;&lt; setprecision(2) &lt;&lt; fixed;  // Set the precision, in case
                                      // this is floating-point data
   for (vector&lt;valT&gt;::const_iterator p = v.begin( );
        p != v.end( ); ++p)
     out_ &lt;&lt; setw(width) &lt;&lt; left &lt;&lt; *p;  // Set the width, justify,
                                         // and write the element
   out_ &lt;&lt; endl;     // Flush
   out_.setf(flags); // Set the flags back to normal
}

int main( ) {

   TableFormatter&lt;char&gt; fmt(cout);

   vector&lt;string&gt; vs;

   vs.push_back( "Sunday" );
   vs.push_back( "Monday" );
   vs.push_back( "Tuesday" );

   fmt.writeTableRow(vs, 12);
   fmt.writeTableRow(vs, 12);
   fmt.writeTableRow(vs, 12);

   vector&lt;double&gt; vd;

   vd.push_back(4.0);
   vd.push_back(3.0);
   vd.push_back(2.0);
   vd.push_back(1.0);

   fmt.writeTableRow(vd, 5);
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The output from






Example 10-2 looks
like this:</p>
<pre>Sunday      Monday      Tuesday
4.00 3.00 2.00 1.00</pre><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EPCDI">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Table 10-1, Recipe 10.2</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
