<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 10.2. Formatting Floating-Point Output</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 10.2. Formatting Floating-Point Output</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ECVCI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You need to present 



floating-point output in a
well-defined format, either for the sake of precision (scientific
versus fixed-point notation) or simply to line up decimal points
vertically for easier reading.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EIWCI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use the standard manipulators provided in
<tt>&lt;iomanip&gt;</tt> and <tt>&lt;ios&gt;</tt>
to control the format of floating-point values that are written to


the stream. There are too many
combinations of ways to cover here, but Example 10-3
offers a few different ways to display the value of pi.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EHXCI">Example 10-3. Formatting pi</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;iomanip&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;

using namespace std;

int main( ) {

   ios_base::fmtflags flags =  // Save old flags
      cout.flags( );

   double pi = 3.14159265;

   cout &lt;&lt; "pi = " &lt;&lt; setprecision(5)  // Normal (default) mode; only
        &lt;&lt; pi &lt;&lt; '\n';                 // show 5 digits, including both
                                       // sides of decimal point.

   cout &lt;&lt; "pi = " &lt;&lt; fixed            // Fixed-point mode;
        &lt;&lt; showpos                     // show a "+" for positive nums,
        &lt;&lt; setprecision(3)             // show 3 digits to the *right*
        &lt;&lt; pi &lt;&lt; '\n';                 // of the decimal.

   cout &lt;&lt; "pi = " &lt;&lt; scientific       // Scientific mode; 
        &lt;&lt; noshowpos                   // don't show plus sign anymore
        &lt;&lt; pi * 1000 &lt;&lt; '\n';

   cout.flags(flags);  // Set the flags to the way they were
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">This will produce the following output:</p>
<pre>pi = 3.1416
pi = +3.142
pi = 3.142e+003</pre><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EUXCI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">Manipulators that specifically manipulate floating-point output
divide into two categories. There are those that set the format,
which, for the purposes of this recipe, set the general appearance of
floating-point and integer values, and there are those that fine-tune
the display of each format. The formats are as follows:</p>
<dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><i><span class="docPubcolor">Normal (the default)</span></i></p></dt>
<dd>
<p class="docList">In this format, the number of digits displayed is fixed (with a
default of six) and the decimal is displayed such that only a set
number of digits are displayed at one time. So, by default, pi would
be displayed as <tt>3.14159</tt>, and pi times 100 would
display <tt>314.159</tt>.</p>
</dd>
<dt><br/><p><i><span class="docPubcolor">Fixed</span></i></p></dt>
<dd>
<p class="docList">In this format, the number of digits displayed to the
<span class="docEmphasis">right</span> of the decimal point is fixed, while the
number of those displayed to the left is not. In this case, again
with a default precision of six, pi would be displayed as
<tt>3.141593</tt>, and pi times 100 would be
<tt>314.159265</tt>. In both cases, the number of digits
displayed to the right of the decimal point is six while the total
number of digits can grow indefinitely.</p>
</dd>
<dt><br/><p><i><span class="docPubcolor">Scientific</span></i></p></dt>
<dd>
<p class="docList">The value is shown as a single digit, followed by a decimal point,
followed by a number of digits determined by the precision setting,
followed by the letter "e" and the
power of ten to raise the preceding value to. In this case, pi times
1,000 would display as <tt>3.141593e+003</tt>.</p>
</dd>
</dl>
<p class="docText">Table 10-2 shows all manipulators that affect
floating-point output (and sometimes numeric output in general). See
Table 10-1 for general manipulators you can use
together with the floating-point manipulators.</p>
<p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 10-2. Floating-point and numeric manipulators</h5></caption><colgroup span="3"><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Manipulator
								</th><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Description
								</th><th class="docTableCell thead" scope="col">
									Sample output
								</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>Fixed</tt>

</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Show floating-point values with a fixed number of digits to the right
of the decimal point.
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									With a default precision of six digits:
									<pre>pi = 3.141593</pre><br/>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>scientific</tt>

</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Show floating-point values using scientific notation, which means a
decimal number and an exponent multiplier.
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									pi * 1000, with a default precision of six digits:
									<pre>pi = 3.141593e+003</pre><br/>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>setprecision</tt>

</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Control the number of digits displayed in the output. (See further
explanation later.)
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Pi in the default format, with a precision of <tt>3</tt>:
									<pre>pi = 3.14</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In fixed format:</p>
<pre>pi = 3.142</pre><br/>

									In scientific format:
									<pre>pi = 3.142e+000</pre><br/>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>showposnoshowpos</tt>



</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Show a plus sign in front of positive numbers. This works for any
kind of number, decimal or integer.
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>+3.14</tt>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>showpointnoshowpoint</tt>



</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Show the decimal, even if there are only zeros after it. This works
only for floating-point values, and not for integers.
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									The following line, with a precision of <tt>2</tt>:
									<pre>cout &lt;&lt; showpoint &lt;&lt; 2.0</pre><br/>

									will display like this:
									<pre>2.00</pre><br/>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>showbasenoshowbase</tt>



</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Show the base for the number: decimal (none), octal (leading zero),
or hexadecimal (leading 0x). See the next entry.
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Decimal: <tt>32</tt>Octal:
<tt>040</tt>Hexadecimal: <tt>0x20</tt>
</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>decocthex</tt>





</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Set the base for the numbers to be displayed to decimal, octal, or
hexadecimal. The base is not shown by default; use
<tt>showbase</tt> to display the base.
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									See previous entry.
								</td></tr><tr><td class="docTableCell">
<tt>Uppercasenouppercase</tt>



</td><td class="docTableCell">
									Display values in uppercase.
								</td><td class="docTableCell">
									This sets the case for numeric output, such as 0X for hexadecimal
numbers and E for numbers in scientific notation.
								</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">In all three formats, all manipulators have the same effects except
<tt>setprecision</tt>. In the default mode,
"precision" refers to the number of
digits on both sides of the decimal point. For example, to display pi
in the default format with a precision of <tt>2</tt>, do
this:</p>
<pre>cout &lt;&lt; "pi = " &lt;&lt; setprecision(2)
     &lt;&lt; pi &lt;&lt; '\n';</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Your output will look like this:</p>
<pre>pi = 3.1</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">By comparison, consider if you want to display pi in fixed-point
format instead:</p>
<pre>cout &lt;&lt; "pi = " &lt;&lt; fixed
     &lt;&lt; setprecision(2)
     &lt;&lt; pi &lt;&lt; '\n';</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Now the output will look like this:</p>
<pre>pi = 3.14</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This is because, in fixed-point format, the precision refers to the
number of digits to the <span class="docEmphasis">right</span> of the decimal
point. If we multiply pi by 1,000 in the same format, the number of
digits to the right of the decimal remains unchanged:</p>
<pre>cout &lt;&lt; "pi = " &lt;&lt; fixed
     &lt;&lt; setprecision(2)
     &lt;&lt; pi * 1000 &lt;&lt; '\n';</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">produces:</p>
<pre>pi = 3141.59</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This is nice, because you can set your precision, set your field
width with <tt>setw</tt>, right-justify your output with
<tt>right</tt> (see Recipe 10.1 ),
and your decimal points will all be lined up vertically.</p>
<p class="docText">Since a manipulator is just a convenient way of setting a format flag
on the stream, remember that the settings stick around until you undo
them or until the stream is destroyed. Save the format flags (see
Example 10-3) before you start making changes, and
restore them when 



you are done</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ECHDI">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 10.3</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
