<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 10.4. Making a Class Writable to a Stream</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 10.4. Making a Class Writable to a Stream</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EQYCI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have to write a class to an 

output stream, either for
human readability or persistent storage, i.e., serialization.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ENZCI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Overload <tt>operator&lt;&lt;</tt> to write the
appropriate data members to the stream.
Example 10-6 shows how.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EB1CI">Example 10-6. Writing objects to a stream</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;

using namespace std;

class Employer {
   friend ostream&amp; operator&lt;&lt;              // This has to be a friend 
     (ostream&amp; out, const Employer&amp; empr); // so it can access non-
public:                                    // public members
   Employer( ) {}
  ~Employer( ) {}

   void setName(const string&amp; name) {name_ = name;}
private:
   string name_;
};

class Employee {
   friend ostream&amp; operator&lt;&lt;
     (ostream&amp; out, const Employee&amp; obj); 
public:
   Employee( ) : empr_(NULL) {}
  ~Employee( ) {if (empr_) delete empr_;}

   void setFirstName(const string&amp; name) {firstName_ = name;}
   void setLastName(const string&amp; name) {lastName_ = name;}
   void setEmployer(Employer&amp; empr) {empr_ = &amp;empr;}
   const Employer* getEmployer( ) const {return(empr_);}

private:
   string firstName_;
   string lastName_;
   Employer* empr_;
};

// Allow us to send Employer objects to an ostream...
ostream&amp; operator&lt;&lt;(ostream&amp; out, const Employer&amp; empr) {

   out &lt;&lt; empr.name_ &lt;&lt; endl;

   return(out);
}

// Allow us to send Employee objects to an ostream...
ostream&amp; operator&lt;&lt;(ostream&amp; out, const Employee&amp; emp) {

   out &lt;&lt; emp.firstName_ &lt;&lt; endl;
   out &lt;&lt; emp.lastName_ &lt;&lt; endl;
   if (emp.empr_)
     out &lt;&lt; *emp.empr_ &lt;&lt; endl;

   return(out);
}

int main( ) {

   Employee emp;
   string first = "William";
   string last = "Shatner";
   Employer empr;
   string name = "Enterprise";
   empr.setName(name);

   emp.setFirstName(first);
   emp.setLastName(last);
   emp.setEmployer(empr);

   cout &lt;&lt; emp;  // Write to the stream
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EK1CI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">The first thing you need to do is declare
<tt>operator&lt;&lt;</tt> as a <tt>friend</tt> of
the class you want to write to a stream. You should use
<tt>operator&lt;&lt;</tt> instead of a member function like
<tt>writeToStream(ostream&amp; os)</tt> because the
left-shift operator is the convention for writing everything else in
the standard library to a stream. You need to declare it as a
<tt>friend</tt> because, in most cases, you want to write
private members to the stream, and non-<tt>friend</tt>
functions can't access them.</p>
<p class="docText">After that, define the version of <tt>operator&lt;&lt;</tt>
that operates on an <tt>ostream</tt> or
<tt>wostream</tt> (defined in
<tt>&lt;ostream&gt;</tt>) and your class that you have
already declared as a <tt>friend</tt>. This is where you
have to decide which data members should be written to the stream.
Typically, you will want to write all data members to the stream, as
I did in Example 10-6:</p>
<pre>out &lt;&lt; emp.firstName_ &lt;&lt; endl;
out &lt;&lt; emp.lastName_ &lt;&lt; endl;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In Example 10-6, I wrote the object pointed to by
<tt>empr_</tt> by invoking
<tt>operator&lt;&lt;</tt> on it:</p>
<pre>if (emp.empr_)
   out &lt;&lt; *emp.empr_ &lt;&lt; endl;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">I can do this because <tt>empr_</tt> points to an object of
the <tt>Employer</tt> class, and, like
<tt>Employee</tt>, I have defined
<tt>operator&lt;&lt;</tt> for it.</p>
<p class="docText">When you are done writing your class's members to
the stream, your <tt>operator&lt;&lt;</tt> must return the
stream it was passed. You need to do this whenever you overload
<tt>operator&lt;&lt;</tt>, so it can be used in succession,
like this:</p>
<pre>cout &lt;&lt; "Here's my object: " &lt;&lt; myObj &lt;&lt; '\n';</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The approach I give is simple, and when you want to be able to write
a class to an output stream for human consumption, it will work just
fine, but that's only part of the story. If you are
writing an object to a stream, it's usually for one
of two reasons. Either that stream goes somewhere that will be read
by a person (<tt>cout</tt>, console window, a log file,
etc.), or the stream is a temporary or persistent storage medium (a
<tt>stringstream</tt>, a network connection, a file, etc.),
and you plan on reassembling the object from that stream in the
future. If you need to recreate the object from a stream (the subject
of Recipe 10.5), you need to think carefully
about your class relationships.</p>
<p class="docText">Implementing serialization for

anything
other than trivial classes is hard work. If your class references
(via pointer or reference) other classes—as most nontrivial
classes do—you have to accommodate the potential for circular
references in a meaningful way when writing out objects, and you have
to reconstruct references correctly when reading them in. If you have
to build something from scratch, then you'll have to
handle these design considerations, but if you can use an external
library, you should try the Boost Serialization library, 

which provides a
framework for serializing objects in a portable way.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E24CI">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 10.5</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
