<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 10.6. Getting Information About a File</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 10.6. Getting Information About a File</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EG2CI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You want information 

about a file, such as its size, device,
last modification time, etc.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E62CI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use the C system call <tt>stat</tt> in
<tt>&lt;sys/stat.h&gt;</tt>. See Example 10-8 for a typical use of <tt>stat</tt>
that prints out a few file attributes.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ES3CI">Example 10-8. Obtaining file information</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;ctime&gt;
#include &lt;sys/types.h&gt;
#include &lt;sys/stat.h&gt;
#include &lt;cerrno&gt;
#include &lt;cstring&gt;

int main(int argc, char** argv )
{
   struct stat fileInfo;

   if (argc &lt; 2) {
      std::cout &lt;&lt; "Usage: fileinfo &lt;file name&gt;\n";
      return(EXIT_FAILURE);
   }

   if (stat(argv[1], &amp;fileInfo) != 0) {  // Use stat( ) to get the info
      std::cerr &lt;&lt; "Error: " &lt;&lt; strerror(errno) &lt;&lt; '\n';
      return(EXIT_FAILURE);
   }

   std::cout &lt;&lt; "Type:         : ";
   if ((fileInfo.st_mode &amp; S_IFMT) == S_IFDIR) { // From sys/types.h
      std::cout &lt;&lt; "Directory\n";
   } else {
      std::cout &lt;&lt; "File\n";
   }

   std::cout &lt;&lt; "Size          : " &lt;&lt;
      fileInfo.st_size &lt;&lt; '\n';               // Size in bytes
   std::cout &lt;&lt; "Device        : " &lt;&lt;
      (char)(fileInfo.st_dev + 'A') &lt;&lt; '\n';  // Device number
   std::cout &lt;&lt; "Created       : " &lt;&lt;
      std::ctime(&amp;fileInfo.st_ctime);         // Creation time
   std::cout &lt;&lt; "Modified      : " &lt;&lt;
      std::ctime(&amp;fileInfo.st_mtime);         // Last mod time
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E23CI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">The C++ standard library supports manipulation of file
<span class="docEmphasis">content</span> with streams, but it has no built-in
support for reading or altering the metadata the OS maintains about a
file, such as its size, ownership, permissions, various timestamps,
and other information. However, standard C contains a number of
standard system call libraries that you can use to get this kind of
information about a file, and that's what Example 10-8 uses.</p>
<p class="docText">There are two parts to obtaining file information. First, there is a
<tt>struct</tt> named <tt>stat</tt> that contains
members that hold data about a file, and second there is a system
call (function) of the same name, which gets information about
whatever file you specify and populates a <tt>stat</tt>
<tt>struct</tt> with it. A <span class="docEmphasis">system
call</span>
is a function that provides some service from the OS. A number of
system calls are part of Standard C, and many of them are
standardized across the different versions of Unix. The
<tt>stat</tt>
<tt>struct</tt> looks like this
(from Kernigan and Richie's <span class="docEmphasis">The C
Programming Language</span> [Prentice Hall]):</p>
<pre>struct stat {
   dev_t   st_dev;    /* device of inode */
   ino_t   st_ino;    /* inode number */
   short   st_mode;   /* mode bits */
   short   st_nlink;  /* number of links to file */
   short   st_uid;    /* owner's user id */
   short   st_gid;    /* owner's group id */
   dev_t   st_rdev;   /* for special files */
   off_t   st_size;   /* file size in characters */
   time_t  st_atime;  /* time last accessed */
   time_t  st_mtime;  /* time last modified */
   time_t  st_ctime;  /* time inode last changed */
};</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The meaning of each of <tt>stat</tt>'s
members depends on the OS. For example, <tt>st_uid</tt> and
<tt>st_gid</tt> mean nothing on Windows systems; whereas on
Unix systems, they actually contain the user and group ids of the
file's owner. Take a look at your OS documentation
to see which values are supported and how to interpret them.</p>
<p class="docText">Example 10-8 shows how to display some of the
portable members of <tt>stat</tt>.
<tt>st_mode</tt> contains a bit mask describing the type of
file. You can use it to determine if the file is a directory or not.
<tt>st_size</tt> is the file size in bytes. The three
<tt>time_t</tt> members are timestamps of the access,
modification, and creation times of the files.</p>
<p class="docText">The remaining members contain operating-system specific information.
Consider <tt>st_dev</tt>: on Windows systems, it contains
the device number (drive) as an offset from ASCII letter A (which is
why I add an '<tt>A</tt>' to it in the example—this
gives you the drive letter). But that won't give you
the same results on Unix; pass the value returned to the
<tt>ustat</tt> system call to obtain the filesystem name.</p>
<p class="docText">If you need more information about a file, the best thing to do is to
do some investigating in your OS's documentation.
The standard C system calls are Unix-centric, so they are usually
more useful on Unix systems (and have a number of other system calls
that can be used in conjunction with them). If you are not using
Unix, chances are there are proprietary libraries that ship with your
OS's 

development environment that provide
more detailed information.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
