<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 10.7. Copying a File</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 10.7. Copying a File</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EL3CI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You need to copy one file to another in a 
portable
manner, i.e., without using OS-specific APIs.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EA4CI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use C++ file streams in <tt>&lt;fstream&gt;</tt> to copy
data from one stream to another. Example 10-9 gives
an example of a buffered stream copy.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EP4CI">Example 10-9. Copying a file</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;fstream&gt;

const static int BUF_SIZE = 4096;

using std::ios_base;

int main(int argc, char** argv) {

   std::ifstream in(argv[1],
      ios_base::in | ios_base::binary);  // Use binary mode so we can
   std::ofstream out(argv[2],            // handle all kinds of file
      ios_base::out | ios_base::binary); // content.
   
   // Make sure the streams opened okay...

   char buf[BUF_SIZE];

   do {
      in.read(&amp;buf[0], BUF_SIZE);      // Read at most n bytes into
      out.write(&amp;buf[0], in.gcount( )); // buf, then write the buf to
   } while (in.gcount( ) &gt; 0);          // the output.

   // Check streams for problems...

   in.close( );
   out.close( );
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EY4CI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">Copying a file may appear to be a simple matter of reading from one
stream and writing to another. But the C++ streams library is large,
and there are a number of different ways to do the reading and the
writing, so you should know a little about the library to avoid
costly performance mistakes.</p>
<p class="docText">Example 10-9 runs fast because it buffers input and
output. The <tt>read</tt> and <tt>write</tt>
functions operate on entire buffers at a time—instead of a
character-at-a-time copy loop—by reading from the input stream
to the buffer and writing from the buffer to the output stream in
chunks. They also do not do any kind of formatting on the data like
the left- and right-shift operators, which keeps things fast.
Additionally, since the streams are in binary mode, EOF characters
can be read and written without incident. Depending on your hardware,
OS, and so on, you will get different results for different buffer
sizes. Experiment to find the best parameters for your system.</p>
<p class="docText">But there's more to it than this. All C++ streams
already buffer data when reading or writing, so Example 10-9 is actually doing <span class="docEmphasis">double</span>
buffering. The input stream has its own internal stream buffer that
holds characters that have been read from the source but not
extracted with <tt>read</tt>,
<tt>operator&lt;&lt;</tt>, <tt>getc</tt>, or any
other member functions, and the output stream has a buffer that holds
output that has been written to the stream but not the destination
(in the case of an <tt>ofstream</tt>, it's
a file but it could be a string, a network connection, or
who-knows-what). Therefore, the best thing to do is to let the
buffers exchange data directly. You can do this with
<tt>operator&lt;&lt;</tt>, which behaves differently than
usual when used with stream buffers. For example, instead of the
<tt>do</tt>/<tt>while</tt> loop in Example 10-9, use this:</p>
<pre>out &lt;&lt; in.rdbuf( );</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Don't place this statement in the body of the loop,
replace the loop with this single line. It looks a little odd, since,
typically, <tt>operator&lt;&lt;</tt> says,
"take the righthand side and send it to the lefthand
stream," but bear with me and it will make sense.
<tt>rdbuf</tt> returns the buffer from the input stream,
and the implementation of <tt>operator&lt;&lt;</tt> that
takes a stream buffer as a righthand argument reads a character at a
time from the input buffer and writes it to the output buffer. When
the input buffer is emptied, it knows it has to refill itself with
data from the real source, and <tt>operator&lt;&lt;</tt> is
none the wiser.</p>
<p class="docText">Example 10-9 shows how to copy the
<span class="docEmphasis">contents</span> of a file yourself, but your OS is
responsible for managing the filesystem, which encompasses copying
them, so why not let the OS do the work? In most cases, the answer to
this question is that a direct call to the OS API is, of course, not
portable.
Boost's Filesystem
library masks a lot of the OS-specific APIs for you by providing the
function <tt>copy_file</tt>, which makes different OS calls
based on the platform it was compiled for. Example 10-10 contains a short program that copies a file
from one location to another.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EGADI">Example 10-10. Copying a file with Boost</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;boost/filesystem/operations.hpp&gt;
#include &lt;boost/filesystem/fstream.hpp&gt;

using namespace std;
using namespace boost::filesystem;

int main(int argc, char** argv) {

   // Parameter checking...

   try {
      // Turn the args into absolute paths using native formatting
      path src = complete(path(argv[1], native));
      path dst = complete(path(argv[2], native));

      copy_file(src, dst);
   }
   catch (exception&amp; e) {
      cerr &lt;&lt; e.what( ) &lt;&lt; endl;
   }

   return(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">This a small program, but there are a few key parts that need
explaining because other recipes in this chapter use the Boost
Filesystem library. To begin with, the central component of the

Boost
Filesystem library is the <tt>path</tt> class, which
represents, in an OS-independent way, a path to a file or directory.
You can create a <tt>path</tt> using either a portable or
OS-native string. In Example 10-10, I create a
<tt>path</tt> out of the program arguments (that I then
pass to <tt>complete</tt>, which I discuss in a moment):</p>
<pre>path src = complete(<b>path(argv[1], native)</b>);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The first argument is the text of the path, e.g.,
"<tt>tmp\\foo.txt</tt>" and the second argument is the name
of a function that accepts a <tt>string</tt> argument and
returns a <tt>boolean</tt> that validates that a path is
valid according to certain rules. The <tt>native</tt>
function means to use the OS's native format for
validation. I used it in Example 10-10 because the
arguments are passed in from the command line where they are
presumably typed in by a human user, who will probably use the native
OS format when specifying files. There are a number of functions that
you can use to validate file and directory names, all of which are
self-explanatory: <tt>portable_posix_name</tt>,
<tt>windows_name</tt>, <tt>portable_name</tt>,
<tt>portable_directory_name</tt>,
<tt>portable_file_name</tt>, and
<tt>no_check</tt>. See the documentation for specifics.</p>
<p class="docText"><tt>complete</tt> composes an absolute path using the
current working directory and the relative path you pass it. Thus, I
can do this to create an absolute path to the source file:</p>
<pre>path src = complete(path("tmp\\foo.txt", native));</pre><br/>
<p class="docText"><tt>complete</tt> handles the case where the first argument
is already an absolute filename by using the value given rather than
trying to merge it with the current working directory. In other
words, the following code invoked from a current directory of
"<tt>c:\myprograms</tt>" ignores the current working
directory since the path given is already complete:</p>
<pre>path src = complete(path("c:\\windows\\garbage.txt", native));</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Many of the Boost Filesystem functions will throw an exception if a
precondition is not met. The documentation has all the details, but a
good example is with the <tt>copy_file</tt> function
itself. A file must exist before it can be copied, so if the source
file does not exist, the operation cannot succeed; therefore,
<tt>copy_file</tt> will throw an exception. Catch the
exception as I did in Example 10-10
 and you will get an
error message that explains the problem.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
