<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 10.8. Deleting or Renaming a File</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 10.8. Deleting or Renaming a File</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EI5CI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have to remove or 




rename
a file, and you want to do it portably, i.e., without using
OS-specific APIs.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EU6CI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">The Standard C functions <tt>remove</tt> and
<tt>rename</tt>, in <tt>&lt;cstdio&gt;</tt>, will
do this. See Example 10-11 for a brief demonstration
of them.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EHADI">Example 10-11. Removing a file</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;cstdio&gt;
#include &lt;cerrno&gt;

using namespace std;

int main(int argc, char** argv) {

   if (argc != 2) {
      cerr &lt;&lt; "You must supply a file name to remove." &lt;&lt; endl;
      return(EXIT_FAILURE);
   }

   if (remove(argv[1]) == -1) {  // remove( ) returns -1 on error
      cerr &lt;&lt; "Error: " &lt;&lt; strerror(errno) &lt;&lt; endl;
      return(EXIT_FAILURE);
   }
   else {
      cout &lt;&lt; "File '" &lt;&lt; argv[1] &lt;&lt; "' removed." &lt;&lt; endl;
   }
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EQADI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">These system calls are easy to use: just call one or the other with
the filename you want to delete or rename. If something goes wrong,
the return value is non-zero and <tt>errno</tt> is set to
the appropriate error number. You can use <tt>strerror</tt>
or <tt>perror</tt> (both declared in
<tt>&lt;cstdio&gt;</tt>) to print out the
implementation-defined error message.</p>
<p class="docText">To rename a file, you can replace the <tt>remove</tt> call
in Example 10-11 with the following code:</p>
<pre>if (rename(argv[1], argv[2])) {
   cerr &lt;&lt; "Error: " &lt;&lt; strerror(errno) &lt;&lt; endl;
   return(EXIT_FAILURE);
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The Boost Filesystem library also provides the ability to remove or
rename a file. Example 10-12 shows a short
program for removing a file (or directory, but
see the discussion after the example).</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EZBDI">Example 10-12. Removing a file with Boost</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;boost/filesystem/operations.hpp&gt;
#include &lt;boost/filesystem/fstream.hpp&gt;

using namespace std;
using namespace boost::filesystem;

int main(int argc, char** argv) {

   // Do parameter checking...

   try {
      path p = complete(path(argv[1], native));
      remove(p);
   }
   catch (exception&amp; e) {
      cerr &lt;&lt; e.what( ) &lt;&lt; endl;
   }
   return(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The important part of Example 10-12 is the
<tt>remove</tt> function. Call it with a valid
<tt>path</tt> argument that refers to a file or an empty
directory, and it will be removed. For an explanation of the
<tt>path</tt> class and <tt>complete</tt>
function, both of which are part of the Boost Filesystem library,
take a look at the discussion in Recipe 10.7.
See Recipe 10.11 for an example of how to
remove a directory and all the files it contains.</p>
<p class="docText">Renaming a file or directory is similar. Replace the code in the
<tt>try</tt> block in Example 10-12 with
this code:</p>
<pre>path src = complete(path(argv[1], native));
path dst = complete(path(argv[2], native));
rename(src, dst);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This will rename <tt>src</tt> to <tt>dst</tt>, so
long as each is a valid path. <tt>src</tt> and
<tt>dst</tt> don't have to have a common
base directory, and in that respect, the rename function logically
moves a file or directory to a new base directory, so long 




as
<tt>dst</tt> exists.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EREDI">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 10.7</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
