<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 10.9. Creating a Temporary Filename and File</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 10.9. Creating a Temporary Filename and File</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EN6CI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have to store some stuff on disk



 temporarily, and you
don't want to have to write a routine that generates
a unique name yourself.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EUADI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use either the

<tt>tmpfile</tt> or
<tt>tmpnam</tt>

functions, declared in <tt>&lt;cstdio&gt;</tt>.
<tt>tmpfile</tt> returns a <tt>FILE*</tt> that is
already opened for writing, and <tt>tmpnam</tt> generates a
unique filename that you can open yourself. Example 10-13 shows how to use <tt>tmpfile</tt>.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EACDI">Example 10-13. Creating a temporary file</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;cstdio&gt;

using namespace std;

int main( ) {

   FILE* pf = NULL;
   char buf[256];

   pf = tmpfile( );  // Create and open a temp file

   if (pf) {
      fputs("This is a temp file", pf);  // Write some data to it
   }

   fseek(pf, 5, SEEK_SET);  // Reset the file position
   fgets(buf, 255, pf);     // Read a string from it
   fclose(pf);

   cout &lt;&lt; buf &lt;&lt; '\n';
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EJCDI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">There are two ways to create a temporary file; Example 10-13 shows the first way. The function
<tt>tmpfile</tt> is declared in
<tt>&lt;cstdio&gt;</tt>, takes no parameters, and returns a
<tt>FILE*</tt> if successful, <tt>NULL</tt> if
not. The <tt>FILE*</tt> is the same type you can use with
the C input/output functions <tt>fread</tt>,
<tt>fwrite</tt>, <tt>fgets</tt>,
<tt>fputs</tt>, etc. <tt>tmpfile</tt> opens the
temporary file in "wb+" mode, which
means you can write to it or read from it in binary mode (i.e., the
characters are not interpreted as they are read). When your program
terminates normally, the temporary file created by
<tt>tmpfile</tt> is automatically deleted.</p>
<p class="docText">This may or may not work for you depending on your requirements. You
will notice that <tt>tmpfile</tt> does not give you a
filename—how do you pass the file to another program? You
can't; you'll have to use a similar
function instead: <tt>tmpnam</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText"><tt>tmpnam</tt> doesn't actually create a
temporary file, it just creates a unique file
<span class="docEmphasis">name</span> that you can use to go open a file using
that name yourself. <tt>tmpnam</tt> takes a single
<tt>char*</tt> parameter and returns a
<tt>char*</tt>. You can pass in a pointer to a
<tt>char</tt> buffer (that has to be at least as big as the
macro <tt>L_tmpnam</tt>, also defined in
<tt>&lt;cstdio&gt;</tt>), where <tt>tmpnam</tt>
will copy the temporary name, and it will return a pointer to the
same buffer. If you pass in <tt>NULL</tt>,
<tt>tmpfile</tt> will return a pointer to a static buffer
that contains the filename, which means that subsequent calls to
<tt>tmpnam</tt> will overwrite it. (See Example 10-14.)</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EREDI">Example 10-14. Creating a temporary filename</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;fstream&gt;
#include &lt;cstdio&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;

using namespace std;

int main( ) {

   char* pFileName = NULL;

   pFileName = tmpnam(NULL);
   // Right here is where another program may get the same temp
   // filename.

   if (!pFileName) {
      cerr &lt;&lt; "Couldn't create temp file name.\n";
      return(EXIT_FAILURE);
   }

   cout &lt;&lt; "The temp file name is: " &lt;&lt; pFileName &lt;&lt; '\n';

   ofstream of(pFileName);

   if (of) {
      of &lt;&lt; "Here is some temp data.";
      of.close( );
   }

   ifstream ifs(pFileName);
   string s;
   
   if (ifs) {
      ifs &gt;&gt; s;
      cout &lt;&lt; "Just read in \"" &lt;&lt; s &lt;&lt; "\"\n";
      ifs.close( );
   }
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">But there is something important you should know about
<tt>tmpnam</tt>. It has a race condition whereby more than
one process may generate the same filename if one calls
<tt>tmpname</tt> and the other calls
<tt>tmpname</tt> before the first process opens the file.
This is bad for two reasons. First, a malicious program can do this
to intercept the data in a temporary file, and second, an 



unsuspecting program
can get the same filename and simply corrupt or delete data.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
