<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 10.10. Creating a Directory</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 10.10. Creating a Directory</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ESADI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have to create a directory, and 

you
want to do it portably, i.e., without using OS-specific APIs.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EOBDI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">On most platforms, you will be able to use the
<tt>mkdir</tt> system call that is shipped with most
compilers as part of the C headers. It takes on different forms in
different OSs, but regardless, you can use it to create a new
directory. There is no standard C++, portable way to create a
directory. Check out Example 10-15 to see how.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E4BDI">Example 10-15. Creating a directory</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;direct.h&gt;
#include &lt;cstring&gt;
#include &lt;errno.h&gt;
#include &lt;cstdlib&gt;

using namespace std;

int main(int argc, char** argv) {

   if (argc &lt; 2) {
      cerr &lt;&lt; "Usage: " &lt;&lt; argv[0] &lt;&lt; " [new dir name]\n";
      return(EXIT_FAILURE);
   }

   if (mkdir(argv[1]) == -1) {  // Create the directory
      cerr &lt;&lt; "Error: " &lt;&lt; strerror(errno);
      return(EXIT_FAILURE);
   }
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EGCDI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">The system call for creating directories differs somewhat from one OS
to another, but don't let that stop you from using
it anyway. Variations of <tt>mkdir</tt> are supported on
most systems, so creating a directory is just a matter of knowing
which header to include and what the function's
signature looks like.</p>
<p class="docText">Example 10-15 works on Windows, but not Unix. On
Windows, <tt>mkdir</tt> is declared in
<tt>&lt;direct.h&gt;</tt>. It takes one parameter (the
directory name), returns <tt>-1</tt> if there is an error,
and sets <tt>errno</tt> to the corresponding error number.
You can get the implementation-defined error text by calling
<tt>strerror</tt> or <tt>perror</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">On Unix, <tt>mkdir</tt> is declared in
<tt>&lt;sys/stat.h&gt;</tt>, and its signature is slightly
different. The error semantics are just like Windows, but there is a
second parameter that specifies the permissions to apply to the new
directory. Instead, you must specify the permissions using the
traditional <tt>chmod</tt> format (see the
<tt>chmod</tt> man page for specifics), e.g.,
<tt>0777</tt> means owner, group, and others all have
<tt>read</tt>, <tt>write</tt>, and
<tt>execute</tt> permissions. Thus, you might call it like
this on Unix:</p>
<pre>#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;sys/types.h&gt;
#include &lt;sys/stat.h&gt;
#include &lt;cstring&gt;
#include &lt;errno.h&gt;
#include &lt;cstdlib&lt;

using namespace std;

int main(int argc, char** argv) {

   if (argc &lt; 2) {
      cerr &lt;&lt; "Usage: " &lt;&lt; argv[0] &lt;&lt; " [new dir name]\n";
      return(EXIT_FAILURE);
   }

   if (mkdir(argv[1], 0777) == -1) {  // Create the directory
      cerr &lt;&lt; "Error: " &lt;&lt; strerror(errno);
      return(EXIT_FAILURE);
   }
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">If you want portability, and don't want to write all
the <tt>#ifdef</tt>s yourself, you should consider using
the Boost Filesystem library. You can create a directory using the
<tt>create_directory</tt> function, as shown in
Example 10-16, which
contains a short program that creates a directory.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EIEDI">Example 10-16. Creating a directory with Boost</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;cstdlib&gt;
#include &lt;boost/filesystem/operations.hpp&gt;
#include &lt;boost/filesystem/fstream.hpp&gt;

using namespace std;
using namespace boost::filesystem;

int main(int argc, char** argv) {

   // Parameter checking...

   try {
      path p = complete(path(argv[1], native));
      create_directory(p);
   }
   catch (exception&amp; e) {
      cerr &lt;&lt; e.what( ) &lt;&lt; endl;
   }

  return(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>create_directory</tt> function creates a directory
identified by the <tt>path</tt> argument you give it. If
that directory already exists, a <tt>filesystem_error</tt>
exception is thrown (derived from the standard exception class). For
an explanation of the <tt>path</tt> class and
<tt>complete</tt> function, both of which are part of the
Boost Filesystem library, take a look at the discussion in Recipe
Recipe 10.7. See Recipe 10.11
for an example of how to remove a directory and all the files it
contains. If, on the other hand, portability is not a concern,
consult your OS's proprietary filesystem API,


which
will most likely offer more flexibility.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EXFDI">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 10.12</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
