<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 10.11. Removing a Directory</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 10.11. Removing a Directory</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EXBDI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You need to remove a directory, 

and
you want to do it portably, i.e., without using OS-specific APIs.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ETCDI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">On most platforms, you will be able to use the
<tt>rmdir</tt> system call that is shipped with most
compilers as part of the C headers. There is no standard C++,
portable way to remove a directory. <tt>rmdir</tt> takes on
different forms in different OSs, but regardless, you can use it to
remove a directory. See Example 10-17 for a short
program that removes a directory.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EEDDI">Example 10-17. Removing a directory</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;direct.h&gt;

using namespace std;

int main(int argc, char** argv) {

   if (argc &lt; 2) {
      cerr &lt;&lt; "Usage: " &lt;&lt; argv[0] &lt;&lt; " [dir name]" &lt;&lt; endl;
      return(EXIT_FAILURE);
   }

   if (rmdir(argv[1]) == -1) {  // Remove the directory
      cerr &lt;&lt; "Error: " &lt;&lt; strerror(errno) &lt;&lt; endl;;
      return(EXIT_FAILURE);
   }
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ENDDI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">The signature of <tt>rmdir</tt> is the same on most OSs,
but the header file where it is declared is not. On Windows, it is
declared in <tt>&lt;direct.h&gt;</tt>, and on Unix, it is
declared in <tt>&lt;unistd.h&gt;</tt>. It takes one
parameter (the directory name), returns <tt>-1</tt> if
there is an error, and sets <tt>errno</tt> to the
corresponding error number. You can get the implementation-defined
error text by calling <tt>strerror</tt> or
<tt>perror</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">If the target directory is not empty <tt>rmdir</tt> will
return an error. To list the contents of a directory, to enumerate
them for deletion, etc., see Recipe 10.12.</p>
<p class="docText">If you want portability, and don't want to write a
bunch of <tt>#ifdef</tt>s around the various OS-specific
directory functions, you should consider using the Boost Filesystem
library. The Boost Filesystem library uses the concept of a path to
refer to a directory or file, and paths can be removed with a single
function, <tt>remove</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">The function <tt>removeRecurse</tt> in Example 10-18 recursively removes a directory and all of its
contents. The most important part is the <tt>remove</tt>
function (which is <tt>boost::filesystem::remove</tt>, not
a standard library function). It takes a <tt>path</tt>
argument, and removes it if it is a file or an
<span class="docEmphasis">empty</span> directory, but
it doesn't remove a
directory that contains files.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EMFDI">Example 10-18. Removing a directory with Boost</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;cstdlib&gt;
#include &lt;boost/filesystem/operations.hpp&gt;
#include &lt;boost/filesystem/fstream.hpp&gt;

using namespace std;
using namespace boost::filesystem;

void removeRecurse(const path&amp; p) {

   // First, remove the contents of the directory
   directory_iterator end;
   for (directory_iterator it(p);
        it != end; ++it) {

      if (is_directory(*it)) {
         removeRecurse(*it);
      }
      else {
         remove(*it);
      }
   }
   // Then, remove the directory itself
   remove(p);
}

int main(int argc, char** argv) {

   if (argc != 2) {
      cerr &lt;&lt; "Usage: " &lt;&lt; argv[0] &lt;&lt; " [dir name]\n";
      return(EXIT_FAILURE);
   }

   path thePath = system_complete(path(argv[1], native));

   if (!exists(thePath)) {
      cerr &lt;&lt; "Error: the directory " &lt;&lt; thePath.string( )
           &lt;&lt; " does not exist.\n";
      return(EXIT_FAILURE);
   }

   try {
      removeRecurse(thePath);
   }
   catch (exception&amp; e) {
      cerr &lt;&lt; e.what( ) &lt;&lt; endl;
      return(EXIT_FAILURE);
   }
   return(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The code that iterates through the directory contents requires some
explanation, and that is the subject of Recipe 10.12.</p>
<p class="docText">The Boost Filesystem library is handy, but remember that Boost is not
a formal standard and therefore is not guaranteed to run everywhere.
If you examine the source code for the Boost Filesystem library, you
will notice that essentially, it compiles native OS calls based on
the target platform. If portability is not a concern, consult your
OS's proprietary filesystem API, which
will

 most
likely offer more flexibility.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EPGDI">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 10.12</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
