<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 10.12. Reading the Contents of a Directory</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 10.12. Reading the Contents of a Directory</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EIDDI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You need to read the contents 

of
a directory, most likely to do something to each file or subdirectory
that's in it.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EEEDI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">To write something portable, use the Boost Filesystem
library's classes and functions. It provides a
number of handy utilities for manipulating files, such as a portable
path representation, directory iterators, and numerous functions for
renaming, deleting, and copying files, and so on. Example 10-19 demonstrates how to use a few of these
facilities.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EREDI">Example 10-19. Reading a directory</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;boost/filesystem/operations.hpp&gt;
#include &lt;boost/filesystem/fstream.hpp&gt;

using namespace boost::filesystem;

int main(int argc, char** argv) {

   if (argc &lt; 2) {
      std::cerr &lt;&lt; "Usage: " &lt;&lt; argv[0] &lt;&lt; " [dir name]\n";
      return(EXIT_FAILURE);
   }

   path fullPath =    // Create the full, absolute path name
     system_complete(path(argv[1], native));

   if (!exists(fullPath)) {
      std::cerr &lt;&lt; "Error: the directory " &lt;&lt; fullPath.string( )
                &lt;&lt; " does not exist.\n";
      return(EXIT_FAILURE);
   }

   if (!is_directory(fullPath)) {
      std::cout &lt;&lt; fullPath.string( ) &lt;&lt; " is not a directory!\n";
      return(EXIT_SUCCESS);
   }

   directory_iterator end;
   for (directory_iterator it(fullPath);
        it != end; ++it) {               // Iterate through each
                                         // element in the dir,
      std::cout &lt;&lt; it-&gt;leaf( );           // almost as you would
      if (is_directory(*it))             // an STL container
         std::cout &lt;&lt; " (dir)";
      std::cout &lt;&lt; '\n';
   }

   return(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E1EDI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">Like creating or deleting directories (see Recipe 10.10 and Recipe 10.11), there is no
standard, portable way to read the contents of a directory. To make
your C++ life easier, the Filesystem library in the Boost project
provides a set of portable routines for operating on files and
directories. It also provides many more—see the other recipes
in this chapter or the Boost Filesystem web page at www.boost.com for more information.</p>
<p class="docText">Example 10-19 is a simple directory listing program
(like <tt>ls</tt> on Unix or <tt>dir</tt> on
MS-DOS). First, it builds an absolute pathname out of the argument
passed to the program, like this:</p>
<pre>path fullPath = complete(path(argv[1], native));</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The data type of a path is called, appropriately,
<tt>path</tt>. This is the type that the filesystem
routines operate on, and is easily convertible to a string by calling
<tt>path::string</tt>. Once the path has been assembled,
the program checks its existence (with <tt>exists</tt>),
then checks to see if it is a directory with another utility
function, <tt>is_directory</tt>. If it is, then everything
is in good shape and it can proceed to the real work of listing the
directory contents.</p>
<p class="docText">There is a class called <tt>directory_iterator</tt> in
filesystem that uses standard iterator semantics, like the standard
containers, to allow you to use an iterator like you would a pointer
to a directory element. Unlike standard containers, however, there is
no <tt>end</tt> member function you can call on a directory
that represents one-past-the-last-element (i.e.,
<tt>vector&lt;T&gt;::end</tt>). Instead, if you create a
<tt>directory_iterator</tt> with the default constructor,
it represents an end marker that you can use for comparison to
determine when you are done. So do this:</p>
<pre>directory_iterator end;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">and then you can create an iterator from your path, and compare it to
end, like this:</p>
<pre>for (directory_iterator it(fullPath);
     it != end; ++it) {
   // do whatever you want to *it
   std::cout &lt;&lt; it-&gt;leaf( );
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>leaf</tt> member function returns a string
representing the element referred to by a path, and not the full path
itself, which is what you get if you call the
<tt>string</tt> member function.</p>
<p class="docText">If you have to write something that is portable, but for some reason
you cannot use Boost, take a look at the Boost code itself. It
contains <tt>#ifdef</tt>s that deal with (for the most
part) Windows versus Posix OS interface environments and path
particulars, such as drive letters versus device

 names.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ETHDI">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 10.10 and Recipe 10.11</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
