<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 10.13. Extracting a File Extension from a String</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 10.13. Extracting a File Extension from a String</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ENEDI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">Given a filename or a



complete path, you need to retrieve the
file extension, which is the part of a filename that follows the last
period. For example, in the filenames <i>src.cpp</i>,
<i>Window.class</i>, and
<i>Resume.doc</i>, the file extensions are
<i>.cpp</i>, <i>.class</i>, and
<i>.doc</i>.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EVFDI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Convert the file and/or pathname to a <tt>string</tt>,


use the
<tt>rfind</tt> member function to locate the last period,
and return everything after that. Example 10-20 shows
how to do this.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EXGDI">Example 10-20. Getting a file extension from a filename</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;

using std::string;

string getFileExt(const string&amp; s) {

   size_t i = s.rfind('.', s.length( ));
   if (i != string::npos) {
      return(s.substr(i+1, s.length( ) - i));
   }

   return("");
}

int main(int argc, char** argv) {

   string path = argv[1];

   std::cout &lt;&lt; "The extension is \"" &lt;&lt; getFileExt(path) &lt;&lt; "\"\n";
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EAHDI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">To get an extension from a filename, you just need to find out where
the last dot "." is and take
everything to the right of that. The standard
<tt>string</tt> class, defined in
<tt>&lt;string&gt;</tt> contains functions for doing both
of these things: <tt>rfind</tt> and
<tt>substr</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText"><tt>rfind</tt> will search <span class="docEmphasis">backward</span>
for whatever you sent it (a <tt>char</tt> in this case) as
the first argument, starting at the index specified by the second
argument, and return the index where it was found. If the pattern
wasn't found, <tt>rfind</tt> will return
<tt>string::npos</tt>. <tt>substr</tt> also takes
two arguments. The first is the index of the first element to copy,
and the second is the number of characters to copy.</p>
<p class="docText">The standard string class contains a number of member functions for
finding things. See Recipe 4.9 for a longer
discussion of string searching.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EHIDI">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 4.9 and Recipe 10.12</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
