<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 10.14. Extracting a Filename from a Full Path</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 10.14. Extracting a Filename from a Full Path</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EGFDI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have the full path of


a filename, e.g.,
<i>d:\apps\src\foo.c</i>, and you need to get the
filename, <i>foo.c</i>.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EEGDI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Employ the same technique as the previous recipe and use
<tt>rfind</tt> and <tt>substr</tt> to find and
get what you want from the full pathname. Example 10-21 shows how.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EVGDI">Example 10-21. Extracting a filename from a path</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;

using std::string;

string getFileName(const string&amp; s) {

   char sep = '/';

#ifdef _WIN32
   sep = '\\';
#endif

   size_t i = s.rfind(sep, s.length( ));
   if (i != string::npos) {
      return(s.substr(i+1, s.length( ) - i));
   }

   return("");
}

int main(int argc, char** argv) {

   string path = argv[1];

   std::cout &lt;&lt; "The file name is \"" &lt;&lt; getFileName(path) &lt;&lt; "\"\n";
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E5GDI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">See the previous recipe for details on how <tt>rfind</tt>
and <tt>substr</tt> work. The only thing noteworthy about
Example 10-21 is that, as you probably are already
aware, Windows has a path separator that is a backslash instead of a
forward-slash, so I added an <tt>#ifdef</tt> to
conditionally set the path separator.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>path</tt> class in the Boost Filesystem library
makes getting the last part of a full pathname—which may be a
file or directory name—easy with the
<tt>path::leaf</tt> member function. Example 10-22 shows a simple program that uses it to print
out whether a path refers to a file or directory.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E3HDI">Example 10-22. Getting a filename from a path</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;cstdlib&gt;
#include &lt;boost/filesystem/operations.hpp&gt;

using namespace std;
using namespace boost::filesystem;

int main(int argc, char** argv) {

   // Parameter checking...

   try {
      path p = complete(path(argv[1], native));
      cout &lt;&lt; p.leaf( ) &lt;&lt; " is a "
           &lt;&lt; (is_directory(p) ? "directory" : "file") &lt;&lt; endl;
   }
   catch (exception&amp; e) {
      cerr &lt;&lt; e.what( ) &lt;&lt; endl;
   }

  return(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">See the discussion in Recipe 10.7 for more
information about the <tt>path</tt> class.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EPIDI">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 10.15</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
