<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 10.15. Extracting a Path from a Full Path and Filename</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 10.15. Extracting a Path from a Full Path and Filename</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ELGDI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have the full path of a filename, e.g.,
<tt>d:\apps\src\foo.c</tt>, and you need to get the
pathname, <tt>d:\apps\src</tt>.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EYGDI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use the same technique as the previous two recipes by invoking
<tt>rfind</tt> and <tt>substr</tt> to find and
get what you want from the full pathname. See Example 10-23 for a short sample program.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EJHDI">Example 10-23. Get the path from a full path and filename</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;

using std::string;

string getPathName(const string&amp; s) {

   char sep = '/';

#ifdef _WIN32
   sep = '\\';
#endif

   size_t i = s.rfind(sep, s.length( ));
   if (i != string::npos) {
      return(s.substr(0, i));
   }

   return("");
}

int main(int argc, char** argv) {

   string path = argv[1];

   std::cout &lt;&lt; "The path name is \"" &lt;&lt; getPathName(path) &lt;&lt; "\"\n";
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ESHDI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">Example 10-23 is trivial, especially if
you've already looked at the previous few recipes,
so there is no more to explain. However, as with many of the other
recipes, the Boost Filesystem library provides a way to extract
everything but the last part of the filename with its
<tt>branch_path</tt> function. Example 10-24
shows how to use it.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EEIDI">Example 10-24. Getting the base path</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;cstdlib&gt;
#include &lt;boost/filesystem/operations.hpp&gt;

using namespace std;
using namespace boost::filesystem;

int main(int argc, char** argv) {

   // Parameter checking...

   try {
      path p = complete(path(argv[1], native));
      cout &lt;&lt; p.branch_path( ).string( ) &lt;&lt; endl;
   }
   catch (exception&amp; e) {
      cerr &lt;&lt; e.what( ) &lt;&lt; endl;
   }
  return(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Sample output from Example 10-24 looks like this:</p>
<pre>D:\src\ccb\c10&gt;bin\GetPathBoost.exe c:\windows\system32\1033
c:/windows/system32</pre><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EWIDI">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 10.13 and Recipe 10.14</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
