<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 10.16. Replacing a File Extension</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 10.16. Replacing a File Extension</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EEHDI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">Given a filename, or a path
and

 filename,
you want to replace the file's extension. For
example, if you are given <tt>thesis.tex</tt>, you want to
convert it to <tt>thesis.txt</tt>.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E6HDI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use <tt>string</tt>'s
<tt>rfind</tt> and <tt>replace</tt> member
functions to find the extension and replace it. Example 10-25 shows you how to do this.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ESIDI">Example 10-25. Replacing a file extension</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;

using std::string;

void replaceExt(string&amp; s, const string&amp; newExt) {

   string::size_type i = s.rfind('.', s.length( ));

   if (i != string::npos) {
      s.replace(i+1, newExt.length( ), newExt);
   }
}

int main(int argc, char** argv) {

   string path = argv[1];

   replaceExt(path, "foobar");
   std::cout &lt;&lt; "The new name is \"" &lt;&lt; path &lt;&lt; "\"\n";
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E2IDI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">This solution is similar to the ones in the preceding recipes, but in
this case I used <tt>replace</tt> to replace a portion of
the string with a new string. <tt>replace</tt> has three
parameters. The first parameter is the index where the
<tt>replace</tt> should begin, and the second is the number
of characters to delete from the destination string. The third
parameter is the value that will be used to replace the deleted
portion of the string.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EKJDI">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 4.9</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
