<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 10.17. Combining Two Paths into a Single Path</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 10.17. Combining Two Paths into a Single Path</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E4HDI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have two paths and you have

to combine them into a single path. You may have something like
<tt>/usr/home/ryan</tt> as a first path, and
<tt>utils/compilers</tt> as the second, and wish to get
<tt>/usr/home/ryan/utils/compilers</tt>, without having to
worry whether or not the first path ends with a path separator.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EXIDI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Treat the paths as strings and use the append operator,
<tt>operator+=</tt>, to compose a full path out of partial
paths. See Example 10-26.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EGJDI">Example 10-26. Combining paths</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;

using std::string;

string pathAppend(const string&amp; p1, const string&amp; p2) {

   char sep = '/';
   string tmp = p1;

#ifdef _WIN32
  sep = '\\';
#endif

  if (p1[p1.length( )] != sep) { // Need to add a
     tmp += sep;                // path separator
     return(tmp + p2);
  }
  else
     return(p1 + p2);
}

int main(int argc, char** argv) {

   string path = argv[1];

   std::cout &lt;&lt; "Appending somedir\\anotherdir is \""
             &lt;&lt; pathAppend(path, "somedir\\anotherdir") &lt;&lt; "\"\n";
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EPJDI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">The code in Example 10-26 uses strings that represent
paths, but there's no additional checking on the
path class for validity and the paths used are only as portable as
the values they contain. If, for example, these paths are retrieved
from the user, you don't know if
they're using the right OS-specific format, or if
they contain illegal characters.</p>
<p class="docText">For many other recipes in this chapter I have included examples that
use the Boost Filesystem library, and when working with paths, this
approach has lots of benefits. As I discussed in Recipe 10.7, the Boost Filesystem library contains a
<tt>path</tt> class that is a portable representation of a
path to a file or directory. The operations in the Filesystem library
mostly work with <tt>path</tt> objects, and as such, the
<tt>path</tt> class can handle path composition from an
absolute base and a relative path. (See Example 10-27.)</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ETKDI">Example 10-27. Combining paths with Boost</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;cstdlib&gt;
#include &lt;boost/filesystem/operations.hpp&gt;
#include &lt;boost/filesystem/fstream.hpp&gt;

using namespace std;
using namespace boost::filesystem;

int main(int argc, char** argv) {

   // Parameter checking...

   try {
      // Compose a path from the two args
      path p1 = complete(path(argv[2], native),
                         path(argv[1], native));
      cout &lt;&lt; p1.string( ) &lt;&lt; endl;

      // Create a path with a base of the current dir
      path p2 = system_complete(path(argv[2], native));
      cout &lt;&lt; p2.string( ) &lt;&lt; endl;
   }
   catch (exception&amp; e) {
      cerr &lt;&lt; e.what( ) &lt;&lt; endl;
   }

  return(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The output of the program in Example 10-27 might look
like this:</p>
<pre>D:\src\ccb\c10&gt;bin\MakePathBoost.exe d:\temp some\other\dir
d:/temp/some/other/dir
D:/src/ccb/c10/some/other/dir</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">or:</p>
<pre>D:\src\ccb\c10&gt;bin\MakePathBoost.exe d:\temp c:\WINDOWS\system32
c:/WINDOWS/system32
c:/WINDOWS/system32</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">What you can see here is that <tt>complete</tt> and
<tt>system_complete</tt> merge paths when possible, or
return the absolute path when merging paths makes no sense. For
example, in the first output, the first argument given to the program
is an absolute directory and the second is a relative directory.
<tt>complete</tt> merges them together and produces a
single, absolute path. The first argument to
<tt>complete</tt> is the relative path, and the second is
the absolute path, and if the first argument is already an absolute
path, the second argument is ignored. That's why in
the second output you can see that the argument
"<tt>d:\temp</tt>" is ignored since the second argument I
give is already an absolute path.</p>
<p class="docText"><tt>system_complete</tt> only takes a single argument (the
relative path in this case) and appends it to the current working
directory to produce another absolute path. Again, if you give it a
path that is already absolute, it ignores the current working
directory and simply returns the absolute path you gave it.</p>
<p class="docText">These paths are not reconciled with the filesystem though. You have
to explicitly test to see if a <tt>path</tt> object
represents a valid filesystem path. For example, to check if one of
these paths exists, you can use the <tt>exists</tt>
function on a path:</p>
<pre>path p1 = complete(path(argv[2], native),
                   path(argv[1], native));
if (exists(p1)) {
   // ...</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">There are many more functions you can use to get information about a
path: <tt>is_dir-ectory</tt>, <tt>is_empty</tt>,
<tt>file_size</tt>, <tt>last_write_time</tt>, and
so on. See the Boost Filesystem library documentation at www.boost.org for more
 information.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E2MDI">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 10.7</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
