<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Introduction</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Introduction</h3>
<p class="docText">C++ is a language well suited for scientific and mathematical
programming, due to its flexibility, expressivity, and efficiency.
One of the biggest advantages of C++ for numerical processing code is
that it can help you avoid redundancy.</p>
<p class="docText">Historically, numerical code in many programming languages would
repeat algorithms over and over for different kinds of numerical
types (e.g., short, long, single, double, custom numerical types,
etc.). C++ provides a solution to this problem of redundancy through
templates. Templates enable you to write algorithms independantly of
the data representation, a technique known commonly as generic
programming.</p>
<p class="docText">C++ is not without its shortcomings with regards to numerical
processing code. The biggest drawback with C++—in contrast to
specialized mathematical and scientific programming
languages—is that the standard library is limited in terms of
support of algorithms and data-types relevant to numerical
programming. The biggest oversights in the standard library are
arguably the lack of matrix types and arbitrary precision integers.</p>
<p class="docText">In this chapter, I will provide you with solutions to common
numerical programming problems and demonstrate how to use generic
programming techniques to write numerical code effectively. Where
appropriate, I will recommend widely used open-source libraries with
commercially friendly licenses and a proven track record. This
chapter introduces the basic techniques of generic programming
gradually from recipe to recipe.</p>
<p class="docText">Many programmers using C++ still distrust templates and generic
programming due to their apparent complexity. When templates were
first introduced into the language they were neither well implemented
nor well understood by programmers and compiler implementers alike.
As a result, many programmers, including yours truly, avoided generic
programming in C++ for several years while the technology matured.</p>
<p class="docText">Today, generic programming is widely accepted as a powerful and
useful programming paradigm, and is supported by the most popular
programming languages. Furthermore, C++ compiler technology has
improved by leaps and bounds, and modern compilers deal with
templates in a much more standardized and efficient manner. As a
result, modern C++ is a particularly powerful language for scientific
and numerical applications.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
