<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 11.1. Computing the Number of Elements in a Container</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 11.1. Computing the Number of Elements in a Container</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E4KDI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You want to find the


number of elements in a
container.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EWLDI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">You can compute the number of elements in a container by using the
<tt>size</tt>




member function or the <tt>distance</tt> function from the
<tt>&lt;algorithm&gt;</tt> header as in Example 11-1.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E6MDI">Example 11-1. Computing the Number of Elements in a Container</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;algorithm&gt;
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;vector&gt;

using namespace std; 

int main( ) {
  vector&lt;int&gt; v; 
  v.push_back(0); 
  v.push_back(1);
  v.push_back(2);
  cout &lt;&lt; v.size( ) &lt;&lt; endl; 
  cout &lt;&lt; distance(v.begin( ), v.end( )) &lt;&lt; endl; 
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The program in Example 11-1 produces the following
output:</p>
<pre>3
3</pre><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ERNDI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">The <tt>size</tt> member function, which returns the number
of elements in a standard container, is the best solution in cases
where the container object is accessible. I also demonstrated
<tt>distance</tt> in Example 11-1, because
when writing generic code it is common to work with only a pair of
iterators. When working with iterators, you often
don't have access to the type of the container or to
its member functions.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>distance</tt> function, like most STL algorithms,
is actually a template function. Since the type of the template
argument can be deduced automatically by the compiler from the
function arguments, you don't have to explicitly
pass it as a template parameter. You can, of course, write out the
template parameter explicitly if you want to, as follows:</p>
<pre>  cout &lt;&lt; distance&lt;vector&lt;int&gt;::iterator&gt;(v.begin( ), v.end( )) &lt;&lt; endl;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>distance</tt> function performance depends on the
kind of iterator used. It takes constant time if the input iterator
is a random-access iterator; otherwise, it operates in linear time.
(Iterator concepts are explained in Recipe 7.1.)</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ETODI">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 15.1</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
