<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 11.2. Finding the Greatest or Least Value in a Container</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 11.2. Finding the Greatest or Least Value in a Container</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EWLDI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You want to find the maximum or 



minimum value in a container.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E2MDI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Example 11-2 shows how to find the

minimum and maximum elements in a
container by using the functions
<tt>max_element</tt>



and <tt>min_element</tt> found in the
<tt>&lt;algorithm&gt;</tt> header. These functions return
iterators that point to the first occurence of an element with the
largest or smallest value, respectively.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EGODI">Example 11-2. Finding the minimum or maximum element from a container</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;algorithm&gt;
#include &lt;vector&gt;
#include &lt;iostream&gt;

using namespace std;

int getMaxInt(vector&lt;int&gt;&amp; v) {
  return *max_element(v.begin( ), v.end( ));
}

int getMinInt(vector&lt;int&gt;&amp; v) {
  return *min_element(v.begin( ), v.end( ));
}

int main( ) {
  vector&lt;int&gt; v;
  for (int i=10; i &lt; 20; ++i) v.push_back(i);
  cout &lt;&lt; "min integer = " &lt;&lt; getMinInt(v) &lt;&lt; endl;
  cout &lt;&lt; "max integer = " &lt;&lt; getMaxInt(v) &lt;&lt; endl;
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The program in Example 11-2 produces the following
output:</p>
<pre>min integer = 10
max integer = 19</pre><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EYODI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">You may have noticed the dereferencing of the return value from the
calls to <tt>min_element</tt> and
<tt>max_element</tt>. This is because these functions
return iterators and not actual values, so the results have to be
dereferenced. You may find it a minor inconvenience to have to
dereference the return type, but it avoids unnecssarily copying the
return value. This can be especially significant when the return
value has expensive copy semantics (e.g., large strings).</p>
<p class="docText">The generic algorithms provided by the standard library are obviously
quite useful, but it is more important for you to be able to write
your own generic functions for getting the minimum and maximum value
from a container. For instance, let's say that you
want a single function which returns the minimum and maximum values
by modifying reference parameters instead of returning them in a pair
or some other structure. This is demonstrated in Example 11-3.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EMPDI">Example 11-3. Generic function for returning the minimum and maximum value</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedWidth">#include &lt;algorithm&gt;
#include &lt;vector&gt;
#include &lt;iostream&gt;

using namespace std;

template&lt;class Iter_T, class Value_T&gt;
void computeMinAndMax(Iter_T first, Iter_T last, Value_T&amp; min, Value_T&amp; max) {
  min = *min_element(first, last);
  max = *max_element(first, last);
}

int main( ) {
  vector&lt;int&gt; v;
  for (int i=10; i &lt; 20; ++i) v.push_back(i);
  int min = -1;
  int max = -1;
  computeMinAndMax(v.begin( ), v.end( ), min, max);
  cout &lt;&lt; "min integer = " &lt;&lt; min &lt;&lt; endl;
  cout &lt;&lt; "max integer = " &lt;&lt; max &lt;&lt; endl;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">In Example 11-3, I have written a
<tt>computeMinAndMax</tt> function template which takes two
template parameters, one is the type of the iterator and the other is
the type of the minimum and maximum values. Because both template
parameters are also function parameters, the C++ compiler is able to
deduce the two separate types, <tt>Iter_T</tt> and
<tt>Value_T</tt>, just as I demonstrated in Recipe 11.1. This saves me from having to specify the
template parameters explicitly like:</p>
<pre>compute_min_max&lt;vector&lt;int&gt;::iterator, int&gt;(...)</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>min_element</tt> and <tt>max_element</tt>
functions work by using <tt>operator&lt;</tt> to compare
the values referenced by the iterators. This means that if an
iterator does not reference a type that supports comparison through
the less-than operator, a compiler error will result. The
<tt>min_element</tt> and <tt>max_element</tt>
functions, however, can be used with a user-defined comparison
functor, i.e., a function pointer or a function object.</p>
<p></p><div class="box">
<h2 class="docSidebarTitle">Functors</h2>
<p class="docText">Many STL algorithms accept user-defined function objects or pointers.
Collectively, these are known as
<i>functors</i>.
Sometimes in the literature, the term "function
object" is used interchangeably with the term
functor, but I've reserved the use of function
object for refering specifically to instances of classes or structs
that overload <tt>operator( )</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Of the two options, which one should you use? In the majority of
cases, a function object is more efficient because most compilers can
more easily inline a function object.</p>
<p class="docText">Another reason for using a function object is that it can have a
state. You can pass values to its constructor, which it stores in its
fields for use later on. This gives function objects an expressive
equivalency as with the concept of closures found in other
programming languages.</p>
<p class="docText">Finally, function objects can be defined within another function or
class. Function pointers have to be declared in a namespace scope.</p>
</div><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">The specific kind of functor needed by <tt>min_element</tt>
and <tt>max_element</tt> is one that takes two values of
the type referenced by the iterator and returns a
<tt>boolean</tt> value if one is less than the other. A
functor which returns a <tt>boolean</tt> value is known as
a predicate. Consider for instance the case of finding the greatest
element of a set of
 user defined type in
Example 11-4.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EESDI">Example 11-4. Finding the maximum element for user-defined types</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;algorithm&gt;
#include &lt;vector&gt;
#include &lt;iostream&gt;

using namespace std;

struct ChessPlayer {
  ChessPlayer(const char* name, int rating)
    : name_(name), rating_(rating)
  { }
  const char* name_;
  int rating_;
};

struct IsWeakerPlayer {
  bool operator( )(const ChessPlayer&amp; x, const ChessPlayer&amp; y) {
    return x.rating_ &lt; y.rating_;
  }
};

int main( )
{
  ChessPlayer kasparov("Garry Kasparov", 2805);
  ChessPlayer anand("Viswanathan Anand ", 2788);
  ChessPlayer topalov("Veselin Topalov", 2788);
  vector&lt;ChessPlayer&gt; v;
  v.push_back(kasparov);
  v.push_back(anand);
  v.push_back(topalov);
  cout &lt;&lt; "the best player is ";
  cout &lt;&lt; max_element(v.begin( ), v.end( ), IsWeakerPlayer( ))-&gt;name_;
  cout &lt;&lt; endl;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The program in Example 11-4 produces the following
output:</p>
<pre>the best player is Garry Kasparov</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In Example 11-4 I have shown how to provide
<tt>max_element</tt> with a custom predicate. The predicate
is the function object <tt>IsWeakerPlayer</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Another alternative to pasing a user-defined predicate in Example 11-4 is to override <tt>operator&lt;</tt>
for the <tt>ChessPlayer</tt> struct. This works fine for
the specific case of the example, but it presumes that the most
important way to sort players is by rating. It may be that sorting by
name is more prevalent. Since choosing one method of sorting over
another in this case is an arbitrary choice, I prefer to



 leave
<tt>operator&lt;</tt> undefined.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
