<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 11.3. Computing the Sum and Mean of Elements in a Container</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 11.3. Computing the Sum and Mean of Elements in a Container</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EHNDI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You want to compute 


the sum
and mean of elements in a container of numbers.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EGODI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">You can use the <tt>accumulate</tt> function from the
<tt>&lt;numeric&gt;</tt> header to compute the sum, and
then divide by the size to get the mean. Example 11-5
demonstrates this using a vector.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EXODI">Example 11-5. Computing the sum and mean of a container</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;numeric&gt;
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;vector&gt;

using namespace std;

int main( ) {
  vector&lt;int&gt; v;
  v.push_back(1);
  v.push_back(2);
  v.push_back(3);
  v.push_back(4);
  int sum = accumulate(v.begin( ), v.end( ), 0);
  double mean = double(sum) / v.size( );
  cout &lt;&lt; "sum = " &lt;&lt; sum &lt;&lt; endl;
  cout &lt;&lt; "count = " &lt;&lt; v.size( ) &lt;&lt; endl;
  cout &lt;&lt; "mean = " &lt;&lt; mean &lt;&lt; endl;
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The program in Example 11-5 produces the following
output:</p>
<pre>sum = 10
count = 4
mean = 2.5</pre><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EJPDI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">The <tt>accumulate</tt> function generally provides the
most efficient and simplest method to find the sum of all the
elements in a container.</p>
<p class="docText">Even though this recipe has a relatively simple solution, writing
your own generic function to compute a mean is not so easy. Example 11-6 shows one way to write such a generic
function:</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E2PDI">Example 11-6. A generic function to compute the mean</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>template&lt;class Iter_T&gt;
double computeMean(Iter_T first, Iter_T last) {
  return static_cast&lt;double&gt;(accumulate(first, last, 0.0)) 
    / distance(first, last);
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>computeMean</tt> function in Example 11-6 is sufficient for most purposes but it has one
restriction: it doesn't work with input iterators
such as <tt>istream_iterator</tt>.</p>
<p></p><div class="box">
<h2 class="docSidebarTitle">istream_iterator and ostream_iterator</h2>
<p class="docText">The
<tt>istream_iterator</tt>


 and <tt>ostream_iterator</tt>
class templates are special-purpose iterators found in the the
<tt>&lt;iterator&gt;</tt> header that allow you to treat
streams as single-pass containers.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>istream_iterator</tt> is an input iterator that
wraps an input stream, such as <tt>cin</tt> or
<tt>ifstream</tt> allowing it to be used as a parameter for
many generic functions. The <tt>ostream_iterator</tt> is an
output iterator that allows you to use output streams as if they are
containers.</p>
<p class="docText">Using <tt>istream_iterator</tt> and
<tt>ostream_iterator</tt> are good habits to get in, as
they make it easier to write reusable code.</p>
</div><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">An <tt>istream_iterator</tt> allows only a single pass over
the data, so you can call either <tt>accumulate</tt> or
<tt>distance</tt> but once you call either function, the
data is invalidated and any further attempts to iterate over the data
will likely fail. Example 11-7 demonstrates how to
write instead a more generic algorithm for computing the mean of a
sequence of numbers in a single pass.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EOSDI">Example 11-7. A more generic function to compute the mean</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;stdexcept&gt;
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;iterator&gt;

using namespace std;

template&lt;class Value_T, class Iter_T&gt;
Value_T computeMean(Iter_T first, Iter_T last) {
  if (first == last) throw domain_error("mean is undefined");
  Value_T sum;
  int cnt = 0;
  while (first != last) {
    sum += *first++;
    ++cnt;
  }
  return sum / cnt;
}

int main( ) {
  cout &lt;&lt; "please type in several integers separated by newlines" &lt;&lt; endl;
  cout &lt;&lt; "and terminated by an EOF character (i.e., Ctrl-Z)" &lt;&lt; endl;
  double mean = computeMean&lt;double&gt;(
    istream_iterator&lt;int&gt;(cin),
    istream_iterator&lt;int&gt;( ));
  cout &lt;&lt; "the mean is " &lt;&lt; mean &lt;&lt; endl;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">When writing generic code, you should always try to write for the
most basic kind of iterator possible. This implies that whenever you
can you should try to write generic algorithms that operate in a
single pass over the input. By taking this approach, your generic
code is not restricted only to containers, but can also be used with
input iterators such as <tt>istream_iterator</tt>. As
further motivation, single pass algorithms are often more efficient.</p>
<p class="docText">It may be surprising that I decided to write the
<tt>computeMean</tt> function in Example 11-7 to require that the return type is passed as a
template parameter as opposed to deducing it from the iterator type.
This is because it is common for statistics to be computed and
represented with a higher level of precision than the numbers in the
container. For example, the code in Example 11-7
returns 


the mean of a set of integers as a
<tt>double</tt> value.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
