<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 11.7. Initializing a Container with Random Numbers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 11.7. Initializing a Container with Random Numbers</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ETSDI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You want to fill an arbitrary 


container with random numbers.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ERTDI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">You can use either the <tt>generate</tt>
or



<tt>generate_n</tt> functions from the
<tt>&lt;algorithm&gt;</tt> header with a functor that
returns random numbers. See Example 11-13 for an
example of how to do this.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EWUDI">Example 11-13. Initializing containers with random numbers</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;algorithm&gt;
#include &lt;vector&gt;
#include &lt;iterator&gt;
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;cstdlib&gt;

using namespace std;

struct RndIntGen
{
  RndIntGen(int l, int h)
    : low(l), high(h)
  { }
  int operator( )( ) const {
    return low + (rand( ) % ((high - low) + 1));
  }
private:
  int low;
  int high;
};

int main( ) {
  srand(static_cast&lt;unsigned int&gt;(clock( )));
  vector&lt;int&gt; v(5);
  generate(v.begin( ), v.end( ), RndIntGen(1, 6));
  copy(v.begin( ), v.end( ), ostream_iterator&lt;int&gt;(cout, "\n"));
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The program in Example 11-13 should produce output
similar to:</p>
<pre>3
1
2
6
4</pre><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EIVDI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">The standard C++ library provides the functions
<tt>generate</tt> and <tt>generate_n</tt>
specifically for filling containers with the result of a generator
function. These functions accept a nullary functor (a function
pointer or function object with no arguments) whose result is
assigned to contiguous values in the container. Sample
implementations of the <tt>generate</tt> and
<tt>generate_n</tt> functions are shown in Example 11-14.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E4VDI">Example 11-14. Sample implementations of generate and generate_n</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>template&lt;class Iter_T, class Fxn_T&gt;
void generate(Iter_T first, Iter_T last, Fxn_T f) {
  while (first != last) *first++ = f( );
}

template&lt;class Iter_T, class Fxn_T&gt;
void generate_n(Iter_T first, int n, Fxn_T f) {
  for (int i=0; i &lt; n; ++i) *first++ = f( );
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
