<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 11.8. Representing a Dynamically Sized Numerical Vector</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 11.8. Representing a Dynamically Sized Numerical Vector</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EMTDI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You want a type for manipulating numerical vectors


with dynamic size.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EDUDI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">You can use the
<tt>valarray</tt>

template from the <tt>&lt;valarray&gt;</tt> header. Example 11-15 shows how you can use the
<tt>valarray</tt> template.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E5UDI">Example 11-15. Using valarray</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;valarray&gt;
#include &lt;iostream&gt;

using namespace std;

int main( ) {
  valarray&lt;int&gt; v(3);
  v[0] = 1; v[1] = 2; v[2] = 3;
  cout &lt;&lt; v[0] &lt;&lt; ", " &lt;&lt; v[1] &lt;&lt; ", " &lt;&lt; v[2] &lt;&lt; endl;
  v = v + v;
  cout &lt;&lt; v[0] &lt;&lt; ", " &lt;&lt; v[1] &lt;&lt; ", " &lt;&lt; v[2] &lt;&lt; endl;
  v /= 2;
  cout &lt;&lt; v[0] &lt;&lt; ", " &lt;&lt; v[1] &lt;&lt; ", " &lt;&lt; v[2] &lt;&lt; endl;
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The program in Example 11-15 will output the following:</p>
<pre>1, 2, 3
2, 4, 6
1, 2, 3</pre><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EQVDI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">Despite its name, <tt>vector</tt> is not intended to be
used as a numerical vector; rather, the <tt>valarray</tt>
template is. The <tt>valarray</tt> is designed so that C++
implementations, especially those on high-performance machines, can
apply specialized vector optimizations to it. The other big advantage
of <tt>valarray</tt> is that it provides numerous
overloaded operators specifically for working with numerical vectors.
These operators provide such functionality as vector addition and
scalar multiplication.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>valarray</tt> template can also be used with the
standard algorithms like a C-style array. See Example 11-16 to see how
you can create iterators to the
beginning of, and one past the end of, a <tt>valarray</tt>.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ERWDI">Example 11-16. Getting iterators to valarray</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>template&lt;class T&gt;
T* valarray_begin(valarray&lt;T&gt;&amp; x) {
  return &amp;x[0];
}

template&lt;class T&gt;
T* valarray_end(valarray&lt;T&gt;&amp; x) {
  return valarray_begin(x) + x.size( );
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Even though it appears somewhat academic, you should not try to
create an end iterator for a <tt>valarray</tt> by writing
<tt>&amp;x[x.size( )]</tt>. If this works, it is only by
accident since indexing a <tt>valarray</tt> past the last
valid index results in undefined behaviour.</p>
<p class="docText">The lack of <tt>begin</tt> and <tt>end</tt>
member functions in <tt>valarray</tt> is decidedly
non-STL-like. This lack emphasizes that <tt>valarray</tt>
does not model an STL container concept. Despite that, you can use
<tt>valarray</tt> with any of the generic algorithms where
a random-access iterator is required.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
