<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 11.9. Representing a Fixed-Size Numerical Vector</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 11.9. Representing a Fixed-Size Numerical Vector</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ERUDI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You want an efficient representation

 for manipulating
constant-sized numerical vectors</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ELVDI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">On many common software architectures, it is more efficient to use a
custom vector implementation than a <tt>valarray</tt> when
the size is known at compile time. Example 11-17
provides a sample implementation of a fixed-size vector template
called a

<tt>kvector</tt>.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EFWDI">Example 11-17. kvector.hpp</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;algorithm&gt;
#include &lt;cassert&gt;

template&lt;class Value_T, unsigned int N&gt;
class kvector
{
public:
  // public fields
  Value_T m[N];

  // public typedefs
  typedef Value_T value_type;
  typedef Value_T* iterator;
  typedef const Value_T* const_iterator;
  typedef Value_T&amp; reference;
  typedef const Value_T&amp; const_reference;
  typedef size_t size_type;

  // shorthand for referring to kvector
  typedef kvector self;

  // member functions
  template&lt;typename Iter_T&gt;
  void copy(Iter_T first, Iter_T last) { copy(first, last, begin( )); }
  iterator begin( ) { return m; }
  iterator end( ) { return m + N; }
  const_iterator begin( ) const { return m; }
  const_iterator end( ) const { return m + N; }
  reference operator[](size_type n) { return m[n]; }
  const_reference operator[](size_type n) const { return m[n]; }
  static size_type size( ) { return N; }

  // vector operations
  self&amp; operator+=(const self&amp; x) {
      for (int i=0; i&lt;N; ++i) m[i] += x.m[i]; return *this;
  }
  self&amp; operator-=(const self&amp; x) {
      for (int i=0; i&lt;N; ++i) m[i] -= x.m[i]; return *this;
  }

  // scalar operations
  self&amp; operator=(value_type x) {
    std::fill(begin( ), end( ), x); return *this;
  }
  self&amp; operator+=(value_type x) {
    for (int i=0; i&lt;N; ++i) m[i] += x; return *this;
  }
  self&amp; operator-=(value_type x) {
    for (int i=0; i&lt;N; ++i) m[i] -= x; return *this;
  }
  self&amp; operator*=(value_type x) {
     for (int i=0; i&lt;N;  ++i) m[i] *= x; return *this;
  }
  self&amp; operator/=(value_type x) {
     for (int i=0; i&lt;N; ++i) m[i] /= x; return *this;
  }
  self&amp; operator%=(value_type x) {
     for (int i=0; i&lt;N; ++i) m[i] %= x; return *this;
   }
  self operator-( ) {
    self x;
    for (int i=0; i&lt;N; ++i) x.m[i] = -m[i];
    return x;
  }

  // friend operators
  friend self operator+(self x, const self&amp; y) { return x += y; }
  friend self operator-(self x, const self&amp; y) { return x -= y; }
  friend self operator+(self x, value_type y) { return x += y; }
  friend self operator-(self x, value_type y) { return x -= y; }
  friend self operator*(self x, value_type y) { return x *= y; }
  friend self operator/(self x, value_type y) { return x /= y; }
  friend self operator%(self x, value_type y) { return x %= y; }
};

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Usage of the <tt>kvector</tt> class template is
demonstrated in Example 11-18.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EXWDI">Example 11-18. Using kvector</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include "kvector.hpp"

#include &lt;algorithm&gt;
#include &lt;numeric&gt;
#include &lt;iostream&gt;

using namespace std;

int main( ) {
  kvector&lt;int, 4&gt; v = { 1, 2, 3, 4 };
  cout &lt;&lt; "sum = " &lt;&lt; accumulate(v.begin( ), v.end( ), 0) &lt;&lt; endl;
  v *= 3;
  cout &lt;&lt; "sum = " &lt;&lt; accumulate(v.begin( ), v.end( ), 0) &lt;&lt; endl;
  v += 1;
  cout &lt;&lt; "sum = " &lt;&lt; accumulate(v.begin( ), v.end( ), 0) &lt;&lt; endl;
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The program in Example 11-18 will produce the
following output:</p>
<pre>sum = 10
sum = 30
sum = 34</pre><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EJXDI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">The <tt>kvector</tt> template in Example 11-17 is a cross between a
<tt>valarray</tt> and the array template proposed for TR1.
Like <tt>valarray</tt>, <tt>kvector</tt>
represents a sequence of values of a given numerical type, but like
<tt>tr1::array</tt>, the size is known at compile time.</p>
<p class="docText">Salient features of <tt>kvector</tt> are that it supports
array initialization syntax and it provides <tt>begin</tt>
and <tt>end</tt> member functions. In effect, a
<tt>kvector</tt> is considered a pseudo-container, which
means that it satisfies some but not all of the requirements of a
standard container concept. The result of this is that it is much
easier to use <tt>kvector</tt> with standard algorithms
than a <tt>valarray</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Another advantage of the <tt>kvector</tt> template class is
that it supports array initialization syntax as follows:</p>
<pre>int x;
kvector&lt;int, 3&gt; k = { x = 1, x + 2, 5 };</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This initializing syntax is only possible because
<tt>kvector</tt> is an aggregate. An
<span class="docEmphasis">aggregate</span> is an array or a class with no user
declared constructors, no private or protected nonstatic data
members, no base classes, and no virtual functions. Note that you can
still declare a <tt>kvector</tt> filled with default values
as follows:</p>
<pre>kvector&lt;int, 3&gt; k = {};</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This fills the vector with zeros.</p>
<p class="docText">As you can see, I had to made a design trade-off between fully
satisfying the standard container requirements or allowing the array
initialization syntax. A similar design trade-off was made in the
design of the TR1 <tt>array</tt> template.</p>
<p class="docText">Perhaps the biggest advantage of the <tt>kvector</tt> over
dynamic vector implementations is performance. The
<tt>kvector</tt> template is much more efficient than most
dynamic vector implementations for two main reasons: compilers are
very good at optimizing fixed-size loops, and there are no dynamic
allocations. The performance difference is particularly noticeable
for small matricies (e.g., 2 2 or 3 3), which are common in many
kinds of applications.</p>
<p></p><div class="box">
<h2 class="docSidebarTitle">What Is the "self" typedef?</h2>
<p class="docText">The <tt>self</tt> typedef I use in Example 11-17 and in later examples is a convenient
shorthand that I use to refer to the type of the current class. It
makes code much easier to write and understand when the self typedef
is

 used
rather than writing out the name of the class.</p>
</div><p></p><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
