<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 11.10. Computing a Dot Product</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 11.10. Computing a Dot Product</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ECWDI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have two containers
of
 numbers that are the same length and
you want to compute their dot product.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EUWDI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Example 11-19 shows how you can compute a dot product
using the
<tt>inner_product</tt>

function from the <tt>&lt;numeric&gt;</tt> header.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EMXDI">Example 11-19. Computing the dot product</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;numeric&gt;
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;vector&gt;

using namespace std;

int main( ) {
  int v1[] = { 1, 2, 3 };
  int v2[] = { 4, 6, 8 };
  cout &lt;&lt; "the dot product of (1,2,3) and (4,6,8) is ";
  cout &lt;&lt; inner_product(v1, v1 + 3, v2, 0) &lt;&lt; endl;
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The program in Example 11-19 produces the following
output:</p>
<pre>the dot product of (1,2,3) and (4,6,8) is 40</pre><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E5XDI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">The dot product is a form of inner product known as the
Euclidean Inner Product. The
<tt>inner_product</tt> function is declared as follows:</p>
<pre class="preFixedWidth">template&lt;class In, class In2, class T&gt;
T inner_product(In first, In last, In2 first2, T init);

template&lt;class In, class In2, class T, class BinOp, class BinOp2&gt;
T inner_product(In first, In last, In2 first2, T init, BinOp op, Binop2 op2);

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The first form of <tt>inner_product</tt> sums the result of
multiplying corresponding elements from two containers. The second
form of the <tt>inner_product</tt> function allows you to
supply your own pairwise operation and accumulation function. See
Example 11-20 to see a sample implementation
demonstrating how <tt>inner_product</tt> works.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E3YDI">Example 11-20. Sample implementation of inner_product( )</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedWidth">template&lt;class In, class In2, class T, class BinOp, class BinOp2&gt;
T inner_product(In first, In last, In2 first2, T init, BinOp op, Binop2 op2) {
  while (first != last) {
    BinOp(init, BinOp2(*first++, *first2++));    
  }
  return init;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Because of its flexible implementation, you can use
<tt>inner_product</tt> for many more purposes than just
computing a dot product (e.g., you can use it to compute the distance
between two vectors or compute the norm of a vector).</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EKZDI">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 11.11 and Recipe 11.12</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
