<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 11.11. Computing the Norm of a Vector</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 11.11. Computing the Norm of a Vector</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E2WDI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You want to find the


norm (i.e., the length) of a numerical
vector.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ESXDI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">You can use the <tt>inner_product</tt> function from the
<tt>&lt;numeric&gt;</tt> header to multiply a vector with
itself as shown in Example 11-21.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EDYDI">Example 11-21. Computing the norm of a vector</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;numeric&gt;
#include &lt;vector&gt;
#include &lt;cmath&gt;
#include &lt;iostream&gt;

using namespace std;

template&lt;typename Iter_T&gt;
long double vectorNorm(Iter_T first, Iter_T last) {
  return sqrt(inner_product(first, last, first, 0.0L));
}

int main( ) {
  int v[] = { 3, 4 };
  cout &lt;&lt; "The length of the vector (3,4) is ";
  cout &lt;&lt; vectorNorm(v, v + 2) &lt;&lt; endl;
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The program in Example 11-21 produces the following
output:</p>
<pre>The length of the vector (3,4) is 5</pre><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EVYDI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">Example 11-21 uses the <tt>inner_product</tt>
function from the <tt>&lt;numeric&gt;</tt> header to find
the dot product of the numerical vector with itself. The square root
of this is known as the vector norm or the length of a vector.</p>
<p class="docText">Rather than deduce the result type in the
<tt>vectorNorm</tt> function, I chose to return a
<tt>long double</tt> to lose as little data as possible. If
a vector is a series of integers, it is unlikely that in a real
example, that the distance can be meaningfully represented as an
integer as well.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
