<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 11.12. Computing the Distance Between Two Vectors</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 11.12. Computing the Distance Between Two Vectors</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EUXDI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You want to find the


 Euclidean
distance between two vectors.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ETYDI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">The Euclidean distance between two vectors is defined as the square
root of the sum of squares of differences between corresponding
elements. This can be computed as shown in Example 11-22.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EAZDI">Example 11-22. Finding the distance between two vectors</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;cmath&gt;
#include &lt;iostream&gt;

using namespace std;

template&lt;class Iter_T, class Iter2_T&gt;
double vectorDistance(Iter_T first, Iter_T last, Iter2_T first2) {
  double ret = 0.0;
  while (first != last) {
    double dist = (*first++) - (*first2++);
    ret += dist * dist;
  }
  return ret &gt; 0.0 ? sqrt(ret) : 0.0;
}

int main( ) {
  int v1[] = { 1, 5 };
  int v2[] = { 4, 9 };
  cout &lt;&lt; "distance between vectors (1,5) and (4,9) is ";
  cout &lt;&lt; vectorDistance(v1, v1 + 2, v2) &lt;&lt; endl;
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The program in Example 11-22 produces the following
output:</p>
<pre>distance between vectors (1,5) and (4,9) is 5</pre><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ESZDI">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">Example 11-22 is a straightforward recipe that shows
how to write a simple generic function in the style of the STL. To
compute the vector distances, I could have instead used the
<tt>inner_product</tt> function I chose not to use a
functor, because it was more complex than was strictly needed. Example 11-23 shows how you can compute vector distance
using a functor and the <tt>inner_product</tt> function
from the <tt>&lt;numeric&gt;</tt> header.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EI1DI">Example 11-23. Computing the distance between vectors using inner_product</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;numeric&gt;
#include &lt;cmath&gt;
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;functional&gt;

using namespace std;

template&lt;class Value_T&gt;
struct DiffSquared {
  Value_T operator( )(Value_T x, Value_T y) const {
    return (x - y) * (x - y);
  }
};

template&lt;class Iter_T, class Iter2_T&gt;
double vectorDistance(Iter_T first, Iter_T last, Iter2_T first2)  {
  double ret = inner_product(first, last, first2, 0.0L,
    plus&lt;double&gt;( ), DiffSquared&lt;double&gt;( ));
  return ret &gt; 0.0 ? sqrt(ret) : 0.0;
}

int main( ) {
  int v1[] = { 1, 5 };
  int v2[] = { 4, 9 };
  cout &lt;&lt; "distance between vectors (1,5) and (4,9) is ";
  cout &lt;&lt; vectorDistance(v1, v1 + 2, v2) &lt;&lt; endl;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Because an implementation of <tt>inner_product( )</tt> may
contain special optimizations for your platform and compiler, I
prefer to


 use it where possible.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
