<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 11.17. Computing the Fast Fourier Transform</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 11.17. Computing the Fast Fourier Transform</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E45DI">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You want to compute the 



Discrete
Fourier Transform (DFT) efficiently using the Fast Fourier Transform
(FFT) algorithm.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E36DI">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">The code in Example 11-33 provides a basic
implementation of the FFT.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EKAAK">Example 11-33. FFT implementation</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;complex&gt;
#include &lt;cmath&gt;
#include &lt;iterator&gt;

using namespace std;

unsigned int bitReverse(unsigned int x, int log2n) {
  int n = 0;
  int mask = 0x1;
  for (int i=0; i &lt; log2n; i++) {
    n &lt;&lt;= 1;
    n |= (x &amp; 1);
    x &gt;&gt;= 1;
  }
  return n;
}

const double PI = 3.1415926536;

template&lt;class Iter_T&gt;
void fft(Iter_T a, Iter_T b, int log2n)
{
  typedef typename iterator_traits&lt;Iter_T&gt;::value_type complex;
  const complex J(0, 1);
  int n = 1 &lt;&lt; log2n;
  for (unsigned int i=0; i &lt; n; ++i) {
    b[bitReverse(i, log2n)] = a[i];
  }
  for (int s = 1; s &lt;= log2n; ++s) {
    int m = 1 &lt;&lt; s;
    int m2 = m &gt;&gt; 1;
    complex w(1, 0);
    complex wm = exp(-J * (PI / m2));
    for (int j=0; j &lt; m2; ++j) {
      for (int k=j; k &lt; n; k += m) {
        complex t = w * b[k + m2];
        complex u = b[k];
        b[k] = u + t;
        b[k + m2] = u - t;
      }
      w *= wm;
    }
  }
}

int main( ) {
  typedef complex&lt;double&gt; cx;
  cx a[] = { cx(0,0), cx(1,1), cx(3,3), cx(4,4), 
    cx(4, 4), cx(3, 3), cx(1,1), cx(0,0) };
  cx b[8];
  fft(a, b, 3);
  for (int i=0; i&lt;8; ++i) 
    cout &lt;&lt; b[i] &lt;&lt; "\n";
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The program in Example 11-33 produces the following
output:</p>
<pre>(16,16)
(-4.82843,-11.6569)
(0,0)
(-0.343146,0.828427)
(0,0)
(0.828427,-0.343146)
(0,0)
(-11.6569,-4.82843)</pre><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E3AAK">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">The Fourier transform is an important equation for spectral analysis,
and is required frequently in engineering and scientific
applications. The FFT is an algorithm for computing a DFT that
operates in <tt>N
log</tt><sub>2</sub><tt>(N)</tt>
complexity versus the expected
<tt>N</tt><sup>2</sup> complexity of a
naive implementation of a DFT. The FFT achieves such an impressive
speed-up by removing redundant computations.</p>
<p class="docText">Finding a good FFT implementation written in idiomatic C++ (i.e., C++
that isn't mechanically ported from old Fortran or C
algorithms) and that isn't severely restricted by a
license is very hard. The code in Example 11-33 is based
on public domain code that can be found on the digital signal
processing newswgoup on usenet (comp.dsp). A big advantage of an idiomatic
C++ solution over the more common C-style FFT implementations is that
the standard library provides the <tt>complex</tt> template
that significantly reduces the amount of code needed. The
<tt>fft( )</tt> function in Example 11-33, was
written to be as simple as possible rather than focusing on
efficiency.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
