<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 11.18. Working with Polar Coordinates</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 11.18. Working with Polar Coordinates</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EDAAK">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You want to represent and manipulate 

polar coordinates.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EZAAK">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">The <tt>complex</tt>

template from the <tt>&lt;complex&gt;</tt> header provides
functions for conversion to and from polar coordinates. Example 11-34 shows how you can use the complex template
class to represent and manipulate polar coordinates.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ESBAK">Example 11-34. Using complex template class to represent polar coordinates</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;complex&gt;
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
 
using namespace std;

int main( )  {
  double rho = 3.0; // magnitude
  double theta = 3.141592 / 2; // angle
  complex&lt;double&gt; coord = polar(rho, theta);
  cout &lt;&lt; "rho = " &lt;&lt; abs(coord) &lt;&lt; ", theta = " &lt;&lt; arg(coord) &lt;&lt; endl;
  coord += polar(4.0, 0.0);
  cout &lt;&lt; "rho = " &lt;&lt; abs(coord) &lt;&lt; ", theta = " &lt;&lt; arg(coord) &lt;&lt; endl;
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Example 11-34 produces the following output:</p>
<pre>rho = 3, theta = 1.5708
rho = 5, theta = 0.643501</pre><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EDCAK">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">There is a natural relationship between polar coordinates and complex
numbers. Even though the two are somewhat interchangeable, it is
generally not a good idea to use the same type to represent different
concepts. Since using the <tt>complex</tt> template to
represent polar coordinates is inelegant, I have provided a polar
coordinate class that is more natural to use in Example 11-35.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ESCAK">Example 11-35. A polar coordinate class</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;complex&gt;
#include &lt;iostream&gt;

using namespace std;

template&lt;class T&gt;
struct BasicPolar
{
  public:
    typedef BasicPolar self;

    // constructors
    BasicPolar( ) : m( ) {  }
    BasicPolar(const self&amp; x) : m(x.m) {  }
    BasicPolar(const T&amp; rho, const T&amp; theta) : m(polar(rho, theta)) { }

    // assignment operations
    self operator-( ) { return Polar(-m); }
    self&amp; operator+=(const self&amp; x) { m += x.m; return *this; }
    self&amp; operator-=(const self&amp; x) { m -= x.m; return *this; }
    self&amp; operator*=(const self&amp; x) { m *= x.m; return *this; }
    self&amp; operator/=(const self&amp; x) { m /= x.m; return *this; }
    operator complex&lt;T&gt;( ) const { return m; }

    // public member functions
    T rho( ) const { return abs(m); }
    T theta( ) const { return arg(m); }

    // binary operations
    friend self operator+(self x, const self&amp; y) { return x += y; }
    friend self operator-(self x, const self&amp; y) { return x -= y; }
    friend self operator*(self x, const self&amp; y) { return x *= y; }
    friend self operator/(self x, const self&amp; y) { return x /= y; }

    // comparison operators
    friend bool operator==(const self&amp; x, const self&amp; y) { return x.m == y.m; }
    friend bool operator!=(const self&amp; x, const self&amp; y) { return x.m != y.m; }
  private:
    complex&lt;T&gt; m;
};

typedef BasicPolar&lt;double&gt; Polar;

int main( )  {
  double rho = 3.0; // magnitude
  double theta = 3.141592 / 2; // angle
  Polar coord(rho, theta);
  cout &lt;&lt; "rho = " &lt;&lt; coord.rho( ) &lt;&lt; ", theta = " &lt;&lt; coord.theta( ) &lt;&lt; endl;
  coord += Polar(4.0, 0.0);
  cout &lt;&lt; "rho = " &lt;&lt; coord.rho( ) &lt;&lt; ", theta = " &lt;&lt; coord.theta( ) &lt;&lt; endl;
  system("pause");
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">In Example 11-35, I have defined the
<tt>Polar</tt> type as a
<tt>typedef</tt>'d specialization of the
<tt>BasicPolar</tt> template. This way you can have a
convenient default but you can still specialize the
<tt>BasicPolar</tt> template using another numerical type
if you prefer. This technique is used in the standard library with
the <tt>string</tt> class being a specialization of the
<tt>basic_string</tt> template.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
