<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 11.19. Performing Arithmetic on Bitsets</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 11.19. Performing Arithmetic on Bitsets</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EIBAK">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You want to perform basic

 arithmetic and comparison operations
on a set of bits as if it were a binary representation of an unsigned
integer number.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EBCAK">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">The functions in Example 11-36 provide functions that
allow arithmetic and comparison of <tt>bitset</tt> class
template from the <tt>&lt;bitset&gt;</tt> header as if it
represents an unsigned integer.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ESCAK">Example 11-36. bitset_arithmetic.hpp</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;stdexcept&gt;
#include &lt;bitset&gt;

bool fullAdder(bool b1, bool b2, bool&amp; carry) {
  bool sum = (b1 ^ b2) ^ carry;
  carry = (b1 &amp;&amp; b2) || (b1 &amp;&amp; carry) || (b2 &amp;&amp; carry);
  return sum;
}

bool fullSubtractor(bool b1, bool b2, bool&amp; borrow) {
  bool diff;
  if (borrow) {
    diff = !(b1 ^ b2);
    borrow = !b1 || (b1 &amp;&amp; b2);
  }
  else {
    diff = b1 ^ b2;
    borrow = !b1 &amp;&amp; b2;
  }
  return diff;
}

template&lt;unsigned int N&gt;
bool bitsetLtEq(const std::bitset&lt;N&gt;&amp; x, const std::bitset&lt;N&gt;&amp; y)
{
  for (int i=N-1; i &gt;= 0; i--) {
    if (x[i] &amp;&amp; !y[i]) return false;
    if (!x[i] &amp;&amp; y[i]) return true;
  }
  return true;
}

template&lt;unsigned int N&gt;
bool bitsetLt(const std::bitset&lt;N&gt;&amp; x, const std::bitset&lt;N&gt;&amp; y)
{
  for (int i=N-1; i &gt;= 0; i--) {
    if (x[i] &amp;&amp; !y[i]) return false;
    if (!x[i] &amp;&amp; y[i]) return true;
  }
  return false;
}

template&lt;unsigned int N&gt;
bool bitsetGtEq(const std::bitset&lt;N&gt;&amp; x, const std::bitset&lt;N&gt;&amp; y)
{
  for (int i=N-1; i &gt;= 0; i--) {
    if (x[i] &amp;&amp; !y[i]) return true;
    if (!x[i] &amp;&amp; y[i]) return false;
  }
  return true;
}

template&lt;unsigned int N&gt;
bool bitsetGt(const std::bitset&lt;N&gt;&amp; x, const std::bitset&lt;N&gt;&amp; y)
{
  for (int i=N-1; i &gt;= 0; i--) {
    if (x[i] &amp;&amp; !y[i]) return true;
    if (!x[i] &amp;&amp; y[i]) return false;
  }
  return false;
}

template&lt;unsigned int N&gt;
void bitsetAdd(std::bitset&lt;N&gt;&amp; x, const std::bitset&lt;N&gt;&amp; y)
{
  bool carry = false;
  for (int i = 0; i &lt; N; i++) {
    x[i] = fullAdder(x[i], y[i], carry);
  }
}

template&lt;unsigned int N&gt;
void bitsetSubtract(std::bitset&lt;N&gt;&amp; x, const std::bitset&lt;N&gt;&amp; y) {
  bool borrow = false;
  for (int i = 0; i &lt; N; i++) {
    if (borrow) {
      if (x[i]) {
        x[i] = y[i];
        borrow = y[i];
      }
      else {
        x[i] = !y[i];
        borrow = true;
      }
    }
    else {
      if (x[i]) {
        x[i] = !y[i];
        borrow = false;
      }
      else {
        x[i] = y[i];
        borrow = y[i];
      }
    }
  }
}

template&lt;unsigned int N&gt;
void bitsetMultiply(std::bitset&lt;N&gt;&amp; x, const std::bitset&lt;N&gt;&amp; y)
{
  std::bitset&lt;N&gt; tmp = x;
  x.reset( );

  // we want to minimize the number of times we shift and add
  if (tmp.count( ) &lt; y.count( )) {
    for (int i=0; i &lt; N; i++)
      if (tmp[i]) bitsetAdd(x, y &lt;&lt; i);
  }
  else {
    for (int i=0; i &lt; N; i++)
      if (y[i]) bitsetAdd(x, tmp &lt;&lt; i);
  }
}

template&lt;unsigned int N&gt;
void bitsetDivide(std::bitset&lt;N&gt; x, std::bitset&lt;N&gt; y,
  std::bitset&lt;N&gt;&amp; q, std::bitset&lt;N&gt;&amp; r)
{
  if (y.none( )) {
    throw std::domain_error("division by zero undefined");
  }
  q.reset( );
  r.reset( );
  if (x.none( )) {
    return;
  }
  if (x == y) {
    q[0] = 1;
    return;
  }
  r = x;
  if (bitsetLt(x, y)) {
    return;
  }

  // count significant digits in divisor and dividend
  unsigned int sig_x;
  for (int i=N-1; i&gt;=0; i--) {
    sig_x = i;
    if (x[i]) break;
  }
  unsigned int sig_y;
  for (int i=N-1; i&gt;=0; i--) {
    sig_y = i;
    if (y[i]) break;
  }

  // align the divisor with the dividend
  unsigned int n = (sig_x - sig_y);
  y &lt;&lt;= n;

  // make sure the loop executes the right number of times
  n += 1;

  // long division algorithm, shift, and subtract
  while (n--)
  {
    // shift the quotient to the left
    if (bitsetLtEq(y, r))
    {
      // add a new digit to quotient
      q[n] = true;
      bitsetSubtract(r, y);
    }
    // shift the divisor to the right
    y &gt;&gt;= 1;
  }
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Example 11-37 shows how you might use the
<i>bitset_arithmetic.hpp</i> header file.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EDDAK">Example 11-37. Using the bitset_arithmetic.hpp functions</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedWidth">#include "bitset_arithmetic.hpp"

#include &lt;bitset&gt;
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;

using namespace std;

int main( ) {
  bitset&lt;10&gt; bits1(string("100010001"));
  bitset&lt;10&gt; bits2(string("000000011"));
  bitsetAdd(bits1, bits2);
  cout &lt;&lt; bits1.to_string&lt;char, char_traits&lt;char&gt;, allocator&lt;char&gt; &gt;( ) &lt;&lt; endl;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The program in Example 11-37 produces the following
output:</p>
<pre>0100010100</pre><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EVDAK">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">The <tt>bitset</tt> class template comes with basic
operations for manipulating sets of bits but doesn't
provide any arithmetic or comparion operations. This is because the
library can't safely assume what kind of numerical
type a programmer might expect an arbitrary set of bits to represent.</p>
<p class="docText">The functions in Example 11-36 treat a
<tt>bitset</tt> as a representation of an unsigned integer
type, and provide you with functions for adding, subtracting,
multiplying, dividing, and comparing them. These functions can
provide a basis for writing custom-sized integer types, and are used
for such a purpose in Recipe 11.20.</p>
<p class="docText">I did not use the most efficient algorithms I could for Example 11-36. Instead I chose the simplest possible
algorithms because they are more easily understood. A much more
efficient implementation would

 use similar algorithms, but would
operate on words rather than single bits.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EEFAK">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 11.20</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
