<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 11.21. Implementing Fixed-Point Numbers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 11.21. Implementing Fixed-Point Numbers</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ECFAK">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You want to perform 

computations on real numbers using a
fixed-point representation of a real number rather than using a
floating-point type.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E3FAK">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Example 11-40 provides the implementation of a
fixed-point real number, where the number of places to the right of
the binary point is a template parameter. For instance
<tt>basic_fixed_real&lt;10&gt;</tt> has 10 binary digits to
the right of the binary point, allowing it to represent numbers up to
a precision of 1/1,024.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EKGAK">Example 11-40. Representing real numbers using a fixed-point implementation</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;

using namespace std;

template&lt;int E&gt;
struct BasicFixedReal
{
  typedef BasicFixedReal self;
  static const int factor = 1 &lt;&lt; (E - 1);
  BasicFixedReal( ) : m(0) { }
  BasicFixedReal(double d) : m(static_cast&lt;int&gt;(d * factor)) { }
  self&amp; operator+=(const self&amp; x) { m += x.m; return *this; }
  self&amp; operator-=(const self&amp; x) { m -= x.m; return *this; }
  self&amp; operator*=(const self&amp; x) { m *= x.m; m &gt;&gt;= E; return *this; }
  self&amp; operator/=(const self&amp; x) { m /= x.m; m *= factor; return *this; }
  self&amp; operator*=(int x) { m *= x; return *this; }
  self&amp; operator/=(int x) { m /= x; return *this; }
  self operator-( ) { return self(-m); }
  double toDouble( ) const { return double(m) / factor;  }

  // friend functions
  friend self operator+(self x, const self&amp; y) { return x += y; }
  friend self operator-(self x, const self&amp; y) { return x -= y; }
  friend self operator*(self x, const self&amp; y) { return x *= y; }
  friend self operator/(self x, const self&amp; y) { return x /= y; }

  // comparison operators
  friend bool operator==(const self&amp; x, const self&amp; y) { return x.m == y.m; }
  friend bool operator!=(const self&amp; x, const self&amp; y) { return x.m != y.m; }
  friend bool operator&gt;(const self&amp; x, const self&amp; y) { return x.m &gt; y.m; }
  friend bool operator&lt;(const self&amp; x, const self&amp; y) { return x.m &lt; y.m; }
  friend bool operator&gt;=(const self&amp; x, const self&amp; y) { return x.m &gt;= y.m; }
  friend bool operator&lt;=(const self&amp; x, const self&amp; y) { return x.m &lt;= y.m; }
private:
  int m;
};

typedef BasicFixedReal&lt;10&gt; FixedReal;

int main( ) {
  FixedReal x(0);
  for (int i=0; i &lt; 100; ++i) {
    x += FixedReal(0.0625);
  }
  cout &lt;&lt; x.toDouble( ) &lt;&lt; endl;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The program in Example 11-40 outputs:</p>
<pre>6.25</pre><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E3GAK">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">A fixed-point number, like a floating-point number, is an approximate
representation of a real number. A floating-point number is stored as
a mantissa (<span class="docEmphasis">m</span>), and an exponent
(<span class="docEmphasis">e</span>), to form the equation <span class="docEmphasis">m</span>
* <span class="docEmphasis">b</span><sup>e</sup>, where
<span class="docEmphasis">b</span> is some constant.</p>
<p class="docText">A fixed-point number is almost the same but the exponent is also a
constant. This constant is passed to the
<tt>basic_fixed_real</tt> in Example 11-40
as a template parameter.</p>
<p class="docText">By representing <span class="docEmphasis">e</span> as a constant, it allows
fixed-point numbers to be represented internally as integers and for
the arithmetic operations on them to be performed using integer
artithmetic. This can often improve the speed of basic arithmetic
operations especially addition and subtraction.</p>
<p class="docText">Fixed-point representations are less flexible than floating-point
numbers, as they can only represent a narrow range of values. The
<tt>fixed_real</tt> type in Example 11-40
has a range that can only represent values from
<tt>-2,097,151</tt> to <tt>+2,097,151</tt> with a
precision of 1/1,024.</p>
<p class="docText">Implementing addition and subtraction of fixed-point numbers is
straightforward enough: I simply add or subtract the underlying
representation. To perform division and multiplication, I need
an


extra step of shifting the mantissa left or right to adjust for the
binary point.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
