<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Introduction</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Introduction</h3>
<p class="docText">This chapter describes how to write multithreaded programs in C++
using the Boost Threads library written by William Kempf. Boost is a
set of open source, peer-reviewed, portable, high-performance
libraries ranging from simple data structures to a complex parsing
framework. The Boost Threads library is a framework for
multithreading. For more information on Boost, see www.boost.org.</p>
<p class="docText">Standard C++ contains no native support for multithreading, so it is
not possible to write portable multithreaded code the same way you
would write portable code that uses other standard library classes
like <tt>string</tt>, <tt>vector</tt>,
<tt>list</tt>, and so on. The Boost Threads library goes a
long way toward making a standard, portable multithreading library
though, and it is designed to minimize many common multithreading
headaches.</p>
<p class="docText">Unlike the standard library or third-party libraries, however, using
a multithreading library is not as easy as unzipping it into a
directory, adding your <tt>#include</tt>s, and coding away.
For all but trivial multithreaded applications, you must design
carefully using proven patterns and known tactics to avoid bugs that
are otherwise virtually guaranteed to happen. In a typical,
single-threaded application, it is easy to find common programming
errors: off-by-one loops, dereferencing a null or
<tt>delete</tt>d pointer, loss of precision on
floating-point conversions, and so on. Multithreaded programs are
different. Not only is it tedious to keep track of what several
threads are doing in your debugger, but multithreaded programs are
nondeterministic, meaning that bugs may only show up under rare or
complicated circumstances.</p>
<p class="docText">It is for this reason that this chapter should not be your
introduction to multithreaded programming. If you have already done
some programming with threads, but not with C++ or the

Boost Threads library, this chapter
will get you on your way. But describing the fundamentals of
multithreaded programming is beyond the scope of this book. If you
have never done any multithreaded programming before, then you may
want to read an introductory book on multithreading, though such
titles are scant because most programmers don't use
threads (though they probably ought to).</p>
<p class="docText">Much of the Boost documentation and some of the following recipes
discuss the classes using the <span class="docEmphasis">concept/model</span>
idea. A
<span class="docEmphasis">concept</span>
is an abstract description of something, usually a class, and its
behavior, without any assumptions about its implementation.
Typically, this description includes construction and destruction
behavior, and each of the methods, including their preconditions,
parameters, and postconditions. For example, the concept of a Mutex
is something that can be locked and unlocked by one thread at a time.
A
<span class="docEmphasis">model</span>
is a concrete manifestation of a concept, such as the
<tt>mutex</tt> class in the Boost Threads library. A
<span class="docEmphasis">refinement</span>
on a concept is a specialization of it, such as a
<tt>ReadWriteMutex</tt>, which is a Mutex with some
additional behavior.</p>
<p class="docText">Finally, threads are doing one of three things: working, waiting for
something, or ready to go but not waiting for anything or doing any
work. These states are called 


<span class="docEmphasis">run</span>,
<span class="docEmphasis">wait</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">ready</span>. These are
the terms I will use in the following recipes.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
