<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 12.1. Creating a Thread</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 12.1. Creating a Thread</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EWHAK">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You want to create a thread 

to
perform some task while the main thread continues its work.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ESIAK">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Create an object of the class <tt>thread</tt>, and pass it
a functor that does the work. The creation of the thread object will
instantiate an operating system thread that begins executing at
<tt>operator( )</tt> on your functor (or the beginning of
the function if you passed in a function pointer instead). Example 12-1 shows you how.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EDJAK">Example 12-1. Creating a thread</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;boost/thread/thread.hpp&gt;
#include &lt;boost/thread/xtime.hpp&gt;

struct MyThreadFunc {
   void operator( )( ) {
      // Do something long-running...
   }
} threadFun;

int main( ) {

   boost::thread myThread(threadFun); // Create a thread that starts
                                      // running threadFun

   boost::thread::yield( ); // Give up the main thread's timeslice
                           // so the child thread can get some work
                           // done.

   // Go do some other work...

   myThread.join( ); // The current (i.e., main) thread will wait
                    // for myThread to finish before it returns

}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EMJAK">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">Creating a thread is deceptively simple. All you have to do is create
a <tt>thread</tt> object on the stack or the heap, and pass
it a functor that tells it where it can begin working. For this
discussion, a "thread" is actually
two things. First, it's an object of the class
<tt>thread</tt>, which is a C++ object in the conventional
sense. When I am referring to this object, I will say
"thread object." Then there is the
thread of execution, which is an operating system thread that is
represented by the <tt>thread</tt> object. When I say
"thread" (not in fixed-width font),
I mean the operating system thread.</p>
<p class="docText">Let's get right to the code in the example. The
<tt>thread</tt> constructor takes a functor (or function
pointer) that takes no arguments and returns <tt>void</tt>.
Look at this line from Example 12-1:</p>
<pre>boost::thread myThread(threadFun);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This creates the
<tt>myThread</tt>

object on the stack, which represents a new operating system thread
that begins executing <tt>threadFun</tt>. At that point,
the code in <tt>threadFun</tt> and the code in
<tt>main</tt> are, at least in theory, running in parallel.
They may not exactly be running in parallel, of course, because your
machine may have only one processor, in which case this is impossible
(recent processor architectures have made this not quite true, but
I'll ignore dual-core processors and the like for
now). If you have only one processor, then the operating system will
give each thread you create a slice of time in the run state before
it is suspended. Because these slices of time can be of varying
sizes, you can never be guaranteed which thread will reach a
particular point first. This is the aspect of multithreaded
programming that makes it difficult: <span class="docEmphasis">multithreaded program
state is nondeterministic</span>. The same multithreaded program,
run multiple times, with the same inputs, can produce different
output. Coordinating resources used by multiple threads is the
subject of Recipe 12.2.</p>
<p class="docText">After creating <tt>myThread</tt>, the
<tt>main</tt> thread continues, at least for a moment,
until it reaches the next line:</p>
<pre>boost::thread::yield( );</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This puts the current thread (in this case the
<tt>main</tt> thread) in a sleep state, which means the
operating system will switch to another thread or another process
using some operating-system-specific policy. <tt>yield</tt>
is a way of telling the operating system that the current thread
wants to give up the rest of its slice of time. Meanwhile, the new
thread is executing <tt>threadFun</tt>. When
<tt>threadFun</tt> is done, the child thread goes away.
Note that the <tt>thread</tt> object
doesn't go away, because it's still
a C++ object that's in scope. This is an important
distinction.</p>
<p class="docText">The thread object is something that exists on the heap or the stack,
and works just like any other C++ object. When the calling code exits
scope, any stack thread objects are destroyed and, alternatively,
when the caller calls <tt>delete</tt> on a
<tt>thread*</tt>, the corresponding heap
<tt>thread</tt> object disappears. But
<tt>thread</tt> objects are just proxies for the actual
operating system threads, and when they are destroyed the operating
system threads aren't guaranteed to go away. They
merely become detached, meaning that they cannot later be rejoined.
This is not a bad thing.</p>
<p class="docText">Threads use resources, and

in
any (well-designed) multithreaded application, access to such
resources (objects, sockets, files, raw memory, and so on) is
controlled with mutexes, which are objects used for serializing
access to something among multiple threads (see Recipe 12.2). If an operating system thread is killed, it
will not release its locks or deallocate its resources, similarly to
how killing a process does not give it a chance to flush its buffers
or release operating system resources properly. Simply ending a
thread when you think it ought to be finished is like pulling a
ladder out from under a painter when his time is up.</p>
<p class="docText">Thus, we have the


<tt>join</tt> member function. As in Example 12-1, you can call <tt>join</tt> to wait
for a child thread to finish. <tt>join</tt> is a polite way
of telling the thread that you are going to wait until
it's done working:</p>
<pre>myThread.join( );</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The thread that calls <tt>join</tt> goes into a wait state
until the thread represented by <tt>myThread</tt> is
finished. If it never finishes, <tt>join</tt> never
returns. <tt>join</tt> is the best way to wait for a child
thread to finish.</p>
<p class="docText">You may notice that if you put something meaningful in
<tt>threadFun</tt>, but comment out the use of
<tt>join</tt>, the thread doesn't finish
its work. Try this out by putting a loop or some long operation in
<tt>threadFun</tt>. This is because when the operating
system destroys a process, all of its child threads go with it,
whether they're done or not. Without the call to
<tt>join</tt>, <tt>main</tt>
doesn't wait for its child thread: it exits, and the
operating system thread is destroyed.</p>
<p class="docText">If you need to create several threads, consider grouping them with a
<tt>thread_group</tt> object. A
<tt>thread_group</tt>

object can manage threads in a couple of ways. First, you can call
<tt>add_thread</tt> with a pointer to a
<tt>thread</tt> object, and that object will be added to
the group. Here's a sample:</p>
<pre>boost::thread_group grp;
boost::thread* p = new boost::thread(threadFun);
grp.add_thread(p);
// do something...
grp.remove_thread(p);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">When <tt>grp</tt>'s destructor is called,
it will <tt>delete</tt> each of the thread pointers that
were added with <tt>add_thread</tt>. For this reason, you
can only add pointers to heap thread objects to a
<tt>thread_group</tt>. Remove a thread by calling
<tt>remove_thread</tt> and passing in the thread
object's address (<tt>remove_thread</tt>
finds the corresponding thread object in the group by comparing the
pointer values, not by comparing the objects they point to).
<tt>remove_thread</tt> will remove the pointer to that
thread from the group, but you are still responsible for
<tt>delete</tt>-ing it.</p>
<p class="docText">You can also add a


thread to a group without having to
create it yourself by calling <tt>create_thread</tt>, which
(like a thread object) takes a functor as an argument and begins
executing it in a new operating system thread. For example, to spawn
two threads in a group, do this:</p>
<pre>boost::thread_group grp;

grp.create_thread(threadFun);
grp.create_thread(threadFun); // Now there are two threads in grp

grp.join_all( ); // Wait for all threads to finish</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Whether you add threads to the group with
<tt>create_thread</tt> or <tt>add_thread</tt>,
you can call <tt>join_all</tt> to wait for all of the
threads in the group to complete. Calling <tt>join_all</tt>
is the same as calling <tt>join</tt> on each of the threads
in the group: when all of the threads in the group have completed
their work <tt>join_all</tt> returns.</p>
<p class="docText">Creating a thread object allows a separate thread of execution to
begin. Doing it with the Boost Threads library is deceptively easy,
though, so design carefully. Read the rest of the recipes in this
chapter for more

 cautionary information about threads.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EJRAK">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 12.2</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
