<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 12.2. Making a Resource Thread-Safe</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 12.2. Making a Resource Thread-Safe</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EHJAK">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You are using multiple threads 




in a program and you need
to ensure a resource is not modified by more than one thread at a
time. In general, this process is called making the resource
<span class="docEmphasis">thread-safe</span>, or <span class="docEmphasis">serializing</span>
access to it.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E1KAK">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use the class <tt>mutex</tt>, defined in
<i>boost/thread/mutex.hpp</i>, to synchronize access
among threads. Example 12-2 shows a simple use of a
<tt>mutex</tt> object to control concurrent access to a
queue.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ENLAK">Example 12-2. Making a class thread-safe</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;boost/thread/thread.hpp&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;

// A simple queue class; don't do this, use std::queue
template&lt;typename T&gt;
class Queue {
public:
   Queue( ) {}
  ~Queue( ) {}

   void enqueue(const T&amp; x) {
      // Lock the mutex for this queue
      boost::mutex::scoped_lock lock(mutex_);
      list_.push_back(x);
      // A scoped_lock is automatically destroyed (and thus unlocked)
      // when it goes out of scope
   } 

   T dequeue( ) {
      boost::mutex::scoped_lock lock(mutex_);

      if (list_.empty( ))
         throw "empty!";     // This leaves the current scope, so the
      T tmp = list_.front( ); // lock is released
      list_.pop_front( );
      return(tmp);
   } // Again: when scope ends, mutex_ is unlocked

private:
   std::list&lt;T&gt; list_;
   boost::mutex mutex_;
};

Queue&lt;std::string&gt; queueOfStrings;

void sendSomething( ) {
   std::string s;
   for (int i = 0; i &lt; 10; ++i) {
      queueOfStrings.enqueue("Cyrus");
   }
}

void recvSomething( ) {
   std::string s;

   for (int i = 0; i &lt; 10; ++i) {
      try {s = queueOfStrings.dequeue( );}
      catch(...) {}
   }
}

int main( ) {
   boost::thread thr1(sendSomething);
   boost::thread thr2(recvSomething);

   thr1.join( );
   thr2.join( );
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EWLAK">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">Making classes, functions, blocks of code, or other objects
thread-safe is at the heart of multithreaded programming. If you are
designing a piece of software to be multithreaded, chances are that
each thread will have its own set of resources, such as stack and
heap objects, operating system resources, and so on. But sooner or
later you will need to share something among threads. It may be a
shared queue of incoming work requests (as in a multithreaded web
server) or something as simple as an output stream (as in a log file,
or even <tt>cout</tt>). The standard way of coordinating
the safe sharing of resources is with a
<span class="docEmphasis">mutex</span>,
which provides mutually exclusive access to something.</p>
<p class="docText">The rest of this discussion describes what a mutex is in general and
how to use <tt>boost::mutex</tt> in particular to serialize
access to resources. I use the concept/model approach terminology
that I mentioned briefly in the introduction to this chapter. A
<span class="docEmphasis">concept</span>
is an abstract (language-independent) description of something, and a
<span class="docEmphasis">model</span>
of a concept is its concrete representation in C++ class form. A
<span class="docEmphasis">refinement</span>
of a concept is a given concept with some additional or augmented
behavior.</p>
<p class="docText">
Concurrent programming is a
complicated subject though and there are many more techniques than
can fit in a single recipe. There are lots of different patterns that
can be used, and different strategies that should be used for
different applications. If you plan to do a significant amount of
multithreaded programming, or if you are designing
performance-critical applications, you ought to pick up a good book
on multithreaded patterns. Many of the problems that make debugging
multithreaded programs so difficult can be successfully averted with
careful, tedious design.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EDNAK">Using mutexes</h5>
<p class="docText">The mutex concept is simple: a mutex is something that represents a
resource and can be locked or unlocked by only one thread at a time.
It is a flag used to coordinate access to a resource by multiple
consumers. In the Boost Threads library, the mutex concept is modeled
by the <tt>boost::mutex</tt> class. In Example 12-2, write access to the
<tt>Queue</tt>

class is maintained with a <tt>mutex</tt> member variable:</p>
<pre>boost::mutex mutex_;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText"><tt>mutex_</tt> must be locked by any member function that
must change the state of the queue of items that is maintained. The
<tt>mutex</tt> object itself has no knowledge of what
it's representing. It's just a
locked/unlocked flag that is shared by all consumers of some
resource.</p>
<p class="docText">In Example 12-2, when a <tt>Queue</tt>
member function needs to change the state of the object, it must
first lock <tt>mutex_</tt>. Only one thread at a time can
lock it, which is what prevents multiple objects from modifying the
state of a <tt>Queue</tt> object. Thus, a
<tt>mutex</tt> is a simple signaling mechanism, but it is
more than just a <tt>bool</tt> or <tt>int</tt>,
because a <tt>mutex</tt>
<span class="docEmphasis">requires</span>
serialized access, which can only be guaranteed by the operating
system kernel. If you try doing the same thing with a
<tt>bool</tt>, it won't work because
there's nothing that prevents multiple threads from
modifying the state of a <tt>bool</tt> at the same time.
(Different operating systems have different ways of doing this, which
is why it is not easy to implement a portable threading library.)</p>
<p class="docText"><tt>mutex</tt> objects are locked and unlocked using
several different locking strategies, the simplest of which is the
<tt>scoped_lock</tt>. A <tt>scoped_lock</tt> is a
class that, when constructed using a <tt>mutex</tt>
argument, locks it until the <tt>lock</tt> is destroyed.
Look at the <tt>enqueue</tt> member function in Example 12-2 to see how <tt>scoped_lock</tt>
works with a <tt>mutex</tt>:</p>
<pre>void enqueue(const T&amp; x) {
   boost::mutex::scoped_lock lock(mutex_);
   list_.push_back(x);
} // unlocked!</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">When <tt>lock</tt> is destroyed, <tt>mutex_</tt>
is unlocked. If the <tt>lock</tt> is constructed on a
<tt>mutex</tt> that is already locked by another thread,
the current thread goes into a wait state until the
<tt>lock</tt> becomes available.</p>
<p class="docText">This design may seem a little odd at first—why not have
<tt>lock</tt> and <tt>unlock</tt> methods on
<tt>mutex</tt>? The approach of using a
<tt>scoped_lock</tt> class that locks on construction and
unlocks on destruction is actually much more convenient and less
error-prone. When you create a lock using the
<tt>scoped_lock</tt> approach, it locks the object for its
lifetime, which means that you don't have to unlock
explicitly anything on every control path. On the other hand, if you
have to unlock a locked mutex explicitly, you have to ensure that any
exceptions that are thrown in your function (or anywhere above your
function on the call stack) are caught and the
<tt>mutex</tt> is unlocked. With a
<tt>scoped_lock</tt>, if an exception is thrown or the
function returns, the <tt>scoped_lock</tt> object is
automatically destroyed and the <tt>mutex</tt> is unlocked.</p>
<p class="docText">Using a mutex will get the job done, but it leaves a little to be
desired. It makes no distinction between reading and writing, which
is significant, because it is inefficient to force threads to wait in
line to use a resource when many or all of them are doing a read-only
operation, which should not require exclusive access. For this, the
Boost Threads library provides <tt>read_write_mutex</tt>.
Example 12-3 shows how you might implement Example 12-2 using a
<tt>read_write_mutex</tt>
with a <tt>front</tt> member function that allows the
caller to retrieve a copy of the first item on the queue without
popping it.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EPRAK">Example 12-3. Using a read/write mutex</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;boost/thread/thread.hpp&gt;
#include &lt;boost/thread/read_write_mutex.hpp&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;

template&lt;typename T&gt;
class Queue {
public:
   Queue( ) :  // Use a read/write mutex and give writers priority
      <b>rwMutex_(boost::read_write_scheduling_policy::writer_priority)</b> {}
  ~Queue( ) {}

   void enqueue(const T&amp; x) {
      // Use a r/w lock since enqueue updates the state
      boost::read_write_mutex::scoped_write_lock writeLock(rwMutex_);
      list_.push_back(x);
   } 

   T dequeue( ) {
      // Again, use a write lock
      boost::read_write_mutex::scoped_write_lock writeLock(rwMutex_);

      if (list_.empty( ))
         throw "empty!";
      T tmp = list_.front( );
      list_.pop_front( );
      return(tmp);
   }

   T getFront( ) {
      // This is a read-only operation, so you only need a read lock
      boost::read_write_mutex::scoped_read_lock readLock(rwMutex_);
      if (list_.empty( ))
         throw "empty!";
      return(list_.front( ));
   }

private:
   std::list&lt;T&gt; list_;
   boost::read_write_mutex rwMutex_;
};

Queue&lt;std::string&gt; queueOfStrings;

void sendSomething( ) {
   std::string s;

   for (int i = 0; i &lt; 10; ++i) {
      queueOfStrings.enqueue("Cyrus");
   }
}

void checkTheFront( ) {
   std::string s;

   for (int i = 0; i &lt; 10; ++i) {
      try {s = queueOfStrings.getFront( );}
      catch(...) {}
   }
}

int main( ) {

   boost::thread thr1(sendSomething);
   boost::thread_group grp;

   grp.create_thread(checkTheFront);
   grp.create_thread(checkTheFront);
   grp.create_thread(checkTheFront);
   grp.create_thread(checkTheFront);

   thr1.join( );
   grp.join_all( );
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">There are a few things I should point out here. Notice that now I am
using a <tt>read_write_mutex</tt>, like this:</p>
<pre>boost::read_write_mutex rwMutex_;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The locks are also different when you're using
read/write mutexes. In Example 12-3, when I want to
lock the <tt>Queue</tt> for writing, I create a
<tt>scoped_write_lock</tt>:</p>
<pre>boost::read_write_mutex::scoped_write_lock writeLock(rwMutex_);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">And when I just need to read the <tt>Queue</tt>, I use a
<tt>scoped_read_lock</tt>:</p>
<pre>boost::read_write_mutex::scoped_read_lock readLock(rwMutex_);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Read/write locks are handy, but they don't prevent
you from shooting yourself in the foot. There is no compile-time
check on the resource represented by <tt>rwMutex_</tt> to
make sure you're not changing it when you only have
a read lock. Take extra care to ensure a thread only modifies the
state of an object when it has a write lock because the compiler
won't.</p>
<p class="docText">Exactly how these
locks
 are
scheduled is determined by the scheduling policy you chose when you
constructed the <tt>mutex</tt>. There are four that are
provided by the Boost Threads library:</p>
<dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">reader_priority</span></span></span></p></dt>
<dd>
<p class="docList">Threads waiting for a read lock will be granted the lock before those
waiting for a write lock.</p>
</dd>
<dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">writer_priority</span></span></span></p></dt>
<dd>
<p class="docList">Threads waiting for a write lock will be granted the lock before
those waiting for a read lock.</p>
</dd>
<dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">alternating_single_read</span></span></span></p></dt>
<dd>
<p class="docList">Alternate between read and write locks. Grant a single reader a read
lock when it is the readers'
"turn." This policy gives writers
priority in general. For example, if the mutex is write-locked, and
there are several pending read locks and one pending write lock, one
read lock will be granted, then the waiting write lock will be
granted, then all remaining read locks will be granted. This assumes
no new locks are requested during this period.</p>
</dd>
<dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">alternating_many_reads</span></span></span></p></dt>
<dd>
<p class="docList">Alternate between read and write locks. Grant all
readers' locks when it is the
readers' "turn."
In other words, this policy empties the queue of all waiting read
locks in between write locks.</p>
</dd>
</dl>
<p class="docText">Each of these policies has different pros and cons, and they will
perform differently depending on your application. Deciding which
policy to use takes careful consideration, because simply going with
reader or writer priority can result in starvation, which I describe
in more detail below.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EEVAK">Dangers</h5>
<p class="docText">There are three basic problems

that occur when you are programming with multiple threads:
deadlock,
starvation, and
race
conditions. There are techniques for avoiding each of them, with
varying degrees of sophistication that are beyond the scope of this
recipe. I will describe what each of the problems is so you know how
what to watch out for, but if you plan on doing multithreaded
application development, you should do some homework on multithreaded
patterns first.</p>
<p class="docText">Deadlock is a situation that involves at least two threads and two
resources. Consider two threads, A and B, and two resources, X and Y,
where A has a lock on X and B has a lock on Y. A deadlock occurs when
A tries to lock Y and B tries to lock X. If threads are not designed
to break the deadlock somehow, then they will wait forever.</p>
<p class="docText">The Boost Threads library lets you avoid deadlocks with refinements
to the mutex and locking concepts. A <span class="docEmphasis">try</span> mutex
is one that supports attempts at locking, using a
<span class="docEmphasis">try</span> lock that either succeeds or fails, but does
not block and wait for the lock to become available. Using models of
these concepts in the form of <tt>try_mutex</tt> and
<tt>scoped_try_lock</tt>, your code can go and do something
else if the resource you need to access is locked. There is also yet
another refinement to the concept of a try lock, and that is a timed
lock. With a timed lock, a thread can give up after blocking for a
specific amount of time. I do not discuss timed locks in detail here;
have a look at the Boost Threads documentation for details.</p>
<p class="docText">For example, in the <tt>Queue</tt> class in Example 12-2, you wanted to use a try mutex so
<tt>dequeue</tt> returns a <tt>bool</tt>
indicating whether or not it was able to <tt>dequeue</tt>
the first item. This way, consumers of <tt>dequeue</tt>
don't have to wait around if the queue is locked.
Here's how you could rewrite
<tt>dequeue</tt>:</p>
<pre>bool dequeue(T&amp; x) {
   <b>boost::try_mutex::scoped_try_lock</b> lock(tryMutex_);

   if (!lock.locked( ))
      return(false);
   else {
      if (list_.empty( ))
         throw "empty!";
      x = list_.front( );
      list_.pop_front( );
      return(true);
   }
}
private:
<span class="docEmphBold">boost::try_mutex tryMutex_;</span>
// ...</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The mutex being used and the lock are different than those used in
Example 12-2. Be sure to correctly qualify the names
of the mutex and lock classes you are using, otherwise, you
won't get the behavior you expect.</p>
<p class="docText">When you serialize access to something, you tell consumers of it to
line up and wait their turn. If each of them stays in the same
position in line, everybody gets a chance to use the resource. But if
you let some consumers cut in line, it is possible that those at the
back of the line never get their turn. This is starvation.</p>
<p class="docText">When using a <tt>mutex</tt>, consumers wait in a group and
not a line. There is no guaranteed order among threads that are
waiting for the lock. For read/write mutexes, the Boost Threads
library uses the four scheduling policies described earlier.
Therefore, when using read/write mutexes, be aware of what the
different scheduling policies mean, and what your threads are doing.
If you are using <tt>writer_priority</tt>, and you have
lots of threads creating write locks, your readers will starve; the
same goes for <tt>reader_priority</tt>, since these
scheduling policies always prefer one type of lock over another.
Through testing, if you recognize that one kind of thread
isn't making as much progress as it should, consider
switching to an <tt>alternating_many_reads</tt> or
<tt>alternating_single_read</tt> policy. You specify the
policy when constructing a read/write mutex.</p>
<p class="docText">Finally, a race condition is a situation where your code has made an
assumption about the order or atomicity of locks that has proven
false. For example, consider a consumer of the
<tt>Queue</tt> class that interrogates the element on the
front and conditionally <tt>dequeues</tt> it:</p>
<pre>if (q.getFront( ) == "Cyrus") {
   str = q.dequeue( );
   // ...</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This code works fine in a single-threaded environment, because
<tt>q</tt> won't be modified between the
first and second lines. However, when using multiple threads, you
have to account for the situation where another thread modifies
<tt>q</tt> at any moment—in fact, you should
<span class="docEmphasis">assume</span> that shared objects are modified when a
thread doesn't have them locked. After line 1,
another thread can come along and <tt>dequeue</tt> the next
item from <tt>q</tt>, which means that line 2 gets
something unexpected or nothing at all. Both
<tt>getFront</tt> and <tt>dequeue</tt> lock the
single <tt>mutex</tt> used to modify <tt>q</tt>,
but in between it is unlocked, and if another thread is waiting on
the lock, it may snatch it up before line 2 has a chance.</p>
<p class="docText">A solution, for this particular race condition, is to ensure that a
lock is held for the duration of the operation. Create a member
function called
<tt>dequeueIfEquals</tt>


that only <tt>dequeue</tt>s the next object if it equals
the argument. <tt>dequeueIfEquals</tt> can use a lock like
anything else:</p>
<pre>T dequeueIfEquals(const T&amp; t) {
   boost::mutex::scoped_lock lock(mutex_);
   if (list_.front( ) == t)
      // ...</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">There are other kinds of race conditions, but this example should
give you a general idea of what to watch out for. As the number of
threads and shared resources you are using increases, the race
conditions become more subtle and difficult to catch. Therefore, you
should take special care to design to prevent them.</p>
<p class="docText">Ensuring serialized access to resources is the most difficult thing
about multithreading, because when you don't do it
right, debugging it can be a nightmare. Since a multithreaded program
is inherently nondeterministic (because threads can execute in
different order and for different lengths of time each time the
program is run), it is painful to try and pinpoint exactly where or
how a thread modifies something it shouldn't. More
so than with single-threaded programming, a




 sound design will
minimize debugging and rework.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
