<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 12.3. Notifying One Thread from Another</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 12.3. Notifying One Thread from Another</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EUMAK">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You are using a 



pattern where one
thread (or group of threads) does something and it needs to let
another thread (or group of threads) know about it. You may have a
master thread that is handing out work to slave threads, or you may
use one group of threads to populate a queue and another to remove
the data from it and do something useful.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E2NAK">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use <tt>mutex</tt> and <tt>condition</tt>
objects, declared in <i>boost/thread/mutex.hpp</i> and
<i>boost/thread/condition.hpp</i>. You can create a
condition for each situation you want threads to wait for, and notify
any waiting threads on the condition. Example 12-4
shows how to use signaling in a
master/slave

threading model.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EZOAK">Example 12-4. Signaling between threads</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;boost/thread/thread.hpp&gt;
#include &lt;boost/thread/condition.hpp&gt;
#include &lt;boost/thread/mutex.hpp&gt;
#include &lt;list&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;

class Request { /*...*/ };

// A simple job queue class; don't do this, use std::queue
template&lt;typename T&gt;
class JobQueue {
public:
   JobQueue( ) {}
  ~JobQueue( ) {}

   void submitJob(const T&amp; x) {
      boost::mutex::scoped_lock lock(mutex_);
      list_.push_back(x);
      workToBeDone_.notify_one( );
   } 

   T getJob( ) {
      boost::mutex::scoped_lock lock(mutex_);

      workToBeDone_.wait(lock); // Wait until this condition is
                                // satisfied, then lock the mutex
      T tmp = list_.front( );
      list_.pop_front( );
      return(tmp);
   }

private:
   std::list&lt;T&gt; list_;
   boost::mutex mutex_;
   boost::condition workToBeDone_;
};

JobQueue&lt;Request&gt; myJobQueue;

void boss( ) {
   for (;;) {
      // Get the request from somewhere
      Request req;
      myJobQueue.submitJob(req);
   }
}

void worker( ) {
   for (;;) {
      Request r(myJobQueue.getJob( ));
      // Do something with the job...
   }
}

int main( ) {
   boost::thread thr1(boss);
   boost::thread thr2(worker);
   boost::thread thr3(worker);

   thr1.join( );
   thr2.join( );
   thr3.join( );
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ECPAK">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">A condition object uses a <tt>mutex</tt>, and lets you wait
for a situation other than its becoming unlocked. Consider Example 12-4, which is a modified version of the
<tt>Queue</tt> class presented in Example 12-2. I have modified <tt>Queue</tt> to
be a specific kind of queue, namely a <tt>JobQueue</tt>,
where objects representing jobs are submitted by a master thread and
are retrieved by slave threads.</p>
<p class="docText">The most important change for the
<tt>JobQueue</tt>

class is the <tt>condition</tt> member variable
<tt>workToBeDone_</tt>. This is a condition that indicates
whether or not there is work in the queue. When a thread wants to
retrieve an element from the job queue, it calls
<tt>getJob</tt>, which tries to acquire a lock on the mutex
and then waits for the new condition with the following lines:</p>
<pre>boost::mutex::scoped_lock lock(mutex_);
workToBeDone_.wait(lock);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The first line locks the mutex in the usual


manner. The second line then
<span class="docEmphasis">unlocks</span> the mutex and waits, or goes to sleep,
until the condition is met. The unlocking of the mutex allows other
threads to use that mutex—one of them might need it to set up
the condition we are waiting for—otherwise, other threads would
be unable to lock the mutex while one thread was waiting on the
condition.</p>
<p class="docText">In <tt>submitJob</tt>, after the job has been added to the
internal list, I added the following line:</p>
<pre>workToBeDone_.notify_one( );</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This "satisfies" the condition that
<tt>getJob</tt> is waiting for. Technically, this means
that if there are any threads who have called <tt>wait</tt>
on this condition, that one of them is put in a run state. In
<tt>getJob</tt>, that means that execution continues at the
following line:</p>
<pre>workToBeDone_.wait(lock);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">But not just yet. <tt>wait</tt> does two things: it waits
until someone calls <tt>notify_one</tt> or
<tt>notify_all</tt> on the condition that
it's waiting on, then it tries to lock the mutex
it's associated with. So what actually happens when
<tt>submitJob</tt> calls <tt>notify_all</tt> is
that the waiting thread is put in a run state and the next thing it
does is try to lock the mutex that <tt>submitJob</tt> still
has locked, so it goes back into a wait state until
<tt>submitJob</tt> is complete. Thus,
<tt>condition::wait</tt> requires that the mutex be locked
when you call it, at which point it is unlocked, then locked again
when the condition is met.</p>
<p class="docText">Notify all threads that are waiting for some condition to be true by
calling <tt>notify_all</tt>. This works the same way as
<tt>notify_one</tt>, except that all threads that are
waiting on the condition are changed to a run state. They all try and
acquire the next lock though, so what happens after that depends on
the kind of mutex and the type of locks used.</p>
<p class="docText">A condition gives you something subtle that you
don't get when you are using mutexes and locks
alone. Consider the case of the <tt>Queue</tt> class
presented earlier. Threads waiting to <tt>dequeue</tt>
something wait until they can acquire a write lock, then pop the next
item off the queue. This may appear to work fine without any sort of
signaling mechanism, but does it really? What about when the queue is
empty? You have a few choices for how you implement
<tt>dequeue</tt> if you are waiting for a condition to
become true: acquire the lock; check to see if there are items in the
queue or not, if not, return; use another mutex that is locked when
the queue is empty and unlocked when it has data (not a good idea);
or return a special value when the queue is empty. These are either
problematic or inefficient. If you simply return when the queue is
empty by throwing an exception or returning a special value, then
your clients have to keep checking to see when something arrives.
This is a needless drain on resources.</p>
<p class="docText">A <tt>condition</tt> lets consumer threads sleep so the
processor can do something else while a condition is not met. Imagine
a web server that uses a pool of worker threads to handle incoming
requests. It is far better to have child threads in a wait state when
there is no activity then to have them looping, or 



sleeping and waking
up occasionally to check the queue.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
