<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 12.4. Initializing Shared Resources Once</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 12.4. Initializing Shared Resources Once</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E5OAK">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have a number of threads
that are using a resource that
must only be initialized once.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ETPAK">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Either initialize the resource before the threads are started, or if
you can't, use the <tt>call_once</tt>
function defined in <tt>&lt;boost/thread/once.hpp&gt;</tt>
and the type <tt>once_flag</tt>. Example 12-5 shows how to use <tt>call_once</tt>.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EIQAK">Example 12-5. Initializing something once</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;boost/thread/thread.hpp&gt;
#include &lt;boost/thread/once.hpp&gt;

// Some sort of connection class that should only be initialized once
struct Conn {
   static void init( ) {++i_;}
   static boost::once_flag init_;
   static int i_;
   // ...
};

int Conn::i_ = 0;
boost::once_flag Conn::init_ = BOOST_ONCE_INIT;

void worker( ) {
   boost::call_once(Conn::init, Conn::init_);
   // Do the real work...
}

Conn c;  // You probably don't want to use a global, so see the
         // next Recipe

int main( ) {

   boost::thread_group grp;

   for (int i = 0; i &lt; 100; ++i)
      grp.create_thread(worker);

   grp.join_all( );

   std::cout &lt;&lt; c.i_ &lt;&lt; '\n'; // c.i_ = 1
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ERQAK">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">A shared resource has to be initialized somewhere, and you may want
the first thread to use it to do the initializing. A variable of type
<tt>once_flag</tt> (whose exact type is platform-dependent)
and the <tt>call_once</tt> function can keep multiple
threads from re-initializing the same object. You have to do two
things.</p>
<p class="docText">First, initialize your
<tt>once_flag</tt>

 variable to the macro
<tt>BOOST_ONCE_INIT</tt>
.
This is a platform-dependent value. In Example 12-5,
the class <tt>Conn</tt> represents some sort of connection
(database, socket, hardware, etc.) that I only want initialized once
even though multiple threads may try to initialize it. This sort of
thing comes up often when you want to load a library dynamically,
perhaps one specified in an application config file. The
<tt>once_flag</tt> is a static class variable because I
only want one initialization, no matter how many instances of the
class there may be. So, I give the flag a starting value of
<tt>BOOST_ONCE_INIT</tt> like this:</p>
<pre>boost::once_flag Conn::initFlag_ = BOOST_ONCE_INIT;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Then, in my worker function, I invoke <tt>call_once</tt>,
which synchronizes access to my init flag and, therefore, forbids
concurrent initialization. I pass two arguments to
<tt>call_once</tt>:</p>
<pre>boost::call_once(Conn::init, Conn::initFlag_);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The first argument is the address of the function that will be doing
the initialization. The second is the flag. This way, multiple
threads can try to initialize the
<tt>Conn</tt> class, but only the first will succeed.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
