<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 12.5. Passing an Argument to a Thread Function</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 12.5. Passing an Argument to a Thread Function</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EKPAK">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have to pass an argument to


 your thread function, but the
thread creation facilities in the Boost Threads library only accept
functors that take no arguments.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ENQAK">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Create a functor adapter that takes your parameters and returns a
functor that takes no parameters. You can use the functor adapter
where you would have otherwise put the thread functor. Take a look at
Example 12-6 to see how this is done.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E1QAK">Example 12-6. Passing an argument to a thread function</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;functional&gt;
#include &lt;boost/thread/thread.hpp&gt;

// A typedef to make the declarations below easier to read
typedef void (*WorkerFunPtr)(const std::string&amp;);

template&lt;typename FunT,   // The type of the function being called
         typename ParamT&gt; // The type of its parameter
struct Adapter {
   Adapter(FunT f, ParamT&amp; p) : // Construct this adapter and set the
      f_(f), p_(&amp;p) {}          // members to the function and its arg

   void operator( )( ) { // This just calls the function with its arg
      f_(*p_);         
   }
private:
   FunT    f_;
   ParamT* p_;  // Use the parameter's address to avoid extra copying
};

void worker(const std::string&amp; s) {
   std::cout &lt;&lt; s &lt;&lt; '\n';
}

int main( ) {

   std::string s1 = "This is the first thread!";
   std::string s2 = "This is the second thread!";

   boost::thread thr1(Adapter&lt;WorkerFunPtr, std::string&gt;(worker, s1));
   boost::thread thr2(Adapter&lt;WorkerFunPtr, std::string&gt;(worker, s2));

   thr1.join( );
   thr2.join( );
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EDRAK">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">The fundamental problem you need to solve here is not specific to
threading or Boost, but a general problem when you have to pass a
functor with one signature to something that requires a different
signature. The solution is to create an adapter.</p>
<p class="docText">The syntax can get a little messy, but essentially what Example 12-6 does is create a temporary functor that the
thread constructor can call as a function with no arguments like it
expects. First things first; use a <tt>typedef</tt> to make
function pointer syntax easier to read:</p>
<pre>typedef void (*WorkerFunPtr)(const std::string&amp;);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This creates a type <tt>WorkerFunPtr</tt> that is a pointer
to a function that takes a <tt>string</tt> reference as an
argument and returns <tt>void</tt>. After that, I created
the <tt>Adapter</tt> class template. It provides a way to
instantiate a dynamic functor. Take a look at the constructor:</p>
<pre>template&lt;typename FunT,
         typename ParamT&gt;
struct Adapter {
   Adapter(FunT f, ParamT&amp; p) :
      f_(f), p_(&amp;p) {}
// ...</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">All the constructor does is initialize the two members, which can be
any types, but we expect them to be a function pointer and some
parameter <tt>p</tt> of any type. I store the address of
the parameter instead of copying it by value to be efficient.</p>
<p class="docText">Now consider this line from the main thread:</p>
<pre>boost::thread thr1(Adapter&lt;WorkerFunPtr, std::string&gt;(worker, s1));</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The argument to <tt>thr1</tt>'s
constructor is an instantiation of the <tt>Adapter</tt>
class template, using the two types <tt>WorkerFunPtr</tt>
and <tt>std::string</tt> as its arguments. That instance
uses those two types for Adapter's
<tt>f_</tt> and <tt>p_</tt> members. Finally,
<tt>Adapter</tt> overrides <tt>operator( )</tt>,
so it can be called like a function. When it is called, it simply
does this:</p>
<pre>f_(*p_);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Using the <tt>Adapter</tt> class template, you can pass
arguments to thread functions, albeit with a little extra syntax. If
you want to pass more than one argument, just add another type and
member variable to <tt>Adapter</tt>. The nice thing about
this approach is that you can create a set of generic adapter



class
templates and use them in various other contexts.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
