<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Introduction</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Introduction</h3>
<p class="docText">This chapter describes solutions to some common requirements when
internationalizing C++ programs. Making software work in different
locales (usually referred to as
<span class="docEmphasis">localization</span>)
usually requires solving two problems: formatting user-visible
strings such that they obey local conventions (such as those for
date, time, money, and numbers), and reconciling data in different
character sets. This chapter deals mostly with the first issue, and
only briefly with the second, because there is little standardized
support for different character sets since most aspects of it are
largely implementation dependent.</p>
<p class="docText">Most software will also run in countries other than the one where it
was written. To support this practical reality, the C++ standard
library has several facilities for writing code that will run in
different countries. The design of these facilities, however, is
different than many other standard library facilities such as
strings, file input and output, containers, algorithms, and so forth.
For example, the class that is used to represent a locale is
<tt>locale</tt>, and is provided in the
<tt>&lt;locale&gt;</tt> header. <tt>locale</tt>
provides facilities for writing to and reading from streams using
locale-specific formatting, and for getting information about a
locale, such as the currency symbol or the date format. The standard
only requires that a single locale be provided though, and that is
the "C" or
<span class="docEmphasis">classic</span> locale. The classic locale uses ANSI C
conventions: American English conventions and 7-bit ASCII character
encoding. It is up to the implementation whether it will provide
<tt>locale</tt> instances for the various languages and
regions.</p>
<p class="docText">There are three fundamental parts to the
<tt>&lt;locale&gt;</tt> header. First, there is the
<tt>locale</tt> class. It encapsulates all aspects of
behavior for a locale that C++ supports, and it is your entry point
to the different kinds of locale information you need to do
locale-aware formatting. Second, the most granular part of a locale,
and the concrete classes you will be working with, are called
<span class="docEmphasis">facets</span>. An example of a facet is a class such as
<tt>time_put</tt> for writing a date to a stream. Third,
each facet belongs to a <span class="docEmphasis">category</span>, which is a way
of grouping related facets together. Examples of categories are
numeric, time, and monetary (the <tt>time_put</tt> facet I
mentioned a moment ago belongs to the time category). I mention
categories briefly in this chapter, but they only really come in
handy when you are doing some more sophisticated stuff with locales,
so I don't cover their use in depth here.</p>
<p class="docText">Every C++ program has at least one locale, referred to as the global
locale (it is often implemented as a global static object). By
default, it is the classic "C"
locale unless you change it to something else. One of the
<tt>locale</tt> constructors allows you to instantiate the
user's preferred locale, although an implementation
is free to define exactly what a user's
"preferred" locale is.</p>
<p class="docText">In most cases, you will only use locales when writing to or reading
from streams. This is the main focus of this chapter.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
