<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 13.1. Hardcoding a Unicode String</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 13.1. Hardcoding a Unicode String</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E5RAK">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have to hardcode




a Unicode, i.e., wide-character,
string in a source file.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E5SAK">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Do this by hardcoding the string with a prefix of
<tt>L</tt> and typing the character into your source editor
as you would any other string, or use the hexadecimal number that
represents the Unicode character you're after. Example 13-1 shows how to do it both ways.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ENTAK">Example 13-1. Hardcoding a Unicode string</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;fstream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;

using namespace std;

int main( ) {

   // Create some strings with Unicode characters
   wstring ws1 = L"Infinity: \u221E";
   wstring ws2 = L"Euro: _";

   wchar_t w[] = L"Infinity: \u221E";

   wofstream out("tmp\\unicode.txt");
   out &lt;&lt; ws2 &lt;&lt; endl;
   wcout &lt;&lt; ws2 &lt;&lt; endl;
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EWTAK">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">Hardcoding a Unicode string is mostly a matter of deciding how you
want to enter the string in your source editor. C++ provides a
wide-character type, <tt>wchar_t</tt>, which can store
Unicode strings. The exact implementation of
<tt>wchar_t</tt> is implementation defined, but it is often
UTF-32. The class <tt>wstring</tt>, defined in
<tt>&lt;string&gt;</tt>, is a sequence of
<tt>wchar_t</tt>s, just like the <tt>string</tt>
class is a sequence of <tt>char</tt>s. (Strictly speaking,
of course, <tt>wstring</tt> is a <tt>typedef</tt>
for <tt>basic_string&lt;wchar_t&gt;</tt>).</p>
<p class="docText">The easiest way to enter Unicode characters is to use the
<tt>L</tt> prefix to a string literal, as in Example 13-1:</p>
<pre>wstring ws1 = L"Infinity: \u2210";  // Use the code itself
wstring ws2 = L"Euro: _";           // Or just type it in</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Now, you can write these 
wide-character
strings to a 
wide-character
stream, like this:</p>
<pre>wcout &lt;&lt; ws1 &lt;&lt; endl; // wcout is the wide char version of cout</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This goes for files, too:</p>
<pre>wofstream out("tmp\\unicode.txt");
out &lt;&lt; ws2 &lt;&lt; endl;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The trickiest part of dealing with 
different
character encodings isn't embedding the right
characters in your source files, it's knowing what
kind of character data you are getting back from a database, HTTP
request, user input, and so on, and this is beyond the realm of the
C++ standard. The C++ standard does not require a particular
encoding, rather that the character encoding used by your operating
system to store source files can be anything, as long as it supports
at least the 96 characters used by the C++ language. For characters
that are not part of this character set, called the <span class="docEmphasis">basic
source character set</span>, the standard indicates that
they must be available by using the <tt><i>\uXXXX</i></tt>
or <tt><i>\UXXXXXXXX</i></tt> escape sequences, where each
<tt><i>X</i></tt> is a hexadecimal digit.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
