<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 13.2. Writing and Reading Numbers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 13.2. Writing and Reading Numbers</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EXSAK">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You need to write a number




to a stream in a formatted way that obeys local conventions, which
are different depending on where you are.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E5TAK">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Imbue the stream you are writing
to
 with the current locale and then
write the numbers to it, as in Example 13-2, or you
can set the global locale and then create a stream. The latter
approach is explained in the discussion.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EWUAK">Example 13-2. Writing numbers using localized formatting</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;locale&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;

using namespace std;

// There is a global locale in the background that is set up by the
// runtime environment. It is the "C" locale by default. You can
// replace it with locale::global(const locale&amp;).
int main( ) {
   locale loc(""); // Create a copy of the user's locale
   cout &lt;&lt; "Locale name = " &lt;&lt; loc.name( ) &lt;&lt; endl;

   cout.imbue(loc); // Tell cout to use the formatting of
                    // the user's locale

   cout &lt;&lt; "pi in locale " &lt;&lt; cout.getloc( ).name( ) &lt;&lt; " is "
        &lt;&lt; 3.14 &lt;&lt; endl;
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E6UAK">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">Example 13-2 shows how to use the
user's locale to format a floating-point number.
Doing so requires two steps, creating an instance of the
<tt>locale</tt> class and then


associating,
or <span class="docEmphasis">imbuing</span>, the stream with it.</p>
<p class="docText">To begin with, Example 13-2 creates
<tt>loc</tt>, which is a copy of the
user's locale. You have to do this using
<tt>locale</tt>'s constructor with an
empty string (and not the default constructor), like this:</p>
<pre>locale loc("");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The difference is subtle but important, and I'll
come back to it in a moment. Creating a <tt>locale</tt>
object in this way creates a copy of the
"user's locale,"
which is something that is implementation defined. This means that if
the machine has been configured to use American English,
<tt>locale::name( )</tt> will return a locale string such
as "<tt>en_US</tt>", "<tt>English_United</tt>
<tt>States.1252</tt>",
"<tt>english-american</tt>", and so on. The actual string
is implementation defined, and the only one required to work by the
C++ standard is "<tt>C</tt>".</p>
<p class="docText">By comparison, <tt>locale</tt>'s default
constructor returns a copy of the current <span class="docEmphasis">global</span>
locale. There is a single, 

global
<tt>locale</tt> object for every C++ program that is run
(probably implemented as a <tt>static</tt> variable
somewhere in the runtime library—exactly how this is done is
implementation defined). By default, it is the C locale, and you can
replace it with <tt>locale::global(locale&amp;</tt>
<tt>loc)</tt>. When streams are created, they use the
global locale at the time of creation, which means that
<tt>cin</tt>, <tt>cout</tt>,
<tt>cerr</tt>, <tt>wcin</tt>,
<tt>wcout</tt>, and <tt>wcerr</tt> use the C
locale, so you have to change them explicitly if you want the
formatting to obey a certain locale's conventions.</p>
<p class="docText">Locale names are not standardized. Usually, however, they look
something like this:</p>
<dl class="docList"><dd><tt>&lt;language&gt;_&lt;country&gt;.&lt;codepage&gt;</tt></dd></dl>
<p class="docText">Where language is either a full language name, such as
"<tt>Spanish</tt>", or a two-letter code, such as
"<tt>sp</tt>"; country is a country, such as
"<tt>Colombia</tt>", or a two-letter country code such as
"<tt>CO</tt>", and code page is the code page, e.g.,
<tt>1252</tt>. The language is the only required part.
Experiment using explicit locales on various systems to get a feel
for what the different names will look like using different

compilers. If the locale name you
use is invalid, it will throw a <tt>runtime_error</tt>.
Example 13-3 gives a few examples of explicit locale
names.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EIZAK">Example 13-3. Naming locales explicitly</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;fstream&gt;
#include &lt;locale&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;

using namespace std;

int main( ) {
   try {
      locale loc("");
      cout &lt;&lt; "Locale name = " &lt;&lt; loc.name( ) &lt;&lt; endl;

      locale locFr("french");
      locale locEn("english-american");
      locale locBr("portuguese-brazilian");

      cout.imbue(locFr); // Tell cout to use French formatting

      cout &lt;&lt; "3.14 (French) = " &lt;&lt; 3.14 &lt;&lt; endl;
      cout &lt;&lt; "Name = " &lt;&lt; locFr.name( ) &lt;&lt; endl;

      cout.imbue(locEn); // Now change to English (American)

      cout &lt;&lt; "3.14 (English) = " &lt;&lt; 3.14 &lt;&lt; endl;
      cout &lt;&lt; "Name = " &lt;&lt; locEn.name( ) &lt;&lt; endl;

      cout.imbue(locFr); // Tell cout to use Brazilian formatting

      cout &lt;&lt; "3.14 (Brazil) = " &lt;&lt; 3.14 &lt;&lt; endl;
      cout &lt;&lt; "Name = " &lt;&lt; locBr.name( ) &lt;&lt; endl;
   }
   catch (runtime_error&amp; e) {
      // If you use an invalid locale name, a runtime_error exception
      // is thrown.
      cerr &lt;&lt; "Error: " &lt;&lt; e.what( ) &lt;&lt; endl;
   }
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The output of this program on Windows with Visual C++ 7.1 looks like
this:</p>
<pre>Locale name = English_United States.1252
3.14 (French) = 3,14
Name = French_France.1252
3.14 (English) = 3.14
Name = English_United States.1252
3.14 (Brazil) = 3,14
Name = Portuguese_Brazil.1252</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">You can see that my machine's locale is U.S. English
using codepage 1252. The example also shows pi using a couple of
other locales. Note that France and Brazil use a comma instead of a
decimal point. The thousands separator is different, too: French and
Portuguese use a space instead of a comma, so that 1,000,000.25 in
America would be written as 1 000 000,25 in French and Portuguese.</p>
<p class="docText">Creating locales with explicit names is something you
shouldn't have to do in most cases anyway. For using
locales to print numbers, dates, currency, or anything else, you
should simply instantiate a locale using an empty string, and imbue
your streams with it.</p>
<p class="docText">Locale behavior

can be a
bit confusing, so I will summarize important points:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">The default global locale is the
"C" locale, because it is the only
one guaranteed to exist in every implementation, per the standard.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The standard streams are all created using the global locale at
program start-up, which is the "C"
locale.</p></li><li><p class="docList">You can create a copy of the user's current runtime
locale by passing an empty string to the <tt>locale</tt>
constructor, e.g., <tt>locale("")</tt>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">You can create a <tt>locale</tt> object for a named locale
by passing in a string that identifies the locale, e.g.,
<tt>locale("portuguese-brazilian")</tt>. The strings are
not standardized, though.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Once you have a <tt>locale</tt> object that represents the
user's default locale or a named locale, you can set
the global locale with <tt>locale::global</tt>. All streams
that are created subsequently will use the global locale.</p></li><li><p class="docList">You can set the locale for a stream explicitly with the
<tt>imbue</tt> member function.</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">When writing software to use locales, only use localized formatting
for user-visible data. That is, if you need to display a number in a
format the user is familiar with, instantiate a locale and imbue the
stream with it to display the number correctly to the user. But if
you are writing data to a file or some other intermediate serialized
storage, use the C locale for
portability. If
your code explicitly changes the global locale, then you will need to
explicitly imbue your file streams with the C locale. You can do this
two ways, by creating a locale using the name
"C," or by calling
<tt>locale::classic( )</tt>, like this:</p>
<pre>ofstream out("data.dat");
out.imbue(locale::classic( ));
out &lt;&lt; pi &lt;&lt; endl; // Write using C locale</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Reading numbers is similar. For example, to read in a number in
French and write it in the C locale, do this:</p>
<pre>double d;
cin.imbue(locale("french"));
cin &gt;&gt; d;
cout &lt;&lt; "In English: " &lt;&lt; d;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">If you run this program and enter <tt><b>300,00</b></tt>, it
will print out <tt>300</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">To make a stream obey a locale's numeric
conventions, explicitly <tt>imbue</tt> the stream with the
target <tt>locale</tt> object. Or, if you want all streams
created to use a particular locale, install it as the global locale.
Currency is handled somewhat differently; see Recipe 13.4 for examples of how to write and read




currency.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EM4AK">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 13.4</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
