<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 13.5. Sorting Localized Strings</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 13.5. Sorting Localized Strings</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E1YAK">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have a sequence of strings 


that contain non-ASCII characters, and
you need to sort according to local convention.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E2ZAK">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">The

locale
class has built-in support for comparing characters in a given locale
by overriding <tt>operator</tt>. You can use an instance of
the locale class as your comparison functor when you call any
standard function that takes a functor for comparison. (See Example 13-8.)</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EU1AK">Example 13-8. Locale-specific sorting</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;locale&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;vector&gt;
#include &lt;algorithm&gt;

using namespace std;

bool localeLessThan (const string&amp; s1, const string&amp; s2) {

   const collate&lt;char&gt;&amp; col =
     use_facet&lt;collate&lt;char&gt; &gt;(locale( )); // Use the global locale

   const char* pb1 = s1.data( );
   const char* pb2 = s2.data( );

   return (col.compare(pb1, pb1 + s1.size( ),
                       pb2, pb2 + s2.size( )) &lt; 0);
}

int main( ) {

   // Create two strings, one with a German character
   string s1 = "diät";
   string s2 = "dich";

   vector&lt;string&gt; v;
   v.push_back(s1);
   v.push_back(s2);

   // Sort without giving a locale, which will sort according to the
   // current global locale's rules.
   sort(v.begin( ), v.end( ));
   for (vector&lt;string&gt;::const_iterator p = v.begin( );
        p != v.end( ); ++p)
      cout &lt;&lt; *p &lt;&lt; endl;

   // Set the global locale to German, and then sort
   locale::global(locale("german"));
   sort(v.begin( ), v.end( ), localeLessThan);
   for (vector&lt;string&gt;::const_iterator p = v.begin( );
        p != v.end( ); ++p)
      cout &lt;&lt; *p &lt;&lt; endl;
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">The first sort follows ASCII sorting convention, and therefore the
output looks like this:</p>
<pre>dich
diät</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The second sort uses the proper ordering according to German
semantics, and it is just the opposite:</p>
<pre>diät
dich</pre><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EF2AK">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">Sorting becomes
more

complicated when you're working in different
locales, and the standard library solves this problem. The facet
<tt>collate</tt> provides a member function
<tt>compare</tt> that works like <tt>strcmp</tt>:
it returns <tt>-1</tt> if the first string is less than the
second, <tt>0</tt> if they are equal, and
<tt>1</tt> if the first string is greater than the second.
Unlike <tt>strcmp</tt>, <tt>collate::compare</tt>
uses the character semantics of the target locale.</p>
<p class="docText">Example 13-8 presents the function
<tt>localeLessThan</tt>
,
which returns <tt>true</tt> if the first argument is less
than the second according to the 
global
locale. The most important part of the function is the call to
compare:</p>
<pre>col.compare(pb1,             // Pointer to the first char
            pb1 + s1.size( ), // Pointer to one past the last char
            pb2,
            pb2 + s2.size( ))</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Depending on the execution character set of your implementation,
Example 13-8 may return the results I showed earlier
or not. But if you want to ensure string comparison works in a
locale-specific manner, you should use
<tt>collate::compare</tt>. Of course, the standard does not
require an implementation to support any locales other than
"C," so be sure to test for all the



locales
you support.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
