<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 14.2. Working with Xerces Strings</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 14.2. Working with Xerces Strings</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EH6AK">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You want to be able to handle 





the wide-character strings used by the
Xerces library safely and easily. In particular, you want to be able
to store strings returned by Xerces functions as well as to convert
between Xerces strings and C++ standard library strings.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E1ABK">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">You can store wide-character strings returned by Xerces library
functions using the template <tt>std::basic_string</tt>
specialized for the Xerces wide-character type
<tt>XMLCh</tt>:</p>
<pre>typedef std::basic_string&lt;XMLCh&gt; XercesString;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">To translate between Xerces strings and narrow-character strings, use
the overloaded static method <tt>transcode( )</tt> from the
class <tt>xercesc::XMLString</tt>, defined in the header
<i>xercesc/util/XMLString.hpp</i>. Example 14-4 defines two overloaded utility functions,
<tt>toNative</tt> and <tt>fromNative</tt>, that
use <tt>transcode</tt> to translate from narrow-character
strings to Xerces strings and <span class="docEmphasis">vice versa</span>. Each
function has two variants, one that takes a C-style string and one
that takes a C++ standard library string. These utility functions are
all you'll need to convert between Xerces string and
narrow-character strings; once you
define them, you'll never need to call
<tt>transcode</tt> directly.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EECBK">Example 14-4. The header xerces_strings.hpp, for converting between Xerces strings and narrow-character strings</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#ifndef XERCES_STRINGS_HPP_INCLUDED
#define XERCES_STRINGS_HPP_INCLUDED

#include &lt;string&gt;
#include &lt;boost/scoped_array.hpp&gt;
#include &lt;xercesc/util/XMLString.hpp&gt;

typedef std::basic_string&lt;XMLCh&gt; XercesString;

// Converts from a narrow-character string to a wide-character string.
inline XercesString fromNative(const char* str)
{
    boost::scoped_array&lt;XMLCh&gt; ptr(xercesc::XMLString::transcode(str));
    return XercesString(ptr.get( ));
}

// Converts from a narrow-character string to a wide-charactr string.
inline XercesString fromNative(const std::string&amp; str)
{
    return fromNative(str.c_str( ));
}

// Converts from a wide-character string to a narrow-character string.
inline std::string toNative(const XMLCh* str)
{
    boost::scoped_array&lt;char&gt; ptr(xercesc::XMLString::transcode(str));
    return std::string(ptr.get( ));
}

// Converts from a wide-character string to a narrow-character string.
inline std::string toNative(const XercesString&amp; str)
{
    return toNative(str.c_str( ));
}

#endif // #ifndef XERCES_STRINGS_HPP_INCLUDED

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">To convert between Xerces strings and
<tt>std::wstrings</tt>, simply use the
<tt>std::basic_string</tt> constructor taking a pair of
iterators. For example, you can define the following two functions:</p>
<pre>// Converts from a Xerces String to a std::wstring
std::wstring xercesToWstring(const XercesString&amp; str)
{
    return std::wstring(str.begin( ), str.end( ));
}

// Converts from a std::wstring to a XercesString
XercesString wstringToXerces(const std::wstring&amp; str)
{
    return XercesString(str.begin( ), str.end( ));
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">These functions rely on the fact that <tt>wchar_t</tt> and
<tt>XMLCh</tt> are integral types each of which can be
implicitly converted to the other; it should work regardless of the
size of <tt>wchar_t</tt>, as long as no values outside the
range of <tt>XMLCh</tt> are used. You can define similar
functions taking C-style strings as arguments, using the
<tt>std::basic_string</tt> constructor that takes a
character array and a length as arguments.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EDDBK">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">Xerces uses the null-terminated sequences of characters of type
<tt>XMLCh</tt> to represent Unicode strings.
<tt>XMLCh</tt> is a typedef for an implementation-defined
integral type having a size of at least 16 bits—wide enough to
represent almost all known characters in any language using a single
character. Xerces uses the UTF-16 character encoding, which means
that theoretically some Unicode characters must be represented by a
sequence of more than one <tt>XMLCh</tt>; in practice,
however, you can think of an <tt>XMLCh</tt> as directly
representing a Unicode code point, i.e., the numerical value of a
Unicode character.</p>
<p class="docText">At one time, <tt>XMLCh</tt> was defined as a
<tt>typedef</tt> for <tt>wchar_t</tt>, which
meant you could easily store a copy of a Xerces string as a
<tt>std::wstring</tt>. Currently, however, Xerces defines
<tt>XMLCh</tt> as a typedef for <tt>unsigned
short</tt> on all platforms. Among other things, this means that
on some platforms <tt>XMLCh</tt> and
<tt>wchar_t</tt> don't even have the same
width. Since Xerces may change the definition of
<tt>XMLCh</tt> in the future, you can't
count on <tt>XMLCh</tt> to be identical to any particular
type. So if you want to store a copy of a Xerces string, you should
use a <tt>std::basic_string&lt;XMLCh&gt;</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">When using Xerces you will frequently need to convert between
narrow-character strings and Xerces strings; Xerces provides the
overloaded function <tt>transcode(
)</tt>
 for this purpose. <tt>transcode()</tt> can convert a Unicode string to a narrow-character string
in the "native" character encoding
or a narrow-character string in the
"native" encoding to a Unicode
string. What constitutes the native encoding is not precisely
defined, however, so if you are programming in an environment where
there are several commonly used character encodings, you may need to
take matters into your own hands and perform your own conversion,
either by using a <tt>std::codecvt</tt> facet, or by using
Xerces's <i>pluggable transcoding
services</i>

, described in the Xerces
documentation. In many cases, however, <tt>transcode()</tt> is all you need.</p>
<p class="docText">The null-terminate string returned by <tt>transcode( )</tt>
is dynamically allocated using the array form of
<tt>operator</tt>
<tt>new</tt>;
it's up to you to delete it using
<tt>delete</tt>
<tt>[]</tt>. This presents a
slight memory-management problem, since typically you will want to
make a copy of the string or write it to a stream before you delete
it, and these operations can throw exceptions. I've
addressed this problem in Example 14-4 by using the
template <tt>boost::scoped_array</tt>, which takes
ownership of a dynamically allocated array and deletes it
automatically when it goes out of scope, even if an exception is
thrown. For example, look at the implementation of
<tt>fromNative</tt>:</p>
<pre>inline XercesString fromNative(const char* str)
{
    boost::scoped_array&lt;XMLCh&gt; ptr(xercesc::XMLString::transcode(str));
    return XercesString(ptr.get( ));
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Here, <tt>ptr</tt> takes ownership of the null-terminated
string returned by <tt>transcode( )</tt> and frees it even
if the <tt>XercesString</tt> constructor throws a
<tt>std::bad_alloc</tt>





 exception.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
