<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 14.3. Parsing a Complex XML Document</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 14.3. Parsing a Complex XML Document</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EMABK">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have a collection of data stored in an XML document 


that uses an internal DTD or XML
Namespaces. You want to parse the document and turn the data it
contains into a collection of C++ objects.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ENBBK">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use Xerces's implementation of the SAX2 API (the
Simple API for XML, Version 2.0). First, derive a class from
<tt>xercesc::ContentHandler</tt>; this class will receive
notifications about the structure and content of your XML document as
it is being parsed. Next, if you like, derive a class from
<tt>xercesc::ErrorHandler</tt> to receive warnings and
error notifications. Construct a parser of type
<tt>xercesc::SAX2XMLReader</tt>, register instances of your
handler classes using the parser's
<tt>setContentHandler( )</tt> and <tt>setErrorHandler()</tt> methods. Finally, invoke the parser's
<tt>parse( )</tt> method, passing the file pathname of your
document as its argument.</p>
<p class="docText">For example, suppose you want to parse the XML document
<i>animals.xml</i> from Example 14-1
and construct a <tt>std::vector</tt> of
<tt>Animal</tt>s representing the animals listed in the
document. (See Example 14-2 for the definition of the
class <tt>Animal</tt>.) In Example 14-3, I
showed how to do this using TinyXml. To make the problem more
challenging, let's add namespaces
to

the document, as shown in Example 14-5.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EKDBK">Example 14-5. List of circus animals, using XML Namespaces</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>&lt;?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?&gt;

&lt;!-- Feldman Family Circus Animals with Namespaces --&gt;

&lt;ffc:animalList xmlns:ffc="http://www.feldman-family-circus.com"&gt;
    &lt;ffc:animal&gt;
        &lt;ffc:name&gt;Herby&lt;/ffc:name&gt;
        &lt;ffc:species&gt;elephant&lt;/ffc:species&gt;
        &lt;ffc:dateOfBirth&gt;1992-04-23&lt;/ffc:dateOfBirth&gt;
        &lt;ffc:veterinarian name="Dr. Hal Brown" phone="(801)595-9627"/&gt;
        &lt;ffc:trainer name="Bob Fisk" phone="(801)881-2260"/&gt;
    &lt;/ffc:animal&gt;
    
    &lt;!-- etc. --&gt;

&lt;/ffc:animalList&gt;</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">To parse this document with SAX2, define a
<tt>ContentHandler</tt>, as shown in Example 14-6, and an <tt>ErrorHandler</tt>, as
shown in Example 14-7. Then construct a
<tt>SAX2XMLReader</tt>, register your handlers, and run the
parser. This is illustrated in Example 14-8.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ENEBK">Example 14-6. A SAX2 ContentHandler for parsing the document animals.xml</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;stdexcept&gt;                       // runtime_error
#include &lt;vector&gt;
#include &lt;xercesc/sax2/Attributes.hpp&gt;
#include &lt;xercesc/sax2/DefaultHandler.hpp&gt; // Contains no-op 
                                           // implementations of
                                           // the various handlers
#include "xerces_strings.hpp"              // Example 14-4
#include "animal.hpp"

using namespace std;
using namespace xercesc;

// Returns an instance of Contact based 
// on the given collection of attributes
Contact contactFromAttributes(const Attributes &amp;attrs)
{
    // For efficiency, store frequently used string 
    // in static variables
    static XercesString name = fromNative("name");
    static XercesString phone = fromNative("phone");

    Contact result;    // Contact to be returned.
    const XMLCh* val;  // Value of name or phone attribute.

    // Set Contact's name.
    if ((val = attrs.getValue(name.c_str( ))) != 0) {
        result.setName(toNative(val));
    } else {
        throw runtime_error("contact missing name attribute");
    }

    // Set Contact's phone number.
    if ((val = attrs.getValue(phone.c_str( ))) != 0) {
        result.setPhone(toNative(val));
    } else {
        throw runtime_error("contact missing phone attribute");
    }

    return result;
}

// Implements callbacks that receive character data and
// notifications about the beginnings and ends of elements 
class CircusContentHandler : public DefaultHandler {
public:
    CircusContentHandler(vector&lt;Animal&gt;&amp; animalList) 
        : animalList_(animalList)
        { }

    // If the current element represents a veterinarian or trainer,
    // use attrs to construct a Contact object for the current 
    // Animal; otherwise, clear currentText_ in preparation for the 
    // characters( ) callback
    void startElement( 
           const XMLCh *const uri,        // namespace URI
           const XMLCh *const localname,  // tagname w/ out NS prefix
           const XMLCh *const qname,      // tagname + NS pefix
           const Attributes &amp;attrs )      // elements's attributes
    {
        static XercesString animalList = fromNative("animalList");
        static XercesString animal = fromNative("animal");
        static XercesString vet = fromNative("veterinarian");
        static XercesString trainer = fromNative("trainer");
        static XercesString xmlns = 
            fromNative("http://www.feldman-family-circus.com");

        // Check namespace URI
        if (uri != xmlns)
            throw runtime_error(
                      string("wrong namespace uri: ") + toNative(uri)
                  );
        if (localname == animal) {
            // Add an Animal to the list; this is the new
            // "current Animal"
            animalList_.push_back(Animal( ));
        } else if (localname!= animalList) {
            Animal&amp; animal = animalList_.back( );
            if (localname == vet) {
                // We've encountered a "veterinarian" element.
                animal.setVeterinarian(contactFromAttributes(attrs));
            } else if (localname == trainer) {
                // We 've encountered a "trainer" element.
                animal.setTrainer(contactFromAttributes(attrs));
            } else {
                // We've encountered a "name" , "species", or 
                // "dateOfBirth" element. Its content will be supplied
                // by the callback function characters( ).
                currentText_.clear( );
            }
        }
    }

    // If the current element represents a name, species, or date
    // of birth, use the text stored in currentText_ to set the
    // appropriate property of the current Animal.
    void endElement(          
           const XMLCh *const uri,        // namespace URI
           const XMLCh *const localname,  // tagname w/ out NS prefix
           const XMLCh *const qname )     // tagname + NS pefix
    {
        static XercesString animalList = fromNative("animal-list");
        static XercesString animal = fromNative("animal");
        static XercesString name = fromNative("name");
        static XercesString species = fromNative("species");
        static XercesString dob = fromNative("dateOfBirth");

        if (localname!= animal &amp;&amp; localname!= animalList) {
            // currentText_ contains the content of the element 
            // which has ended. Use it to set the current Animal's 
            // properties.
            Animal&amp; animal = animalList_.back( );
            if (localname == name) {
                animal.setName(toNative(currentText_));
            } else if (localname == species) {
                animal.setSpecies(toNative(currentText_));
            } else if (localname == dob) {
                animal.setDateOfBirth(toNative(currentText_));
            } 
        }
    }
    // Receives notifications when character data is encountered
    void characters( const XMLCh* const chars, 
                     const unsigned int length ) 
    {
        // Append characters to currentText_ for processing by
        // the method endElement( )
        currentText_.append(chars, length);
    }
private:
    vector&lt;Animal&gt;&amp;  animalList_;
    XercesString     currentText_;
};

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E3EBK">Example 14-7. A SAX2 ErrorHandler</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;stdexcept&gt; // runtime_error
#include &lt;xercesc/sax2/DefaultHandler.hpp&gt;

// Receives Error notifications.
class CircusErrorHandler : public DefaultHandler {
public: 
    void warning(const SAXParseException&amp; e)
    {
        /* do nothing */
    }
    void error(const SAXParseException&amp; e)
    {
        throw runtime_error(toNative(e.getMessage( )));
    }
    void fatalError(const SAXParseException&amp; e) { error(e); }
};</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EFFBK">Example 14-8. Parsing the document animals.xml with the SAX2 API</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;exception&gt;
#include &lt;iostream&gt;     // cout
#include &lt;memory&gt;       // auto_ptr
#include &lt;vector&gt;
#include &lt;xercesc/sax2/SAX2XMLReader.hpp&gt;
#include &lt;xercesc/sax2/XMLReaderFactory.hpp&gt;
#include &lt;xercesc/util/PlatformUtils.hpp&gt;
#include "animal.hpp"
#include "xerces_strings.hpp"  // Example 14-4

using namespace std;
using namespace xercesc;

// RAII utility that initializes the parser and frees resources
// when it goes out of scope
class XercesInitializer {
public:
    XercesInitializer( ) { XMLPlatformUtils::Initialize( ); }
    ~XercesInitializer( ) { XMLPlatformUtils::Terminate( ); }
private:
    // Prohibit copying and assignment
    XercesInitializer(const XercesInitializer&amp;);
    XercesInitializer&amp; operator=(const XercesInitializer&amp;);
};

int main( )
{
    try {
        vector&lt;Animal&gt; animalList;

        // Initialze Xerces and obtain parser
        XercesInitializer        init; 
        auto_ptr&lt;SAX2XMLReader&gt;  ]
            parser(XMLReaderFactory::createXMLReader( ));

        // Register handlers
        CircusContentHandler     content(animalList);
        CircusErrorHandler       error;
        parser-&gt;setContentHandler(&amp;content);
        parser-&gt;setErrorHandler(&amp;error);

        // Parse the XML document
        parser-&gt;parse("animals.xml");
       
        // Print animals' names
        for ( vector&lt;Animal&gt;::size_type i = 0,
                                        n = animalList.size( );
              i &lt; n;
              ++i )
        {
            cout &lt;&lt; animalList[i] &lt;&lt; "\n";
        }
    } catch (const SAXException&amp; e) {
        cout &lt;&lt; "xml error: " &lt;&lt; toNative(e.getMessage( )) &lt;&lt; "\n";
        return EXIT_FAILURE;
    } catch (const XMLException&amp; e) {
        cout &lt;&lt; "xml error: " &lt;&lt; toNative(e.getMessage( )) &lt;&lt; "\n";
        return EXIT_FAILURE;
    } catch (const exception&amp; e) {
        cout &lt;&lt; e.what( ) &lt;&lt; "\n";
        return EXIT_FAILURE;
    }
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EUFBK">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">Some XML parsers parse an XML document and return it to the user as a
complex C++ object. The TinyXml parser and the W3C DOM parser that
you'll see in the next recipe both work this way.
The SAX2 parser, by contrast, uses a collection of callback function
to deliver information about an XML document to the user as the
document is being parsed. The callback functions are grouped into
several handler interfaces: a <tt>ContentHandler</tt>
receives notifications about an XML document's
elements, attributes, and text, an <tt>ErrorHandler</tt>
receives warnings and error notifications, and a
<tt>DTDHandler</tt> receives notifications about an XML
document's DTD.</p>
<p class="docText">Designing a parser around a collection of callback function has
several important advantages. For example, it makes it possible to
parse documents that are too large to fit into memory. In addition,
it can save processing time by avoiding the numerous dynamic
allocations needed to construct nodes in an internal representation
of an XML document, and by allowing the user to construct her own
representation of a document's data directly,
instead of having to traverse the document tree as I did in Example 14-3.</p>
<p class="docText">Example 14-8 is pretty straightforward: I obtain a
SAX2 parser, register a ContentHandler and ErrorHandler, parse the
document <tt>animals.xml</tt>, and print the list of
<tt>Animal</tt>s populated by the
<tt>ContentHandler</tt>. There are two interesting points:
First, the function <tt>XMLReaderFactory::createXMLReader()</tt> returns a dynamically allocated instance of
<tt>SAX2XMLReader</tt> that must be freed explicitly by the
user; I use a <tt>std::auto_ptr</tt> for this purpose to
make sure that the parser is deleted even in the event of an
exception. Second, the Xerces framework must be initialized using
<tt>xercesc::XMLPlatformUtils::Initialize( )</tt> and be
cleaned up using <tt>xercesc::XMLPlatformUtils::Terminate(
)</tt>. I encapsulate this initialization and cleanup in a class
called <tt>XercesInitializer</tt>, which calls
<tt>XMLPlatformUtils::Initialize( )</tt> in its constructor
and <tt>XMLPlatformUtils::Terminate( )</tt> in its
destructor. This ensures that <tt>Terminate( )</tt> is
called even if an exception is thrown. This is an example of the
<span class="docEmphasis">Resource Acquisition Is
Initialization</span>
 (RAII)
technique demonstrated in Example 8-3.</p>
<p class="docText">Let's look at how the class
<tt>CircusContentHandler</tt> from Example 14-6 implements the SAX2
<tt>ContentHandler</tt> interface. The SAX 2 parser calls
the method <tt>startElement( )</tt> each time it encounters
the opening tag of an element. If the element has an associated
namespace, the first argument, <tt>uri</tt>, contains the
element's namespace URI, and the second argument,
<tt>localname</tt>, contains the portion of the
element's tag name following its namespace prefix.
If the element has no associated namespace, these two arguments are
empty strings. The third argument contains the
element's tag name, if the element has no associated
namespace; if the element does have an associated namespace, this
argument may contain the element's tag name as it
appears in the document being parsed, but it may also be an empty
string. The fourth argument is an instance of the class
<tt>Attributes</tt>, which represents the
element's collection of attributes.</p>
<p class="docText">In the implementation of <tt>startElement( )</tt> in Example 14-6, I ignore the <tt>animalList</tt>
element. When I encounter an <tt>animal</tt> element, I add
a new <tt>Animal</tt> to its list of
animals—let's call this
<tt>Animal</tt> the <i>current</i>
<tt>Animal</tt>—and delegate the job of setting the
<tt>Animal</tt>'s properties to the
handlers for other elements. When I encounter a
<tt>veterinarian</tt> or <tt>trainer</tt>
element, I call the function <tt>contactFromAttributes</tt>
to construct an instance of <tt>Contact</tt> from the
element's collection of attributes, and then use
this <tt>Contact</tt> to set the current
<tt>Animal</tt>'s veterinarian or trainer
property. When I encounter a <tt>name</tt>,
<tt>species</tt>, or <tt>dateOfBirth</tt>
element, I clear the member variable <tt>currentText_</tt>,
which will be used to store the element's textual
content.</p>
<p class="docText">The SAX2 parser calls the method <tt>characters(
)</tt>
 to deliver the character data contained by
an element. The parser is allowed to deliver an
element's character in a series of calls to
<tt>characters( )</tt>; until an element's
closing tag is encountered, there's no guarantee
that all its character data has been delivered. Consequently, in the
implementation of <tt>characters( )</tt>, I simply append
the provided characters to the member variable
<tt>currentText_</tt>, which I use to set the current
<tt>Animal</tt>'s name, species, or date
of birth as soon as a closing <tt>name</tt>,
<tt>species</tt>, or <tt>dateOfBirth</tt> tag is
encountered.</p>
<p class="docText">The SAX2 parser calls the method <tt>endElement(
)</tt>
 each time it leaves an element. Its
arguments have the same interpretation as the first three arguments
to <tt>startElement()</tt>
. In the implementation of
<tt>endElement( )</tt> in Example 14-6, I
ignore all elements other than <tt>name</tt>,
<tt>species</tt>, and <tt>dateOBirth</tt>. When a
callback corresponding to one of these elements
occurs—signaling that the parser is just leaving the
element—I use the character data stored in
<tt>currentText_</tt> to set the current
<tt>Animal</tt>'s name, species, or date
of birth.</p>
<p class="docText">Several important features of SAX2 are not illustrated in Examples
Example 14-6, Example 14-7, and Example 14-8. For example, the class
<tt>SAX2XMLReader</tt> provides an overload of the
<tt>method</tt>
<tt>parse( )</tt> taking an
instance of <tt>xercesc::InputSource</tt> as an argument
instead of a C-style string. <tt>InputSource</tt> is an
abstract class encapsulating a source of character data; its concrete
subclasses, including <tt>xercesc::MemBufInputSource</tt>
and <tt>xercesc::URLInputSource</tt>, allow the SAX2 parser
to parse XML documents stored in locations other than the local
filesystem.</p>
<p class="docText">Furthermore, the <tt>ContentHandler</tt> interface contains
many additional methods, such as <tt>startDocument( )</tt>
and <tt>endDocmuent( )</tt>, which signal the start and end
of the XML document, and <tt>setLocator( )</tt>, which
allows you to specify a <tt>Locator</tt> object which keeps
track of the current position in the file being parsed. There are
also other handler interfaces, including
<tt>DTDHandler</tt> and
<tt>EntityResolver--</tt>from the core SAX 2.0
specification—and <tt>DeclarationHandler</tt> and
<tt>LexicalHandler--</tt>from the standardized extensions
to SAX 2.0.</p>
<p class="docText">It's also possible for a single class to implement
several handler interfaces. The class
<tt>xercesc::DefaultHandler</tt> makes this easy, because
it derives from all the handler interfaces and provides no-op
implementations of their virtual functions. Consequently, I could
have added the methods from <tt>CircusErrorHandler</tt> to
<tt>CircusContentHandler</tt>, and modified Example 14-8 as follows:</p>
<pre>// Register handlers
CircusContentHandler handler(animalList);
parser-&gt;setContentHandler(&amp;handler);
parser-&gt;setErrorHandler(&amp;handler);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">There's one last feature of Example 14-8 you should notice:
<tt>CircusContentHandler</tt> makes no attempt to verify
that the document being parsed has the correct structure—for
instance, that its root is an <tt>animalList</tt> element
or that all the children of the root are <tt>animal</tt>
elements. This is in sharp contrast with Example 14-3. For example, the <tt>main( )</tt>
function in Example 14-3 verifies that the top-level
element is an <tt>animalList</tt>, and the function
<tt>nodeToAnimal( )</tt> verifies that its argument
represents an <tt>animal</tt> element with exactly five
child elements of type <tt>name</tt>,
<tt>species</tt>, <tt>dateOfBirth</tt>,
<tt>veterinarian</tt>, and <tt>trainer</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">It's possible to modify Example 14-6
so that it performs this type of error checking. The
<tt>ContentHandler</tt> in Example 14-9,
for instance, verifies that the document's root
element is an <tt>animalList</tt>, that its children are of
type <tt>animal</tt>, and the children of an
<tt>animal</tt> element don't contain
other elements. It works by maintaining three
<tt>boolean</tt> flags,
<tt>parsingAnimalList_</tt>,
<tt>parsingAnimal_</tt>, and
<tt>parsingAnimalChild_</tt>, which record the region of
the document that is being parsed at any given time. The methods
<tt>startElement( )</tt> and <tt>endElement()</tt> simply update these flags and check them for consistency,
delegating the task of updating the current <tt>Animal</tt>
to the helper methods <tt>startAnimalChild( )</tt> and
<tt>endElementChild( )</tt>, whose implementations are very
similar to the implementations of <tt>startElement( )</tt>
and <tt>endElement( )</tt> in Example 14-6.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ETQBK">Example 14-9. A SAX2 ContentHandler for animals.xml that checks the document's structure</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">// Implements callbacks which receive character data and
// notifications about the beginnings and ends of elements
class CircusContentHandler : public DefaultHandler {
public:
    CircusContentHandler(vector&lt;Animal&gt;&amp; animalList) 
        : animalList_(animalList),   // list to be populated
          parsingAnimalList_(false), // parsing state
          parsingAnimal_(false),     // parsing state
          parsingAnimalChild_(false) // parsing state
        { }

    // Receives notifications from the parser each time 
    // beginning of an element is encountered
    void startElement( 
             const XMLCh *const uri,       // Namespace uri
             const XMLCh *const localname, // simple tag name
             const XMLCh *const qname,     // qualified tag name
             const Attributes &amp;attrs )     // Collection of attributes
    {
        static XercesString animalList = fromNative("animalList");
        static XercesString animal = fromNative("animal");
        static XercesString xmlns = 
            fromNative("http://www.feldman-family-circus.com");

        // Validate the namespace uri
        if (uri != xmlns)
            throw runtime_error(
                      string("wrong namespace uri: ") + toNative(uri)
                  );

        // (i) Update the flags parsingAnimalList_, parsingAnimal_, 
        //     and parsingAnimalChild_, which indicate where we are
        //     within the document 
        // (ii) verify that the elements are correctly
        //      nested; 
        // (iii) Delegate most of the work to the method 
        //       startAnimalChild( )
        if (!parsingAnimalList_) { 
            // We've just encountered the document root
            if (localname == animalList) {     
                parsingAnimalList_ = true; // Update parsing state.
            } else {
                // Incorrect nesting
                throw runtime_error(
                          string("expected 'animalList', got ") + 
                          toNative(localname )
                      );
            }
        } else if (!parsingAnimal_) {
            // We've just encountered a new animal
            if (localname == animal) {
                parsingAnimal_ = true;           // Update parsing state.
                animalList_.push_back(Animal( )); // Add an Animal to the list.
            } else {
                // Incorrect nesting
                throw runtime_error(
                          string("expected 'animal', got ") + 
                          toNative(localname )
                      );
            }
        } else {
            // We're in the middle of parsing an animal element.
            if (parsingAnimalChild_) {
                // Incorrect nesting
                throw runtime_error("bad animal element"); 
            } 
            // Update parsing state.
            parsingAnimalChild_ = true; 

            // Let startAnimalChild( ) do the real work
            startAnimalChild(uri, localname, qname, attrs); 
        }
    }

    
    void endElement( 
             const XMLCh *const uri,       // Namespace uri
             const XMLCh *const localname, // simple tag name
             const XMLCh *const qname )    // qualified tag name
    {
        static XercesString animalList = fromNative("animal-list");
        static XercesString animal = fromNative("animal");

        // Update the flags parsingAnimalList, parsingAnimal_,
        // and parsingAnimalChild_; delegate most of the work
        // to endAnimalChild( )
        if (localname == animal) {
            parsingAnimal_ = false;
        } else if (localname == animalList) {
            parsingAnimalList_ = false;
        } else {
            endAnimalChild(uri, localname, qname);
            parsingAnimalChild_ = false;
        }
    }

    // Receives notifications when character data is encountered
    void characters(const XMLCh* const chars, const unsigned int length) 
    {
        // Append characters to currentText_ for processing by
        // the method endAnimalChild( )
        currentText_.append(chars, length);
    }
private:
    // If the current element represents a veterinarian or trainer,
    // use attrs to construct a Contact object for the current 
    // Animal; otherwise, clear currentText_ in preparation for the 
    // characters( ) callback
    void startAnimalChild(
             const XMLCh *const uri,       // Namespace uri
             const XMLCh *const localname, // simple tag name
             const XMLCh *const qname,     // qualified tag name
             const Attributes &amp;attrs )     // Collection of attributes
    {
        static XercesString vet = fromNative("veterinarian");
        static XercesString trainer = fromNative("trainer");

        Animal&amp; animal = animalList_.back( );
        if (localname == vet) {
            // We've encountered a "veterinarian" element.
            animal.setVeterinarian(contactFromAttributes(attrs));
        } else if (localname == trainer) {
            // We've encountered a "trainer" element.
            animal.setTrainer(contactFromAttributes(attrs));
        } else {
            // We've encountered a "name" , "species", or 
            // "dateOfBirth" element. Its content will be supplied
            // by the callback function characters( ).
            currentText_.clear( );
        }
    }

    // If the current element represents a name, species, or date
    // of birth, use the text stored in currentText_ to set the
    // appropriate property of the current Animal.
    void endAnimalChild(
             const XMLCh *const uri,       // Namespace uri
             const XMLCh *const localname, // simple tag name
             const XMLCh *const qname )    // qualified tag name
    {
        static XercesString name = fromNative("name");
        static XercesString species = fromNative("species");
        static XercesString dob = fromNative("dateOfBirth");

        // currentText_ contains the content of the element which has
        // just ended. Use it to set the current Animal's properties.
        Animal&amp; animal = animalList_.back( );
        if (localname == name) {
            animal.setName(toNative(currentText_));
        } else if (localname == species) {
            animal.setSpecies(toNative(currentText_));
        } else if (localname == dob) {
            animal.setDateOfBirth(toNative(currentText_));
        } 
    }

    vector&lt;Animal&gt;&amp;  animalList_;         // list to be populated
    bool             parsingAnimalList_;  // parsing state
    bool             parsingAnimal_;      // parsing state
    bool             parsingAnimalChild_; // parsing state
    XercesString     currentText_;        // character data of the
                                          // current text node
};

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Comparing Example 14-9 with Example 14-6, you can see how complex it can be to verify a
document's structure using callbacks.
What's more, Example 14-6 still
doesn't perform as much checking as Example 14-3: it doesn't verify that the
children of an animal element appear in the correct order, for
instance. Fortunately, there are much easier ways to verify a
document's 


structure using SAX2, as
you'll see in the Recipe 14.5 and Recipe 14.6.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EOSBK">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 14.1, Recipe 14.4,
Recipe 14.5, and Recipe 14.6</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
