<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 14.6. Validating an XML Document with a Schema</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 14.6. Validating an XML Document with a Schema</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EPJBK">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You want to verify that an 


XML document is valid according to a
schema, as specified in the XML Schema 1.0 recommendation.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ESKBK">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use the Xerces library with either the SAX2 or the DOM parser.</p>
<p class="docText">Validating an XML document against a schema using the SAX2 API is
exactly the same as validating a document that contains a DTD,
assuming the schema is contained in or referenced from the target
document. If you want to validate an XML document against an external
schema, you must call the parser's
<tt>setProperty( )</tt> method to enable external schema
validation. The first argument to <tt>setProperty( )</tt>
should be
<tt>XMLUni::fgXercesSchemaExternalSchemaLocation</tt> or
<tt>XMLUni::fgXercesSche-maExternalNoNameSpaceSchemaLocation</tt>,
depending on whether the schema has a target namespace. The second
argument should be the location of the schema, expressed as a
<tt>const</tt>
<tt>XMLCh*</tt>. Make sure to cast
the second argument to <tt>void*</tt>, as explained in
Recipe 14.5.</p>
<p class="docText">Validating an XML document against a schema using the
<tt>XercesDOMParser</tt> is similar to validating a
document against a DTD, assuming the schema is contained in or
referenced from the target document. The only difference is that
schema and namespace support must be explicitly enabled, as shown in
Example 14-15.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EZLBK">Example 14-15. Enabling schema validation with a XercesDOMParser</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>XercesDOMParser parser;
parser.setValidationScheme(XercesDOMParser::Val_Always);
parser.setDoSchema(true);
parser.setDoNamespaces(true);</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">If you want to validate an XML document against an external schema
with a target namespace, call the parser's
<tt>setExternalSchemaLocation( )</tt> method with your
schema's location as its argument. If you want to
validate an XML document against an external schema that has no
target namespace, call the parser's
<tt>setExternalNoNamespaceSchema-Location( )</tt> instead.</p>
<p class="docText">Similarly, to validate an XML document against a schema using a
<tt>DOMBuilder</tt>, enable its validation feature as
follows:</p>
<pre>DOMBuilder* parser = ...; 
parser-&gt;setFeature(XMLUni::fgDOMNamespaces, true);
parser-&gt;setFeature(XMLUni::fgDOMValidation, true);
parser-&gt;setFeature(XMLUni::fgXercesSchema, true);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">To validate against an external schema using
<tt>DOMBuilder</tt>, set the property
<tt>XMLUni::fgXercesSchemaExternalSchemaLocation</tt> or
<tt>XMLUni::fgXercesSchemaExternalNoName-SpaceSchemaLocation</tt>
to the location of the schema.</p>
<p class="docText">For example, suppose you want to validate the document
<i>animals.xml</i> from Example 14-1
using the schema in Example 14-16. One way to do this
is to add a reference to the schema to
<i>animals.xml</i>, as shown in Example 14-17. You can then validate the document with the
SAX2 API, as shown in Example 14-13, or using DOM, as
shown in Example 14-14, with the modification
indicated in Example 14-15.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E2NBK">Example 14-16. Schema animals.xsd for the file animals.xml</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">&lt;?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?&gt;

&lt;!-- Schema for Feldman Family Circus Animals --&gt;

&lt;xsd:schema xmlns:xsd="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema" elementFormDefault="qualified"&gt;
&lt;xsd:element name="animalList"&gt;
    &lt;xsd:complexType&gt;
        &lt;xsd:sequence&gt;
            &lt;xsd:element name="animal" minOccurs="0" maxOccurs="unbounded"&gt;
                &lt;xsd:complexType&gt;
                    &lt;xsd:sequence&gt;
                        &lt;xsd:element name="name" type="xsd:string"/&gt;
                        &lt;xsd:element name="species" type="xsd:string"/&gt;
                        &lt;xsd:element name="dateOfBirth" type="xsd:date"/&gt;
                        &lt;xsd:element name="veterinarian" type="contact"/&gt;
                        &lt;xsd:element name="trainer" type="contact"/&gt;
                    &lt;/xsd:sequence&gt;
                &lt;/xsd:complexType&gt;
            &lt;/xsd:element&gt;
        &lt;/xsd:sequence&gt;
    &lt;/xsd:complexType&gt;
&lt;/xsd:element&gt;

&lt;xsd:complexType name="contact"&gt;
    &lt;xsd:attribute name="name" type="xsd:string"/&gt;
    &lt;xsd:attribute name="phone" type="phone"/&gt;
&lt;/xsd:complexType&gt;

&lt;xsd:simpleType name="phone"&gt;
    &lt;xsd:restriction base="xsd:string"&gt;
        &lt;xsd:pattern value="\(\d{3}\)\d{3}-\d{4}"/&gt;
    &lt;/xsd:restriction&gt;
&lt;/xsd:simpleType&gt;

&lt;/xsd:schema&gt;

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EEOBK">Example 14-17. The file animals.xml, modified to contain a reference to a schema</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>&lt;?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?&gt;

&lt;!-- Feldman Family Circus Animals with Schema --&gt;

&lt;animalList xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"  
            xsi:noNamespaceSchemaLocation="animals.xsd"&gt;

    &lt;!-- same as Example 14-1 --&gt;

&lt;/animalList&gt;</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Another way is to omit the reference to the schema and enable
external schema validation. Example 14-18 shows how to
do this with the DOM parser.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E1OBK">Example 14-18. Validating an XML document against an external schema, using DOM</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">/*
 * Same includes as in Example 14-14
 */

using namespace std;
using namespace xercesc;

/*
 * Define XercesInitializer as in Example 14-8
 * and CircusErrorHandler as in Example 14-7
 */

int main( )
{
    try {
        // Initialize Xerces and construct a DOM parser.
        XercesInitializer        init;
        XercesDOMParser          parser;

        // Enable validation
        parser.setValidationScheme(XercesDOMParser::Val_Always);
        parser.setDoSchema(true);
        parser.setDoNamespaces(true);
        parser.setExternalNoNamespaceSchemaLocation(
            fromNative("animals.xsd").c_str( )
        );

        // Register an error handler to receive notifications
        // of schema violations
        CircusErrorHandler       handler;
        parser.setErrorHandler(&amp;handler);

        // Parse and validate.
        parser.parse("animals.xml");
    } catch (const SAXException&amp; e) {
        cout &lt;&lt; "xml error: " &lt;&lt; toNative(e.getMessage( )) &lt;&lt; "\n";
        return EXIT_FAILURE;
    } catch (const XMLException&amp; e) {
        cout &lt;&lt; "xml error: " &lt;&lt; toNative(e.getMessage( )) &lt;&lt; "\n";
        return EXIT_FAILURE;
    } catch (const exception&amp; e) {
        cout &lt;&lt; e.what( ) &lt;&lt; "\n";
        return EXIT_FAILURE;
    }
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ETPBK">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">Like DTDs, discussed in the previous recipe, schemas constrain XML
documents. The purpose of a schema is to identify the subset of
well-formed XML documents that are interesting in a certain
application domain. Schemas differ from DTDs in three respects,
however. First, the DTD concept and the associated notion of
<i>validity</i> are defined in the XML specification
itself, while schemas are described in a separate specification, the
XML Schema recommendation. Second, while DTDs use the specialized
syntax illustrated in Example 14-11, schemas are
expressed as well-formed XML documents. Third, schemas are far more
expressive than DTDs. Because of these last two points, schemas are
widely regarded as superior to DTDs.</p>
<p class="docText">For example, the DTD in Example 14-11 was only able to
require that <tt>veterinarian</tt> elements have exactly
two attributes, <tt>name</tt> and <tt>phone</tt>,
with values consisting of characters. By contrast, the schema in
Example 14-16 requires that the value of the
<tt>phone</tt> attribute also match the regular expression
<tt>\(\d{3}\)\d{3}-\d{4}</tt>, i.e., that it have the form
<tt>(ddd)xxx-dddd</tt>, where <tt>d</tt>
represents an arbitrary digit. Similarly, while the DTD was only able
to require that the <tt>dateOfBirth</tt> element has
textual content, the schema requires that the text be of the form
<tt>yyyy-mm-dd</tt>, where <tt>yyyy</tt> ranges
from <tt>0001</tt> to <tt>9999</tt>,
<tt>mm</tt> ranges from <tt>01</tt> to
<tt>12</tt>, and <tt>dd</tt> ranges from
<tt>01</tt> to <tt>31</tt>. The ability to impose
these additional requirements is a great benefit, since it shifts
work from the programmer to the parser.


</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EGSBK">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 14.5</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
