<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 14.9. Using XML to Save and Restore a Collection of Objects</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 14.9. Using XML to Save and Restore a Collection of Objects</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EWQBK">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You want to be able to



 save a collection of C++ objects to an
XML document and read it back into memory later.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E3RBK">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use the 
Boost Serialization library.
This library allows you to save and restore objects using classes
called
<i>archives</i>

.
To make use of this library, you must first make each of your classes
<i>serializable</i>, which just means that instances of
the class can be written to an archive, or
<i>serialized</i>, and read back into memory, or
<i>deserialized</i>. Then, at runtime, you can save
your objects to an XML archive using the <tt>&lt;&lt;</tt>
operator and restore them using the <tt>&gt;&gt;</tt>
operator.</p>
<p class="docText">To make a class serializable, add a member function template
<tt>serialize</tt> with the following signature:</p>
<pre>template&lt;typename Archive&gt;
void serialize(Archive&amp; ar, const unsigned int version);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The implementation of <tt>serialize</tt> should write each
data member of the class to the specified archive as a name-value
pair, using the <tt>&amp;</tt> operator. For example, if
you want to serialize and deserialize instances of the class
<tt>Contact</tt> from Example 14-2, add a
member function <tt>serialize</tt>, as shown in Example 14-25.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EDUBK">Example 14-25. Adding support for serialization to the class Contact from Example 14-2</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;boost/serialization/nvp.hpp&gt; // "name-value pair"

class Contact {
...
private:
    friend class boost::serialization::access;
    template&lt;typename Archive&gt;
    void serialize(Archive&amp; ar, const unsigned int version)
    {   
        // Write (or read) each data-member as a name-value pair
        using boost::serialization::make_nvp;
        ar &amp; make_nvp("name", name_);    
        ar &amp; make_nvp("phone", phone_); 
    }
    ...
};</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Similarly, you can make the class <tt>Animal</tt> from
Example 14-2 serializable, as shown in Example 14-26.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E6UBK">Example 14-26. Adding support for serialization to the class Animal from Example 14-2</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>...
// Include serialization support for boost::gregorian::date
#include &lt;boost/date_time/gregorian/greg_serialize.hpp&gt;
...
class Contact {
... 
private:
    friend class boost::serialization::access;
    template&lt;typename Archive&gt;
    void serialize(Archive&amp; ar, const unsigned int version)
    {
        // Write (or read) each data-member as a name-value pair 
        using boost::serialization::make_nvp;
        ar &amp; make_nvp("name", name_);      
        ar &amp; make_nvp("species", species_);  
        ar &amp; make_nvp("dateOfBirth", dob_);  
        ar &amp; make_nvp("veterinarian", vet_);
        ar &amp; make_nvp("trainer", trainer_);
    }
...
};</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">You can now serialize an <tt>Animal</tt> by creating an XML
archive of type <tt>boost::archive::xml_oarchive</tt> and
writing the animal to the archive using the
<tt>&lt;&lt;</tt> operator. The
<tt>xml_oarchive</tt> constructor takes a
<tt>std::ostream</tt> as an argument; often this will be an
output stream for writing to a file, but in general it can be a
stream for writing to any type of resource. After an
<tt>Animal</tt> is serialized, it can be read back into
memory by constructing an XML archive of type
<tt>boost::archive::xml_iarchive</tt>, connecting it to the
same resource as the original archive, and invoking the
<tt>&gt;&gt;</tt> operator.</p>
<p class="docText">Example 14-27 shows how to use Boost.Serialization to
save a <tt>std::vector</tt> of <tt>Animal</tt>s
to the file <i>animals.xml</i> and then load it back
into memory. The contents of the file
<i>animals.xml</i> after running the program in Example 14-27 are shown in Example 14-28.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EWWBK">Example 14-27. Serializing a std::vector of Animals</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;fstream&gt;
#include &lt;boost/archive/xml_oarchive.hpp&gt; // Archive for writing XML
#include &lt;boost/archive/xml_iarchive.hpp&gt; // Archive for reading XML
#include &lt;boost/serialization/vector.hpp&gt; // machinery for serializing
#include "animal.hpp"                     // std::vector

int main( )
{
    using namespace std;
    using namespace boost::archive;       // namespace for archives
    using namespace boost::serialization; // namespace for make_nvp

    try {
        // Populate list of animals
        vector&lt;Animal&gt; animalList;
        animalList.push_back( 
            Animal( "Herby", "elephant", "1992-04-23", 
                    Contact("Dr. Hal Brown", "(801)595-9627"),
                    Contact("Bob Fisk", "(801)881-2260") ));
        animalList.push_back( 
            Animal( "Sheldon", "parrot", "1998-09-30", 
                    Contact("Dr. Kevin Wilson", "(801)466-6498"),
                    Contact("Eli Wendel", "(801)929-2506") ));
        animalList.push_back( 
            Animal( "Dippy", "penguin", "2001-06-08", 
                    Contact("Dr. Barbara Swayne", "(801)459-7746"),
                    Contact("Ben Waxman", "(801)882-3549") ));

        // Construct XML output archive and serialize list
        ofstream       fout("animals.xml");
        xml_oarchive   oa(fout);
        oa &lt;&lt; make_nvp("animalList", animalList);
        fout.close( );

        // Construct XML intput archive and deserialize list
        ifstream        fin("animals.xml");
        xml_iarchive    ia(fin);
        vector&lt;Animal&gt;  animalListCopy;
        ia &gt;&gt; make_nvp("animalList", animalListCopy);
        fin.close( );

        if (animalListCopy != animalList) {
            cout &lt;&lt; "XML serialization failed\n";
            return EXIT_FAILURE;
        }

    } catch (const exception&amp; e) {
        cout &lt;&lt; e.what( ) &lt;&lt; "\n";
        return EXIT_FAILURE;
    }
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E6WBK">Example 14-28. The file animals.xml after running the program from Example 14-27</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">&lt;?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="yes" ?&gt;
&lt;!DOCTYPE boost_serialization&gt;
&lt;boost_serialization signature="serialization::archive" version="3"&gt;
&lt;animalList class_id="0" tracking_level="0" version="0"&gt;
    &lt;count&gt;3&lt;/count&gt;
    &lt;item class_id="1" tracking_level="0" version="0"&gt;
        &lt;name&gt;Herby&lt;/name&gt;
        &lt;species&gt;elephant&lt;/species&gt;
        &lt;dateOfBirth class_id="2" tracking_level="0" version="0"&gt;
            &lt;date&gt;19920423&lt;/date&gt;
        &lt;/dateOfBirth&gt;
        &lt;veterinarian class_id="3" tracking_level="0" version="0"&gt;
            &lt;name&gt;Dr. Hal Brown&lt;/name&gt;
            &lt;phone&gt;(801)595-9627&lt;/phone&gt;
        &lt;/veterinarian&gt;
        &lt;trainer&gt;
            &lt;name&gt;Bob Fisk&lt;/name&gt;
            &lt;phone&gt;(801)881-2260&lt;/phone&gt;
        &lt;/trainer&gt;
    &lt;/item&gt;
    &lt;item&gt;
        &lt;name&gt;Sheldon&lt;/name&gt;
        &lt;species&gt;parrot&lt;/species&gt;
        &lt;dateOfBirth&gt;
            &lt;date&gt;19980930&lt;/date&gt;
        &lt;/dateOfBirth&gt;
        &lt;veterinarian&gt;
            &lt;name&gt;Dr. Kevin Wilson&lt;/name&gt;
            &lt;phone&gt;(801)466-6498&lt;/phone&gt;
        &lt;/veterinarian&gt;
        &lt;trainer&gt;
            &lt;name&gt;Eli Wendel&lt;/name&gt;
            &lt;phone&gt;(801)929-2506&lt;/phone&gt;
        &lt;/trainer&gt;
    &lt;/item&gt;
    &lt;item&gt;
        &lt;name&gt;Dippy&lt;/name&gt;
        &lt;species&gt;penguin&lt;/species&gt;
        &lt;dateOfBirth&gt;
            &lt;date&gt;20010608&lt;/date&gt;
        &lt;/dateOfBirth&gt;
        &lt;veterinarian&gt;
            &lt;name&gt;Dr. Barbara Swayne&lt;/name&gt;
            &lt;phone&gt;(801)459-7746&lt;/phone&gt;
        &lt;/veterinarian&gt;
        &lt;trainer&gt;
            &lt;name&gt;Ben Waxman&lt;/name&gt;
            &lt;phone&gt;(801)882-3549&lt;/phone&gt;
        &lt;/trainer&gt;
    &lt;/item&gt;
&lt;/animalList&gt;

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EMXBK">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">The Boost Serialization library provides the most comprehensive and
flexible way to save and restore C++ objects. It's
an extremely sophisticated framework; for example,
it's able to serialize complex data structures
containing cyclic references and pointers to polymorphic objects.
Furthermore, the library is useful for much more than XML
serialization: in addition to XML archives, it provides several types
of text and binary archives. The XML and text archives are portable,
meaning that data can be serialized on one system and deserialized on
another; the binaries archives are nonportable but compact.</p>
<p class="docText">The XML documents produced by Boost.Serialization do not conform to
any pre-existing specification, and the format may change in future
versions of Boost. As a result, you cannot use these documents in
conjunction with other C++ serialization frameworks. Nonetheless, XML
serialization is useful because the serialized output is easy for
humans to read and can be processed by XML processing tools.</p>
<p class="docText">Examples Example 14-25 and Example 14-26 demonstrate <i>intrusive
serialization</i>
:
the classes <tt>Animal</tt> and <tt>Contact</tt>
were modified to make them serializable. Boost.Serialization also
supports <i>nonintrusive
serialization</i>
,
allowing classes to be made serializable without modifying their
definitions, provided that all of an object's state
is accessible through its public interface. You've
already seen an example of nonintrusive serialization in Example 14-27: the template <tt>std::vector</tt>
is serializable, despite the fact that its definition is unmodifiable
by end-users. In fact, all standard library containers are
serializable; to make serialization available for a container defined
in the standard header <tt><i>xxx</i></tt>, simply include
the header
<i>boost/serialization/</i><tt><i>xxx</i></tt><i>.hpp</i>.
To learn more about nonintrusive serialization, consult the
Boost.Serialization documentation.</p>
<p class="docText">Examples Example 14-25 and Example 14-26 also illustrate the dual role of the
<tt>&amp;</tt> operator: it acts like the
<tt>&lt;&lt;</tt> operator when an object is being
serialized and like the <tt>&gt;&gt;</tt> operator when an
object is being deserialized. This is convenient, because it allows
serialization and deserialization to be implemented as a single
function. In some cases, however, it's not
appropriate to use a single function for serialization and
deserialization; for those cases, Boost.Serialization provides a
mechanism for splitting the <tt>serialize( )</tt> method
into separate <tt>load( )</tt> and <tt>save(
)</tt> methods. If you need to take advantage of this feature,
consult the Boost.Serialization documentation.</p>
<p class="docText">In Examples Example 14-25, Example 14-26, and Example 14-27, I use the
function <tt>boost::serialization::make_nvp</tt> to
construct name-value pairs. Boost.Serialization also provides a macro
<tt>BOOST_SERIALIZATION_NVP</tt> that allows you to
serialize a variable by specifying only its name. The first component
of the pair will be constructed automatically by the preprocessor
using the "stringizing" operator
<tt>#</tt> to convert the macro parameters to string
constants:</p>
<pre>// Same as ar &amp; make_nvp("name_", name_);      
ar &amp; BOOST_SERIALIZATION_NVP(name_);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In the examples, I use <tt>make_nvp</tt> instead of
<tt>BOOST_SERIALIZATION_NVP</tt> to give me more control
over the tag names, making the contents of XML archives easier to
read.</p>
<p class="docText">The
Boost.Serialization
documentation recommends that the <tt>serialize( )</tt>
method be declared <tt>private</tt> to reduce user errors
when adding serialization support to classes derived from other
serializable classes. To allow Boost.Serialization to call your
class's <tt>serialize( )</tt> method, you
must declare the class
<tt>boost::serialization::access</tt> to be a friend.</p>
<p class="docText">Finally, the second parameter of the <tt>serialize(
)</tt>

method in Examples Example 14-25 and Example 14-26 is part of
Boost.Serialization's support for

<i>class versioning</i>.
The first time an object of a certain class is saved to an archive,
the class's version is also saved; when an instance
of the class is deserialized, Boost.Serialization passes the stored
version as the second argument to <tt>serialize</tt>. This
information can be used to customize deserialization; for example,
<tt>serialize</tt> might load the value of a member
variable only if the class version recorded in the archive is as
least as high as the first version of the class to declare that
variable. By default, a class's version is
<tt>0</tt>. To specify a class's version,
invoke the macro <tt>BOOST_CLASS_VERSION--</tt>defined in
the header
<i>boost/serialization/version.hpp—</i>passing
the name of the class and class's version as




arguments.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
