<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 15.1. Using Function Pointers for Callbacks</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 15.1. Using Function Pointers for Callbacks</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ECUBK">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You plan to call some

 function <tt>func1</tt>,
and at runtime you need it to invoke another function
<tt>func2</tt>. For one reason or another, however, you
cannot simply hardcode the name of <tt>func2</tt> within
<tt>func1</tt>. <tt>func2</tt> may not be known
definitively at compile time, or perhaps <tt>func1</tt>
belongs to a third-party API that you can't change
and recompile. In either case, you need a
<span class="docEmphasis">callback</span> function.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EKVBK">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">In the case of the functions above, declare <tt>func1</tt>
to take a pointer to a function, and pass it the address of
<tt>func2</tt> at runtime. Use a <tt>typedef</tt>
to make the messy syntax easier to read and debug. Example 15-1 shows how to implement a callback function
with a function pointer.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E4VBK">Example 15-1. A callback function</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>#include &lt;iostream&gt;

// An example of a callback function
bool updateProgress(int pct) {
  
   std::cout &lt;&lt; pct &lt;&lt; "% complete...\n";
   return(true);
}

// A typedef to make for easier reading
typedef bool (*FuncPtrBoolInt)(int);

// A function that runs for a while
void longOperation(FuncPtrBoolInt f) {

   for (long l = 0; l &lt; 100000000; l++)
      if (l % 10000000 == 0)
         f(l / 1000000);
}

int main( ) {

   longOperation(updateProgress); // ok
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EGWBK">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">In a situation such as that shown in Example 15-1, a
function pointer is a good idea if <tt>updateProgress</tt>
and <tt>longOperation</tt> shouldn't know
anything about each other. For example, a function that updates the
progress by displaying it to the user—either in a user
interface (UI) dialog box, in a console window, or somewhere
else—does not care about the context in which it is invoked.
Similarly, the <tt>longOperation</tt> function may be part
of some data loading API that doesn't care whether
it's invoked from a graphical UI, a console window,
or by a background process.</p>
<p class="docText">The first thing you will want to do is determine what the signature
of the function is you plan to call and create a
<tt>typedef</tt> for it. <tt>typedef</tt> is your
friend when it comes to function pointers, because their syntax is
ugly. Consider how you would declare a function pointer variable
<tt>f</tt> that contains the address of a function that
takes a single integer argument and returns a
<tt>boolean</tt>. It would look like this:</p>
<pre>bool (*f)(int);  // f is the variable name</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">One could argue, convincingly, that this is no big deal and that
I'm just a whiner. But what if you want a
<tt>vector</tt> of such function pointers?</p>
<pre>vector&lt;bool (*)(int)&gt; vf;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Or an array of them?</p>
<pre>bool (*af[10])(int);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Function pointers do not look like ordinary C++ variable declarations
whose format is often a (qualified) type name followed by a variable
name. This is why they can make for messy reading.</p>
<p class="docText">Thus, in Example 15-1, I used a
<tt>typedef</tt> like this:</p>
<pre>typedef bool (*FuncPtrBoolInt)(int);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Once that was out of the way, I was free to declare function pointers
that have the signature of returning <tt>bool</tt> and
accepting a single integer argument as I would any other sort of
parameter, like so:</p>
<pre>void longOperation(<b>FuncPtrBoolInt f</b>) {
   // ...</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Now, all <tt>longOperation</tt> needs to do is call
<tt>f</tt> like it would any function:</p>
<pre>f (l/1000000);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In this way, <tt>f</tt> can be any function that accepts an
integer argument and returns <tt>bool</tt>. Consider a
caller of <tt>longOperation</tt> that
doesn't care about the progress. It can pass in a
function pointer of a no-op function:</p>
<pre>bool whoCares(int i) {return(true);}
//...
longOperation(whoCares);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">More importantly, which function to pass to 

<tt>longOperation</tt> can be
determined dynamically at runtime.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
