<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 15.2. Using Pointers to Class Members</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 15.2. Using Pointers to Class Members</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EHVBK">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You need to refer to a data

 member or a member function
with its address.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ECWBK">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use the class name and the 
scope operator (<tt>:</tt>:)
with an asterisk to correctly qualify the name. Example 15-2 shows how.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E1WBK">Example 15-2. Obtaining a pointer to a member</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;

class MyClass {

public:
   MyClass( ) : ival_(0), sval_("foo") {}
  ~MyClass( ) {}

   void incr( ) {++ival_;}
   void decr( ) {ival_--;}

private:
   std::string sval_;
   int ival_;
};

int main( ) {

   MyClass obj;

   int         MyClass::* mpi = &amp;MyClass::ival_;  // Data member
   std::string MyClass::* mps = &amp;MyClass::sval_;  // pointers

   void (MyClass::*mpf)( ); // A pointer to a member function that
                           // takes no params and returns void
   void (*pf)( );           // A normal function pointer

   int* pi = &amp;obj.ival_;   // int pointer referring to int member--no
                           // problem.

   mpf = &amp;MyClass::incr;   // A pointer to a member function. You can't
                           // write this value to a stream. Look at it
                           // in your debugger to see what its
                           // representation looks like.

   pf = &amp;MyClass::incr;    // Error: &amp;MyClass::incr is not an instance
                           // of a function

   std::cout &lt;&lt; "mpi = " &lt;&lt; mpi &lt;&lt; '\n';
   std::cout &lt;&lt; "mps = " &lt;&lt; mps &lt;&lt; '\n';
   std::cout &lt;&lt; "pi =  " &lt;&lt; pi &lt;&lt; '\n';
   std::cout &lt;&lt; "*pi = " &lt;&lt; *pi &lt;&lt; '\n';

   obj.*mpi = 5;
   obj.*mps = "bar";

   (obj.*mpf)( ); // now obj.ival_ is 6

   std::cout &lt;&lt; "obj.ival_ = " &lt;&lt; obj.ival_ &lt;&lt; '\n';
   std::cout &lt;&lt; "obj.sval_ = " &lt;&lt; obj.sval_ &lt;&lt; '\n';
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EDXBK">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">Pointers to members look and act differently than ordinary pointers.
First of all, they have funny syntax (not funny ha-ha, funny
strange). Consider the following line, from Example 15-2:</p>
<pre>int MyClass::* mpi = &amp;MyClass::ival_;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This declares and assigns a pointer to an integer that happens to be
a member of the class <tt>MyClass</tt>. Two things make
this different than an ordinary <tt>int*</tt>. First, you
have to include the class name and the scope operator in between the
data type and the asterisk. Second, when you assign this pointer, you
aren't actually assigning it the address of
something in memory. The value <tt>&amp;MyClass::ival_</tt>
is not a concrete value in memory—it can't be;
it refers to the <span class="docEmphasis">class</span> name, not an
<span class="docEmphasis">object</span> name—but what is it? Think of it as
an offset of the data member from the object's start
address.</p>
<p class="docText">The variable <tt>mpi</tt> has to be used with an instance
of the class to which it applies. A little further down in Example 15-2, this line uses <tt>mpi</tt> to
assign an integer to the value pointed to by <tt>mpi</tt>:</p>
<pre>obj.*mpi = 5;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText"><tt>obj</tt> is an instance of the class
<tt>MyClass</tt>. By referring to the member using the dot
notation (or <tt>-&gt;</tt> if you have a pointer to
<tt>obj</tt>) and dereferencing <tt>mpi</tt>, you
get a reference to <tt>obj.ival_</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Pointers to member functions are essentially the same. Example 15-2 declares a pointer to a member function of
<tt>MyClass</tt> that returns void and takes no arguments:</p>
<pre>void (MyClass::*mpf)( );</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Assign it to a value with the 
address-of
operator:</p>
<pre>mpf = &amp;MyClass::incr;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">To invoke it, place parenthesis around the main expression to ensure
the compiler knows what you're doing, like this:</p>
<pre>(obj.*mpf)( );</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">There is one difference in data member pointers and function pointers
though. If you want to point an ordinary, nonmember pointer at a data
member, just do it as you would expect:</p>
<pre>int* pi = &amp;obj.ival_;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Of course, you use an object name and not a class name, because you
are getting the address of the concrete data member of a specific
object somewhere in memory. (Typically, though, you
don't want to give out addresses to your
class's data members, lest they be inadvertently
changed by reckless client code.)</p>
<p class="docText">By contrast, you can't do the same thing with a
member function because it makes no sense. Consider a function
pointer that assumes the same function signature as
<tt>MyClass::incr</tt> (i.e., returns void and takes no
arguments):</p>
<pre>void (*pf)( );</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Now, try to assign the address of a member function to it:</p>
<pre>pf = &amp;MyClass::incr; // Nope
pf = &amp;obj.incr;      // No dice</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Neither of these will compile, and for good reason. A member function
requires an object context to make any sense, since it most likely
refers to member variables. Invoking a member function without an
object would require that the member function not use any of the
object's members,

 which is presumably why
it's a member function and not a standalone
function.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E31BK">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe 15.1</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
