<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 15.3. Ensuring That a Function Doesn't Modify an Argument</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 15.3. Ensuring That a Function Doesn't Modify an Argument</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EYWBK">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You are writing a

 function, and you
need to guarantee that its arguments will not be modified when it is
invoked.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ETXBK">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Declare your arguments with the keyword <tt>const</tt> to
prevent your function from changing the arguments. See Example 15-3 for a short sample.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EFYBK">Example 15-3. Guaranteeing unmodified arguments</h5><p></p><div class="box">

<pre>#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;

void concat(const std::string&amp; s1, // These are declared const, so they
            const std::string&amp; s2, // cannot be changed
            std::string&amp; out) {
   out = s1 + s2;
}

int main( ) {

   std::string s1 = "Cabo ";
   std::string s2 = "Wabo";
   std::string s3;

   concat(s1, s2, s3);

   std::cout &lt;&lt; "s1 = " &lt;&lt; s1 &lt;&lt; '\n';
   std::cout &lt;&lt; "s2 = " &lt;&lt; s2 &lt;&lt; '\n';
   std::cout &lt;&lt; "s3 = " &lt;&lt; s3 &lt;&lt; '\n';
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EOYBK">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">Example 15-3 demonstrates a straightforward use of
<tt>const</tt>. There are a couple of good reasons for
declaring your function parameters <tt>const</tt> when you
don't plan on changing them. First, you communicate
your intent to human readers of your code. By declaring a parameter
as <tt>const</tt>, what you are saying, essentially, is
that the <tt>const</tt> parameters are for
<span class="docEmphasis">input</span>. This lets consumers of your function,
code with the assumption that the values will not change. Second, it
tells the compiler to disallow any modifying operations, in the event
you do so by accident. Consider an unsafe version of
<tt>concat</tt> from Example 15-3:</p>
<pre>void concatUnsafe(std::string&amp; s1,
                  std::string&amp; s2,
                  std::string&amp; out) {
   out = s1 += s2; // Whoops, wrote to s1
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Despite my fastidious coding habits, I have made a silly mistake and
typed <tt><b>+=</b></tt> when I meant to type
<tt><b>+</b></tt>. As a result, when
<tt>concatUnsafe</tt> is called, it will modify the
arguments <tt>out</tt>
<span class="docEmphasis">and</span>
<tt>s1</tt>, which may come as surprise to the
user—who would expect a concatenation function to modify one of
the source strings?</p>
<p class="docText"><tt>const</tt> to the rescue. Create a new function
<tt>concatSafe</tt>, declare the variables
<tt>const</tt> as in Example 15-3, and it
won't compile:</p>
<pre>void concatSafe(<b>const</b> std::string&amp; s1,
                <b>const</b> std::string&amp; s2,
                std::string&amp; out) {
   out = s1 += s2; // Now you will get a compile error
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText"><tt>concatSafe</tt> guarantees that the values in
<tt>s1</tt> and <tt>s2</tt> will remain
unchanged. It also does something else: it allows the user to pass
<tt>const</tt> arguments. For example, code that needs to
concatenate strings might look like this:</p>
<pre>void myFunc(const std::string&amp; s) { // Notice that s is const

   std::string dest;
   std::string tmp = "foo";

   concatUnsafe(s, tmp, dest);  // Error: s is const

   // Do something with dest...
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In this case, <tt>myFunc</tt> won't
compile because <tt>concatUnsafe</tt> does not maintain the
<tt>const</tt>-ness guarantee of <tt>myFunc</tt>.
<tt>myFunc</tt> has made a guarantee to the world that it
won't modify the contents of <tt>s</tt>,
which means that anything done to <tt>s</tt> within the
body of <tt>myFunc</tt> must uphold this promise. Of
course, you can get around this by using
<tt>const_cast</tt> to cast away the const-ness, but that
is just playing fast and loose with your variables, so you should
avoid it. <tt>concatSafe</tt> compiles and runs fine in
this situation.</p>
<p class="docText">Pointers add a wrinkle to this otherwise rosy portrait of
<tt>const</tt>. When you declare a pointer variable as a
parameter, there are two parts to it: the address itself and the
thing that address refers to. C++ lets you use
<tt>const</tt> to constrain what you can do to either one
of these values. Consider yet another concatenation function that
uses pointers:</p>
<pre>void concatUnsafePtr(std::string* ps1,
                     std::string* ps2,
                     std::string* pout) {
   *pout = *ps1 + *ps2;
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This has the same problems as <tt>concatUnsafe</tt>,
described earlier. Add <tt>const</tt> to guarantee that the
target strings aren't updated:</p>
<pre>void concatSaferPtr(<b>const</b> std::string* ps1,
                    <b>const</b> std::string* ps2,
                    std::string* pout) {
   *pout = *ps1 + *ps2;
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Great, now you can't change <tt>*ps1</tt>
or <tt>*ps2</tt>. But you can still change
<tt>ps1</tt> or <tt>ps2</tt>, or in other words,
you can point them to some other string by changing the value of the
<span class="docEmphasis">pointer</span>, not the value it points to.
There's nothing to stop you, for instance, from
doing this:</p>
<pre>void concatSaferPtr(<b>const</b> std::string* ps1,
                    <b>const</b> std::string* ps2,
                    std::string* pout) {
   ps1 = pout;  // Uh-oh
   *pout = *ps1 + *ps2;
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Prevent this sort of mistake by using <tt>const</tt> yet
again:</p>
<pre>void concatSafestPtr(const std::string* <b>const</b> ps1,
                     const std::string* <b>const</b> ps2,
                     std::string* pout) {
   *pout = *ps1 + *ps2;
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">By using const on either side of the asterisk, you have made your
function as safe as it can be. This makes your intentions clear to
consumers of your function, and it keeps you honest just in case you
make a typo.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EK4BK">See Also</h4>
<p class="docText">Recipe


Recipe 15.4</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
