<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 15.4. Ensuring That a Member Function Doesn't Modify Its Object</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 15.4. Ensuring That a Member Function Doesn't Modify Its Object</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E4XBK">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You need to invoke member


 functions on a
<tt>const</tt> object, but your compiler is complaining
that it can't convert the type of object you are
operating from <tt>const</tt>
<tt><i>type</i></tt> to <tt><i>type</i></tt>.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EIZBK">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Place the <tt>const</tt> keyword to the right of the member
function declaration in both the class declaration and definition.
Example 15-4 shows how to do this.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E2ZBK">Example 15-4. Declaring a member function const</h5><p></p><div class="box">

<pre>#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;string&gt;

class RecordSet {
public:
   bool getFieldVal(int i, std::string&amp; s) <b>const</b>;
   // ...
};

bool RecordSet::getFieldVal(int i, std::string&amp; s) <b>const</b> {
   // In here, you can't modify any nonmutable data
   // members (see discussion)
}

void displayRecords(const RecordSet&amp; rs) {
   // Here, you can only invoke const member functions
   // on rs
}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EJ1BK">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">Adding a trailing <tt>const</tt> to a member declaration
and its definition forces the compiler to look more carefully at what
that member's body is doing to the object.
<tt>const</tt> member functions are not allowed to invoke
any non<tt>const</tt> operation on data members. If one
does, compilation fails. For example, if, in
<tt>RecordSet::getFieldVal</tt>, I updated a counter
member, it wouldn't compile (assume that
<tt>getFieldCount_</tt> is a member variable of
<tt>RecordSet</tt>):</p>
<pre>bool RecordSet::getFieldVal(int i, std::string&amp; s) const {
   ++getFieldCount_;  // Error: const member function can't modify
                      // a member variable
   // ...
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">It can also help catch more subtle errors, similar to how
<tt>const</tt> works in its variable-qualifier role (see
Recipe 15.3). Consider this silly typo:</p>
<pre>bool RecordSet::getFieldVal(int i, std::string&amp; s) const {
  
   fieldArray_[i] = s; // Oops, I meant the other way around
   // ...
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Once again, the compiler will abort and give you an error because you
are trying to change a member variable, and that's
not allowed in <tt>const</tt> member functions. Well, with
one exception.</p>
<p class="docText">In a <tt>RecordSet</tt> class, like the (bare-bones) one
presented in Example 15-4, you would probably want
member functions for moving forward and backward in the record set,
assuming there is the notion of a
"current" record. A simple way to
do this is to keep an integer member variable that indicates the
index of the current record; your member functions for moving the
current record forward or backward increment or decrement this value:</p>
<pre>void RecordSet::gotoNextRecord( ) const {
   if (curIndex_ &gt;= 0 &amp;&amp; curIndex_ &lt; numRecords_-1)
      ++curIndex_;
}

void RecordSet::gotoPrevRecord( ) const {
   if (curIndex_ &gt; 0)
      --curIndex_;
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Clearly this won't work if these member functions
are <tt>const</tt>. Both update a data member. But without
this behavior, consumers of the <tt>RecordSet</tt> class
won't be able to scroll through a
<tt>const</tt>
<tt>RecordSet</tt> object. This is
a reasonable exception to the <tt>const</tt> member
function rules, so C++ has a mechanism to support it: the
<tt>mutable</tt> keyword.</p>
<p class="docText">To allow <tt>curIndex_</tt> to be updated by a
<tt>const</tt> member function, declare it as
<tt>mutable</tt> in the class declaration like this:</p>
<pre>mutable int curIndex_;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This gives you a free pass to modify <tt>curIndex_</tt>
from wherever you like. This should be used judiciously, however,
since it has the same effect as leaving your member function
non<tt>const</tt> to begin with.</p>
<p class="docText">Using <tt>const</tt> as in Example 15-4 is
an effective technique for guaranteeing that a member function does
not change its object's state. In general, this is
good practice because it communicates the behavior of the member
function to users of the class, and because it keeps you honest by
forcing the compiler to validate your assertion that a member
function won't do something


 it
shouldn't.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
