<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Recipe 15.5. Writing an Operator That Isn't a Member Function</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">Recipe 15.5. Writing an Operator That Isn't a Member Function</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ECZBK">Problem</h4>
<p class="docText">You have to write


 a binary operator, and
you can't or don't want to make it
a class member function.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ED1BK">Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">Use the <tt>operator</tt> keyword, a temporary variable,
and a copy constructor to do most of the work, and return the
temporary object. Example 15-5 presents a simple
string concatenation operator for a

 custom
<tt>String</tt> class.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EB2BK">Example 15-5. Concatenation with a nonmember operator</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &lt;cstring&gt;

class String {  // Assume the String class declaration
                // has at least everything shown here
public:
   String( );
   String(const char* p);
   String(const String&amp; orig);
  ~String( ) {delete buf_;}

   String&amp; append(const String&amp; s);
   size_t length( ) const;
   const char* data( ) const;
   String&amp; operator=(const String&amp; orig);

   // ...
};

String operator+(const String&amp; lhs, const String&amp; rhs) {

   String tmp(lhs); // Copy construct a temp object
   tmp.append(rhs); // Use a member function to do the real work

   return(tmp);     // Return the temporary
}

int main( ) {

   String s1("banana ");
   String s2("rancher");
   String s3, s4, s5, s6;

   s3 = s1 + s2;           // Works fine, no surprises
   s4 = s1 + "rama";       // Constructs "rama" automatically using
                           // the constructor String(const char*)
   s5 = "ham " + s2;       // Hey cool, it even does it backward
   s6 = s1 + "rama " + s2;

   std::cout &lt;&lt; "s3 = " &lt;&lt; s3.data( ) &lt;&lt; '\n';
   std::cout &lt;&lt; "s4 = " &lt;&lt; s4.data( ) &lt;&lt; '\n';
   std::cout &lt;&lt; "s5 = " &lt;&lt; s5.data( ) &lt;&lt; '\n';
   std::cout &lt;&lt; "s6 = " &lt;&lt; s6.data( ) &lt;&lt; '\n';
}

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EK2BK">Discussion</h4>
<p class="docText">A standalone operator is declared and defined similarly to a member
function operator. In Example 15-5, I could have
implemented <tt>operator+</tt> as a member function by
declaring it like this:</p>
<pre>String operator+(const String&amp; rhs);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In most cases, this will work the same way regardless of whether you
define <tt>operator+</tt> as a member or nonmember
function, but there are at least a couple of reasons why you would
want to implement it as a nonmember function. The first is
conceptual: does it make sense to have an operator that returns a
new, distinct object? <tt>operator+</tt> as a member
function is not an inspector of the object's state,
nor does it alter the object's state.
It's a general utility function that happens to
operate on <tt>String</tt>s, and, therefore, should not be
a member function.</p>
<p class="docText">The second reason is technical. You can't do the
following with a member operator (from the example):</p>
<pre>s5 = "ham " + s2;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">This won't work because a character string
doesn't have an <tt>operator+</tt> that
takes a <tt>String</tt> parameter. If, on the other hand,
you have defined your standalone <tt>operator+</tt> that
takes two <tt>String</tt> parameters, your compiler will
look to see if the <tt>String</tt> class has a constructor
that takes a <tt>const char*</tt> argument (or whatever
type you are using with a <tt>String</tt>) and construct a
temporary object at runtime. The above code, therefore, is equivalent
to this:</p>
<pre>s5 = String("ham ") + s2;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The compiler saves you the extra keystrokes by just looking it up and
invoking the constructor for you.</p>
<p class="docText">Overloading the left- and right-shift operators
(<tt>&lt;&lt;</tt> and <tt>&gt;&gt;</tt>) for
streams also requires that you use nonmember operators. For example,
to put your new object to a stream using left-shift, you would have
to declare <tt>operator&lt;&lt;</tt>, like this:</p>
<pre>ostream&amp; operator&lt;&lt;(ostream&amp; str, const MyClass&amp; obj);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Of course, you can subclass one of the standard library stream
classes, and add all the left-shift operators you want, but is that
really a good idea? If you do that, only code that uses your new
stream class will be able to write your custom
class's objects to it. If you use a standalone
operator, any code in the same namespace can just write your object
to an <tt>ostream</tt> (or read it from an
<tt>istream</tt>) 


with no problem.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
