<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Compiler Theory</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="sbo-corecss">
<div><h2 style="clear: both">Compiler Theory</h2>






<p>It may be self-evident, or it may be surprising, depending on your level of interaction with various languages, but despite the fact that JavaScript falls under the general category of “dynamic” or “interpreted” languages, it is in fact a compiled language. It is <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>not</em></span> compiled well in advance, as are many traditionally compiled languages, nor are the results of compilation portable among various distributed systems.</p>
<p>But, nevertheless, the JavaScript engine performs many of the same steps, albeit in more sophisticated ways than we may commonly be aware, of any traditional language compiler.</p>
<p>In traditional compiled-language process, a chunk of source code, your program, will undergo typically three steps <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>before</em></span> it is executed, roughly called “compilation”:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Tokenizing/Lexing</em></span>
</span></dt><dd>
<p class="epub__simpara">
Breaking up a string of characters into meaningful (to the language) chunks, called tokens. For instance, consider the program <code class="epub__literal">var a = 2;</code>. This program would likely be broken up into the following tokens: <code class="epub__literal">var</code>, <code class="epub__literal">a</code>, <code class="epub__literal">=</code>, <code class="epub__literal">2</code>, and ;. Whitespace may or may not be persisted as a token, depending on whether its meaningful or not.
</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3>Note</h3>
<p>The difference between tokenizing and lexing is subtle and academic, but it centers on whether or not these tokens are identified in a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>stateless</em></span> or <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>stateful</em></span> way. Put simply, if the tokenizer were to invoke stateful parsing rules to figure out whether <code class="epub__literal">a</code> should be considered a distinct token or just part of another token, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>that</em></span> would be <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>lexing</em></span>.</p>
</div>
</dd><dt><span class="epub__term">
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Parsing</em></span>
</span></dt><dd>
<p class="epub__simpara">
taking a stream (array) of tokens and turning it into a tree of nested elements, which collectively represent the grammatical structure of the program. This tree is called an “AST” (<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>a</em></span>bstract <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>s</em></span>yntax <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>t</em></span>ree).
</p>
<p class="epub__simpara">The tree for <code class="epub__literal">var a = 2;</code> might start with a top-level node called <code class="epub__literal">VariableDeclaration</code>, with a child node called <code class="epub__literal">Identifier</code> (whose value is <code class="epub__literal">a</code>), and another child called <code class="epub__literal">AssignmentExpression</code>, which itself has a child called <code class="epub__literal">NumericLiteral</code> (whose value is <code class="epub__literal">2</code>).</p></dd><dt><span class="epub__term">
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Code-Generation</em></span>
</span></dt><dd>
<p class="epub__simpara">
The process of taking an AST and turning it into executable code. This part varies greatly depending on the language, the platform it’s targeting, and so on.
</p>
<p class="epub__simpara">So, rather than get mired in details, we’ll just handwave and say that there’s a way to take our previously described AST for <code class="epub__literal">var a = 2;</code> and turn it into a set of machine instructions to actually <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>create</em></span> a variable called <code class="epub__literal">a</code> (including reserving memory, etc.), and then store a value into <code class="epub__literal">a</code>.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3>Note</h3>

<p>The details of how the engine manages system resources are deeper than we will dig, so we’ll just take it for granted that the engine is able to create and store variables as needed.</p>
</div>
</dd></dl>
</div>
<p>The JavaScript engine is vastly more complex than <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>just</em></span> those three steps, as are most other language compilers. For instance, in the process of parsing and code-generation, there are certainly steps to optimize the performance of the execution, including collapsing redundant elements, etc.</p>
<p>So, I’m painting only with broad strokes here. But I think you’ll see shortly why these details we <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>do</em></span> cover, even at a high level, are relevant.</p>
<p>For one thing, JavaScript engines don’t get the luxury (like other language compilers) of having plenty of time to optimize, because JavaScript compilation doesn’t happen in a build step ahead of time, as with other languages.</p>
<p>For JavaScript, the compilation that occurs happens, in many cases, mere microseconds (or less!) before the code is executed. To ensure the fastest performance, JS engines use all kinds of tricks (like JITs, which lazy compile and even hot recompile, etc.) that are well beyond the “scope” of our discussion here.</p>
<p>Let’s just say, for simplicity sake, that any snippet of JavaScript has to be compiled before (usually <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>right</em></span> before!) it’s executed. So, the JS compiler will take the program <code class="epub__literal">var a = 2;</code> and compile it <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>first</em></span>, and then be ready to execute it, usually right away.</p>

<div class="epub__sect1" title="Understanding Scope"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>


</body>
</html>
