<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Understanding Scope</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="sbo-corecss">
<div><h2 style="clear: both">Understanding Scope</h2>






<p>The way we will approach learning about scope is to think of the process in terms of a conversation. But, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>who</em></span> is having the conversation?</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="The Cast"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3>The Cast</h3>

</div>

</div>


</div>
<p>Let’s meet the cast of characters that interact to process the program <code class="epub__literal">var a = 2;</code>, so we understand their conversations that we’ll listen in on shortly:</p><div class="epub__variablelist"><dl><dt><span class="epub__term">
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Engine</em></span>
</span></dt><dd>
Responsible for start-to-finish compilation and execution of our JavaScript program.
</dd><dt><span class="epub__term">
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Compiler</em></span>
</span></dt><dd>
One of Engine’s friends; handles all the dirty work of parsing and code-generation (see previous section).
</dd><dt><span class="epub__term">
<span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Scope</em></span>
</span></dt><dd>
Another friend of Engine; collects and maintains a look-up list of all the declared identifiers (variables), and enforces a strict set of rules as to how these are accessible to currently executing code.
</dd></dl>
</div>
<p>For you to <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>fully understand</em></span> how JavaScript works, you need to begin to <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>think</em></span> like Engine (and friends) think, ask the questions they ask, and answer those questions the same.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Back and Forth"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3>Back and Forth</h3>

</div>

</div>


</div>
<p>When you see the program <code class="epub__literal">var a = 2;</code>, you most likely think of that as one statement. But that’s not how our new friend Engine sees it. In fact, Engine sees two distinct statements, one that Compiler will handle during compilation, and one that Engine will handle during execution.</p>
<p>So, let’s break down how Engine and friends will approach the program <code class="epub__literal">var a = 2;</code>.</p>
<p>The first thing Compiler will do with this program is perform lexing to break it down into tokens, which it will then parse into a tree. But when Compiler gets to code generation, it will treat this program somewhat differently than perhaps assumed.</p>
<p>A reasonable assumption would be that Compiler will produce code that could be summed up by this pseudocode: “Allocate memory for a variable, label it <code class="epub__literal">a</code>, then stick the value <code class="epub__literal">2</code> into that variable.” Unfortunately, that’s not quite accurate.</p>
<p>Compiler will instead proceed as:</p><div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist" type="1">
<li class="epub__listitem">
Encountering <code class="epub__literal">var a</code>, Compiler asks Scope to see if a variable <code class="epub__literal">a</code> already exists for that particular scope collection. If so, Compiler ignores this declaration and moves on. Otherwise, Compiler asks Scope to declare a new variable called a for that scope collection.
</li><li class="epub__listitem">
Compiler then produces code for Engine to later execute, to handle the <code class="epub__literal">a = 2</code> assignment. The code Engine runs will first ask Scope if there is a variable called <code class="epub__literal">a</code> accessible in the current scope collection. If so, Engine uses that variable. If not, Engine looks <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>elsewhere</em></span> (see Nested Scope).
</li></ol>

</div>
<p>If Engine eventually finds a variable, it assigns the value <code class="epub__literal">2</code> to it. If not, Engine will raise its hand and yell out an error!</p>
<p>To summarize: two distinct actions are taken for a variable assignment: First, Compiler declares a variable (if not previously declared) in the current Scope, and second, when executing, Engine looks up the variable in Scope and assigns to it, if found.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Compiler Speak"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3>Compiler Speak</h3>

</div>

</div>


</div>
<p>We need a little bit more compiler terminology to proceed further with understanding.</p>
<p>When Engine executes the code that Compiler produced for step 2, it has to look up the variable <code class="epub__literal">a</code> to see if it has been declared, and this look-up is consulting Scope. But the type of look-up Engine performs affects the outcome of the look-up.</p>
<p>In our case, it is said that Engine would be performing an LHS look-up for the variable <code class="epub__literal">a</code>. The other type of look-up is called RHS.</p>
<p>I bet you can guess what the “L” and “R” mean. These terms stand for lefthand side and righthand side.</p>
<p>Side…of what? <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Of an assignment operation.</em></span></p>
<p>In other words, an LHS look-up is done when a variable appears on the lefthand side of an assignment operation, and an RHS look-up is done when a variable appears on the righthand side of an assignment operation.</p>
<p>Actually, let’s be a little more precise. An RHS look-up is indistinguishable, for our purposes, from simply a look-up of the value of some variable, whereas the LHS look-up is trying to find the variable container itself, so that it can assign. In this way, RHS doesn’t <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>really</em></span> mean “righthand side of an assignment” per se, it just, more accurately, means “not lefthand side”.</p>
<p>Being slightly glib for a moment, you could think RHS instead means “retrieve his/her source (value),” implying that RHS means “go get the value of…”</p>
<p>Let’s dig into that deeper.</p>
<p>When I say:</p>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code></pre>
<p>The reference to <code class="epub__literal">a</code> is an RHS reference, because nothing is being assigned to <code class="epub__literal">a</code> here. Instead, we’re looking up to retrieve the value of <code class="epub__literal">a</code>, so that the value can be passed to <code class="epub__literal">console.log(..)</code>.</p>
<p>By contrast:</p>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__mi">2</code><code class="epub__p">;</code></pre>
<p>The reference to <code class="epub__literal">a</code> here is an LHS reference, because we don’t actually care what the current value is, we simply want to find the variable as a target for the <code class="epub__literal">= 2</code> assignment operation.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3>Note</h3>

<p>LHS and RHS meaning “left/righthand side of an assignment” doesn’t necessarily literally mean “left/right side of the <code class="epub__literal">=</code> assignment operator.” There are several other ways that assignments happen, and so it’s better to conceptually think about it as: “Who’s the target of the assignment (LHS)?” and “Who’s the source of the assignment (RHS)?”</p>
</div>
<p>Consider this program, which has both LHS and RHS references:</p>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">a</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code> <code class="epub__c1">// 2</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__mi">2</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code></pre>
<p>The last line that invokes <code class="epub__literal">foo(..)</code> as a function call requires an RHS reference to <code class="epub__literal">foo</code>, meaning, “Go look up the value of <code class="epub__literal">foo</code>, and give it to me.” Moreover, <code class="epub__literal">(..)</code> means the value of <code class="epub__literal">foo</code> should be executed, so it’d better actually be a function!</p>
<p>There’s a subtle but important assignment here.</p>
<p>You may have missed the implied <code class="epub__literal">a = 2</code> in this code snippet. It happens when the value <code class="epub__literal">2</code> is passed as an argument to the <code class="epub__literal">foo(..)</code> function, in which case the <code class="epub__literal">2</code> value is <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>assigned</em></span> to the parameter <code class="epub__literal">a</code>. To (implicitly) assign to parameter <code class="epub__literal">a</code>, an LHS look-up is performed.</p>
<p>There’s also an RHS reference for the value of <code class="epub__literal">a</code>, and that resulting value is passed to <code class="epub__literal">console.log(..)</code>. <code class="epub__literal">console.log(..)</code> needs a reference to execute. It’s an RHS look-up for the <code class="epub__literal">console</code> object, then a property resolution occurs to see if it has a method called <code class="epub__literal">log</code>.</p>
<p>Finally, we can conceptualize that there’s an LHS/RHS exchange of passing the value <code class="epub__literal">2</code> (by way of variable <code class="epub__literal">a</code>’s RHS look-up) into <code class="epub__literal">log(..)</code>. Inside of the native implementation of <code class="epub__literal">log(..)</code>, we can assume it has parameters, the first of which (perhaps called <code class="epub__literal">arg1</code>) has an LHS reference look-up, before assigning <code class="epub__literal">2</code> to it.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3>Note</h3>

<p>You might be tempted to conceptualize the function declaration <code class="epub__literal">function foo(a) {…</code> as a normal variable declaration and assignment, such as <code class="epub__literal">var foo</code> and <code class="epub__literal">foo = function(a){…</code>. In so doing, it would be tempting to think of this function declaration as involving an LHS look-up.</p>
<p>However, the subtle but important difference is that Compiler handles both the declaration and the value definition during code-generation, such that when Engine is executing code, there’s no processing necessary to “assign” a function value to <code class="epub__literal">foo</code>. Thus, it’s not really appropriate to think of a function declaration as an LHS look-up assignment in the way we’re discussing them here.</p>
</div>

</div>

<div class="epub__sect2" title="Engine/Scope Conversation"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3>Engine/Scope Conversation</h3>

</div>

</div>


</div>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">a</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code> <code class="epub__c1">// 2</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__mi">2</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code></pre>
<p>Let’s imagine the above exchange (which processes this code snippet) as a conversation. The conversation would go a little something like this:</p><div class="epub__blockquote"><blockquote class="epub__blockquote">
<p>Engine: Hey Scope, I have an RHS reference for <code class="epub__literal">foo</code>. Ever heard of it?</p>
<p>Scope: Why yes, I have. Compiler declared it just a second ago. It’s a function. Here you go.</p>
<p>Engine: Great, thanks! OK, I’m executing <code class="epub__literal">foo</code>.</p>
<p>Engine: Hey, Scope, I’ve got an LHS reference for <code class="epub__literal">a</code>, ever heard of it?</p>
<p>Scope: Why yes, I have. Compiler declared it as a formal parameter to <code class="epub__literal">foo</code> just recently. Here you go.</p>
<p>Engine: Helpful as always, Scope. Thanks again. Now, time to assign <code class="epub__literal">2</code> to <code class="epub__literal">a</code>.</p>
<p>Engine: Hey, Scope, sorry to bother you again. I need an RHS look-up for <code class="epub__literal">console</code>. Ever heard of it?</p>
<p>Scope: No problem, Engine, this is what I do all day. Yes, I’ve got <code class="epub__literal">console</code>. It’s built-in. Here ya go.</p>
<p>Engine: Perfect. Looking up <code class="epub__literal">log(..)</code>. OK, great, it’s a function.</p>
<p>Engine: Yo, Scope. Can you help me out with an RHS reference to <code class="epub__literal">a</code>. I think I remember it, but just want to double-check.</p>
<p>Scope: You’re right, Engine. Same variable, hasn’t changed. Here ya go.</p>
<p>Engine: Cool. Passing the value of <code class="epub__literal">a</code>, which is <code class="epub__literal">2</code>, into <code class="epub__literal">log(..)</code>.</p>
<p>…</p></blockquote>
</div>

</div>

<div class="epub__sect2" title="Quiz"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3>Quiz</h3>

</div>

</div>


</div>
<p>Check your understanding so far. Make sure to play the part of Engine and have a “conversation” with Scope:</p>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">a</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">b</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
    <code class="epub__k">return</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__o">+</code> <code class="epub__nx">b</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">c</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__mi">2</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code></pre><div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist" type="1">
<li class="epub__listitem">
Identify all the LHS look-ups (there are 3!).
</li><li class="epub__listitem">
Identify all the RHS look-ups (there are 4!).
</li></ol>

</div><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3>Note</h3>
<p>See the chapter review for the quiz answers!</p>
</div>

</div>



<div class="epub__sect1" title="Nested Scope"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>


</body>
</html>
