<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Errors</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="sbo-corecss">
<div><h2 style="clear: both">Errors</h2>






<p>Why does it matter whether we call it LHS or RHS?</p>
<p>Because these two types of look-ups behave differently in the circumstance where the variable has not yet been declared (is not found in any consulted scope).</p>
<p>Consider:</p>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">a</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__o">+</code> <code class="epub__nx">b</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">b</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__mi">2</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code></pre>
<p>When the RHS look-up occurs for <code class="epub__literal">b</code> the first time, it will not be found. This is said to be an “undeclared” variable, because it is not found in the scope.</p>
<p>If an RHS look-up fails to ever find a variable, anywhere in the nested <code class="epub__literal">scope</code>s, this results in a <code class="epub__literal">ReferenceError</code> being thrown by the engine. It’s important to note that the error is of the type <code class="epub__literal">ReferenceError</code>.</p>
<p>By contrast, if the engine is performing an LHS look-up, and it arrives at the top floor (global scope) without finding it, if the program is not running in “Strict Mode,”<sup>[1]</sup> then the global scope will create a new variable of that name <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>in the global scope</em></span>, and hand it back to Engine.</p>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>“No, there wasn’t one before, but I was helpful and created one for you.”</em></span></p>
<p>“Strict Mode,” which was added in ES5, has a number of different behaviors from normal/relaxed/lazy mode. One such behavior is that it disallows the automatic/implicit global variable creation. In that case, there would be no global scoped variable to hand back from an LHS look-up, and Engine would throw a <code class="epub__literal">ReferenceError</code> similarly to the RHS case.</p>
<p>Now, if a variable is found for an RHS look-up, but you try to do something with its value that is impossible, such as trying to execute-as-function a nonfunction value, or reference a property on a <code class="epub__literal">null</code> or <code class="epub__literal">undefined</code> value, then Engine throws a different kind of error, called a <code class="epub__literal">TypeError</code>.</p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">ReferenceError</code> is scope resolution-failure related, whereas <code class="epub__literal">TypeError</code> implies that scope resolution was successful, but that there was an illegal/impossible action attempted against the result.</p>

<div class="epub__sect1" title="Review"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>


</body>
</html>
