<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Review</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="sbo-corecss">
<div><h2 style="clear: both">Review</h2>






<p>Scope is the set of rules that determines where and how a variable (identifier) can be looked up. This look-up may be for the purposes of assigning to the variable, which is an LHS (lefthand-side) reference, or it may be for the purposes of retrieving its value, which is an RHS (righthand-side) reference.</p>
<p>LHS references result from assignment operations. Scope-related assignments can occur either with the <code class="epub__literal">=</code> operator or by passing arguments to (assign to) function parameters.</p>
<p>The JavaScript engine first compiles code before it executes, and in so doing, it splits up statements like <code class="epub__literal">var a = 2;</code> into two separate steps:</p><div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist" type="1">
<li class="epub__listitem">
First, <code class="epub__literal">var a</code> to declare it in that scope. This is performed at the beginning, before code execution.
</li><li class="epub__listitem">
Later, <code class="epub__literal">a = 2</code> to look up the variable (LHS reference) and assign to it if found.
</li></ol>

</div>
<p>Both LHS and RHS reference look-ups start at the currently executing scope, and if need be (that is, they don’t find what they’re looking for there), they work their way up the nested scope, one scope (floor) at a time, looking for the identifier, until they get to the global (top floor) and stop, and either find it, or don’t.</p>
<p>Unfulfilled RHS references result in <code class="epub__literal">ReferenceError</code>s being thrown. Unfulfilled LHS references result in an automatic, implicitly created global of that name (if not in Strict Mode), or a <code class="epub__literal">ReferenceError</code> (if in Strict Mode).</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="Quiz Answers"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3>Quiz Answers</h3>

</div>

</div>


</div>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">a</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">b</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
    <code class="epub__k">return</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__o">+</code> <code class="epub__nx">b</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">c</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__mi">2</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code></pre><div class="epub__orderedlist">
<ol class="epub__orderedlist" type="1">
<li class="epub__listitem">
<p class="epub__simpara">
Identify all the LHS look-ups (there are 3!).
</p>
<p class="epub__simpara"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em><code class="epub__literal">c = ..;, a = 2 (implicit param assignment) and b = ..</code></em></span></p></li><li class="epub__listitem">
<p class="epub__simpara">
Identify all the RHS look-ups (there are 4!).
</p>
<p class="epub__simpara"><span class="epub__emphasis"><em><code class="epub__literal">foo(2.., = a;, a  .. and ..  b</code></em></span></p></li></ol>

</div>

</div>



<div class="epub__footnotes" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="footnotes"><br/><hr style="width: 100; align: left;"/><div class="epub__footnote" id="ftn.id303610">
<p><sup>[1] </sup>See the MDN’s break down of Strict Mode</p>
</div>

</div>



</div>
</div>


</body>
</html>
