<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Cheating Lexical</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="sbo-corecss">
<div><h2 style="clear: both">Cheating Lexical</h2>






<p>If lexical scope is defined only by where a function is declared, which is entirely an author-time decision, how could there possibly be a way to “modify” (a.k.a., cheat) lexical scope at runtime?</p>
<p>JavaScript has two such mechanisms. Both of them are equally frowned upon in the wider community as bad practices to use in your code. But the typical arguments against them are often missing the most important point: <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>cheating lexical scope leads to poorer performance.</em></span>
</p>
<p>Before I explain the performance issue, though, let’s look at how these two mechanisms work.</p>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="eval"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3>eval</h3>

</div>

</div>


</div>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">eval(..)</code> function in JavaScript takes a string as an argument and treats the contents of the string as if it had actually been authored code at that point in the program. In other words, you can programmatically generate code inside of your authored code, and run the generated code as if it had been there at author time.</p>
<p>Evaluating <code class="epub__literal">eval(..)</code> (pun intended) in that light, it should be clear how <code class="epub__literal">eval(..)</code> allows you to modify the lexical scope environment by cheating and pretending that author-time (a.k.a., lexical) code was there all along.</p>
<p>On subsequent lines of code after an <code class="epub__literal">eval(..)</code> has executed, the engine will not “know” or “care” that the previous code in question was dynamically interpreted and thus modified the lexical scope environment. The engine will simply perform its lexical scope look-ups as it always does.</p>
<p>Consider the following code:</p>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">str</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__nb">eval</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">str</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code> <code class="epub__c1">// cheating!</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__nx">b</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">b</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__mi">2</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>

<code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"var b = 3;"</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__mi">1</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code> <code class="epub__c1">// 1, 3</code></pre>
<p>The string <code class="epub__literal">"var b = 3;"</code> is treated, at the point of the <code class="epub__literal">eval(..)</code> call, as code that was there all along. Because that code happens to declare a new variable <code class="epub__literal">b</code>, it modifies the existing lexical scope of <code class="epub__literal">foo(..)</code>. In fact, as mentioned earlier, this code actually creates variable <code class="epub__literal">b</code> inside of <code class="epub__literal">foo(..)</code> that shadows the <code class="epub__literal">b</code> that was declared in the outer (global) scope.</p>
<p>When the <code class="epub__literal">console.log(..)</code> call occurs, it finds both <code class="epub__literal">a</code> and <code class="epub__literal">b</code> in the scope of <code class="epub__literal">foo(..)</code>, and never finds the outer <code class="epub__literal">b</code>. Thus, we print out “1, 3” instead of “1, 2” as would have normally been the case.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3>Note</h3>

<p>In this example, for simplicity sake, the string of “code” we pass in was a fixed literal. But it could easily have been programmatically created by adding characters together based on your program’s logic. <code class="epub__literal">eval(..)</code> is usually used to execute dynamically created code, as dynamically evaluating essentially static code from a string literal would provide no real benefit to just authoring the code directly.</p>
</div>
<p>By default, if a string of code that <code class="epub__literal">eval(..)</code> executes contains one or more declarations (either variables or functions), this action modifies the existing lexical scope in which the <code class="epub__literal">eval(..)</code> resides. Technically, <code class="epub__literal">eval(..)</code> can be invoked indirectly, through various tricks (beyond our discussion here), which causes it to instead execute in the context of the global scope, thus modifying it. But in either case, <code class="epub__literal">eval(..)</code> can at runtime modify an author-time lexical scope.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3>Note</h3>

<p><code class="epub__literal">eval(..)</code> when used in a strict-mode program operates in its own lexical scope, which means declarations made inside of the <code class="epub__literal">eval()</code> do not actually modify the enclosing scope.</p>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">str</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
   <code class="epub__s2">"use strict"</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
   <code class="epub__nb">eval</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">str</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
   <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code> <code class="epub__c1">// ReferenceError: a is not defined</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"var a = 2"</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code></pre>
</div>
<p>There are other facilities in JavaScript that amount to a very similar effect to <code class="epub__literal">eval(..)</code>. <code class="epub__literal">setTimeout(..)</code> and <code class="epub__literal">setInterval(..)</code> <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>can</em></span> take a string for their respective first argument, the contents of which are <code class="epub__literal">eval</code>uated as the code of a dynamically generated function. This is old, legacy behavior and long-since deprecated. Don’t do it!</p>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">new Function(..)</code> function constructor similarly takes a string of code in its <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>last</em></span> argument to turn into a dynamically generated function (the first argument(s), if any, are the named parameters for the new function). This function-constructor syntax is slightly safer than <code class="epub__literal">eval(..)</code>, but it should still be avoided in your code.</p>
<p>The use-cases for dynamically generating code inside your program are incredibly rare, as the performance degradations are almost never worth the capability.</p>
</div>
<div class="epub__sect2" title="with"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3>with</h3>

</div>

</div>


</div>
<p>The other frowned-upon (and now deprecated!) feature in JavaScript that cheats lexical scope is the <code class="epub__literal">with</code> keyword. There are multiple valid ways that <code class="epub__literal">with</code> can be explained, but I will choose here to explain it from the perspective of how it interacts with and affects lexical scope.</p>
<p><code class="epub__literal">with</code> is typically explained as a shorthand for making multiple property references against an object <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>without</em></span> repeating the object reference itself each time.</p>
<p>For example:</p>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">obj</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">a</code><code class="epub__o">:</code> <code class="epub__mi">1</code><code class="epub__p">,</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">b</code><code class="epub__o">:</code> <code class="epub__mi">2</code><code class="epub__p">,</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">c</code><code class="epub__o">:</code> <code class="epub__mi">3</code>
<code class="epub__p">};</code>

<code class="epub__c1">// more "tedious" to repeat "obj"</code>
<code class="epub__nx">obj</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__mi">2</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
<code class="epub__nx">obj</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">b</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__mi">3</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
<code class="epub__nx">obj</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">c</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__mi">4</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>

<code class="epub__c1">// "easier" short-hand</code>
<code class="epub__kd">with</code> <code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">obj</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__mi">3</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">b</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__mi">4</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">c</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__mi">5</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code></pre>
<p>However, there’s much more going on here than just a convenient shorthand for object property access. Consider:</p>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">obj</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__kd">with</code> <code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">obj</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
        <code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__mi">2</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
    <code class="epub__p">}</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">o1</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">a</code><code class="epub__o">:</code> <code class="epub__mi">3</code>
<code class="epub__p">};</code>

<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">o2</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">b</code><code class="epub__o">:</code> <code class="epub__mi">3</code>
<code class="epub__p">};</code>

<code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">o1</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
<code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">o1</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code> <code class="epub__c1">// 2</code>

<code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">o2</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
<code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">o2</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code> <code class="epub__c1">// undefined</code>
<code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code> <code class="epub__c1">// 2—Oops, leaked global!</code></pre>
<p>In this code example, two objects <code class="epub__literal">o1</code> and <code class="epub__literal">o2</code> are created. One has an <code class="epub__literal">a</code> property, and the other does not. The <code class="epub__literal">foo(..)</code> function takes an object reference <code class="epub__literal">obj</code> as an argument, and calls <code class="epub__literal">with (obj) { .. }</code> on the reference. Inside the <code class="epub__literal">with</code> block, we make what appears to be a normal lexical reference to a variable <code class="epub__literal">a</code>, an LHS reference in fact (see Chapter 1), to assign to it the value of <code class="epub__literal">2</code>.</p>
<p>When we pass in <code class="epub__literal">o1</code>, the <code class="epub__literal">a = 2</code> assignment finds the property <code class="epub__literal">o1.a</code> and assigns it the value <code class="epub__literal">2</code>, as reflected in the subsequent <code class="epub__literal">console.log(o1.a)</code> statement. However, when we pass in <code class="epub__literal">o2</code>, since it does not have an <code class="epub__literal">a</code> property, no such property is created, and <code class="epub__literal">o2.a</code> remains <code class="epub__literal">undefined</code>.</p>
<p>But then we note a peculiar side-effect, the fact that a global variable <code class="epub__literal">a</code> was created by the <code class="epub__literal">a = 2</code> assignment. How can this be?</p>
<p>The <code class="epub__literal">with</code> statement takes an object, one that has zero or more properties, and treats that object as if it is a wholly separate lexical scope, and thus the object’s properties are treated as lexically defined identifiers in that scope.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3>Note</h3>

<p>Even though a <code class="epub__literal">with</code> block treats an object like a lexical scope, a normal var declaration inside that <code class="epub__literal">with</code> block will not be scoped to that <code class="epub__literal">with</code> block, but instead the containing function scope.</p>
</div>
<p>While the <code class="epub__literal">eval(..)</code> function can modify existing lexical scope if it takes a string of code with one or more declarations in it, the <code class="epub__literal">with</code> statement actually creates a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>whole new lexical scope</em></span> out of thin air, from the object you pass to it.</p>
<p>Understood in this way, the scope declared by the <code class="epub__literal">with</code> statement when we passed in <code class="epub__literal">o1</code> was <code class="epub__literal">o1</code>, and that scope had an identifier in it which corresponds to the <code class="epub__literal">o1.a</code> property. But when we used <code class="epub__literal">o2</code> as the scope, it had no such <code class="epub__literal">a</code> identifier in it, and so the normal rules of LHS identifier look-up (see Chapter 1) occurred.</p>
<p>Neither the scope of <code class="epub__literal">o2</code>, nor the scope of <code class="epub__literal">foo(..)</code>, nor the global scope even, has an <code class="epub__literal">a</code> identifier to be found, so when <code class="epub__literal">a = 2</code> is executed, it results in the automatic global being created (since we’re in non-strict mode).</p>
<p>It is a strange sort of mind-bending thought to see <code class="epub__literal">with</code> turning, at runtime, an object and its properties into a scope <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>with</em></span> identifiers. But that is the clearest explanation I can give for the results we see.</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3>Note</h3>
<p>In addition to being a bad idea to use, both <code class="epub__literal">eval(..)</code> and <code class="epub__literal">with</code> are affected (restricted) by Strict Mode. <code class="epub__literal">with</code> is outright disallowed, whereas various forms of indirect or unsafe <code class="epub__literal">eval(..)</code> are disallowed while retaining the core functionality.</p>
</div>

</div>

<div class="epub__sect2" title="Performance"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h3>Performance</h3>

</div>

</div>


</div>
<p>Both <code class="epub__literal">eval(..)</code> and <code class="epub__literal">with</code> cheat the otherwise author-time defined lexical scope by modifying or creating new lexical scope at runtime.</p>
<p>So, what’s the big deal, you ask? If they offer more sophisticated functionality and coding flexibility, aren’t these <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>good</em></span> features? <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>No.</em></span></p>
<p>The JavaScript engine has a number of performance optimizations that it performs during the compilation phase. Some of these boil down to being able to essentially statically analyze the code as it lexes, and predetermine where all the variable and function declarations are, so that it takes less effort to resolve identifiers during execution.</p>
<p>But if the engine finds an <code class="epub__literal">eval(..)</code> or <code class="epub__literal">with</code> in the code, it essentially has to <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>assume</em></span> that all its awareness of identifier location may be invalid, because it cannot know at lexing time exactly what code you may pass to <code class="epub__literal">eval(..)</code> to modify the lexical scope, or the contents of the object you may pass to <code class="epub__literal">with</code> to create a new lexical scope to be consulted.</p>
<p>In other words, in the pessimistic sense, most of those optimizations it <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>would</em></span> make are pointless if <code class="epub__literal">eval(..)</code> or <code class="epub__literal">with</code> are present, so it simply doesn’t perform the optimizations <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>at all</em></span>.</p>
<p>Your code will almost certainly tend to run slower simply by the fact that you include an <code class="epub__literal">eval(..)</code> or <code class="epub__literal">with</code> anywhere in the code. No matter how smart the engine may be about trying to limit the side-effects of these pessimistic assumptions, <span class="epub__strong"><strong>there’s no getting around the fact that without the optimizations, code runs slower.</strong></span></p>
</div>



<div class="epub__sect1" title="Review"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>


</body>
</html>
