<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Review</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="sbo-corecss">
<div><h2 style="clear: both">Review</h2>






<p>Functions are the most common unit of scope in JavaScript. Variables and functions that are declared inside another function are essentially “hidden” from any of the enclosing scopes, which is an intentional design principle of good software.</p>
<p>But functions are by no means the only unit of scope. Block scope refers to the idea that variables and functions can belong to an arbitrary block (generally, any <code class="epub__literal">{ .. }</code> pair) of code, rather than only to the enclosing function.</p>
<p>Starting with ES3, the <code class="epub__literal">try/catch</code> structure has block scope in the <code class="epub__literal">catch</code> clause.</p>
<p>In ES6, the <code class="epub__literal">let</code> keyword (a cousin to the <code class="epub__literal">var</code> keyword) is introduced to allow declarations of variables in any arbitrary block of code. <code class="epub__literal">if (..) { let a = 2; }</code> will declare a variable <code class="epub__literal">a</code> that essentially hijacks the scope of the <code class="epub__literal">if</code>’s <code class="epub__literal">{ .. }</code> block and attaches itself there.</p>
<p>Though some seem to believe so, block scope should not be taken as an outright replacement of <code class="epub__literal">var</code> function scope. Both functionalities co-exist, and developers can and should use both function-scope and block-scope techniques where respectively appropriate to produce better, more readable/maintainable code.</p>

<div class="epub__footnotes" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="footnotes"><br/><hr style="width: 100; align: left;"/><div class="epub__footnote" id="ftn.id296274">
<p><sup>[2] </sup>Principle of Least Privilege</p>
</div>

</div>



</div>
</div>


</body>
</html>
