<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chicken or the Egg?</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="sbo-corecss">
<div><h2 style="clear: both">Chicken or the Egg?</h2>






<p>There’s a temptation to think that all of the code you see in a JavaScript program is interpreted line-by-line, top-down in order, as the program executes. While that is substantially true, there’s one part of that assumption that can lead to incorrect thinking about your program.</p>
<p>Consider this code:</p>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__mi">2</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>

<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>

<code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code></pre>
<p>What do you expect to be printed in the <code class="epub__literal">console.log(..)</code> statement?</p>
<p>Many developers would expect <code class="epub__literal">undefined</code>, since the <code class="epub__literal">var a</code> statement comes after the <code class="epub__literal">a = 2</code>, and it would seem natural to assume that the variable is redefined, and thus assigned the default <code class="epub__literal">undefined</code>. However, the output will be <code class="epub__literal">2</code>.</p>
<p>Consider another piece of code:</p>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>

<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__mi">2</code><code class="epub__p">;</code></pre>
<p>You might be tempted to assume that, since the previous snippet exhibited some less-than-top-down looking behavior, perhaps in this snippet, <code class="epub__literal">2</code> will also be printed. Others may think that since the <code class="epub__literal">a</code> variable is used before it is declared, this must result in a <code class="epub__literal">ReferenceError</code> being thrown.</p>
<p>Unfortunately, both guesses are incorrect. <code class="epub__literal">undefined</code> is the output.</p>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>So, what’s going on here?</em></span> It would appear we have a chicken-and-the-egg question. Which comes first, the declaration (“egg”), or the assignment (“chicken”)?</p>

<div class="epub__sect1" title="The Compiler Strikes Again"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>


</body>
</html>
