<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Now I Can See</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="sbo-corecss">
<div><h2 style="clear: both">Now I Can See</h2>






<p>The previous code snippets are somewhat academic and artificially constructed to illustrate <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>using closure</em></span>. But I promised you something more than just a cool new toy. I promised that closure was something all around you in your existing code. Let us now <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>see</em></span> that truth.</p>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">wait</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">message</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>

    <code class="epub__nx">setTimeout</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">timer</code><code class="epub__p">(){</code>
        <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">message</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
    <code class="epub__p">},</code> <code class="epub__mi">1000</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>

<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__nx">wait</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"Hello, closure!"</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code></pre>
<p>We take an inner function (named <code class="epub__literal">timer</code>) and pass it to <code class="epub__literal">setTimeout(..)</code>. But <code class="epub__literal">timer</code> has a scope closure over the scope of <code class="epub__literal">wait(..)</code>, indeed keeping and using a reference to the variable <code class="epub__literal">message</code>.</p>
<p>A thousand milliseconds after we have executed <code class="epub__literal">wait(..)</code>, and its inner scope should otherwise be long gone, that anonymous function still has closure over that scope.</p>
<p>Deep down in the guts of the engine, the built-in utility <code class="epub__literal">setTimeout(..)</code> has reference to some parameter, probably called <code class="epub__literal">fn</code> or <code class="epub__literal">func</code> or something like that. Engine goes to invoke that function, which is invoking our inner <code class="epub__literal">timer</code> function, and the lexical scope reference is still intact.</p>
<p><span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Closure.</em></span></p>
<p>Or, if you’re of the jQuery persuasion (or any JS framework, for that matter):</p>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">setupBot</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">name</code><code class="epub__p">,</code><code class="epub__nx">selector</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">$</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">selector</code> <code class="epub__p">).</code><code class="epub__nx">click</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">activator</code><code class="epub__p">(){</code>
        <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"Activating: "</code> <code class="epub__o">+</code> <code class="epub__nx">name</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
    <code class="epub__p">}</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__nx">setupBot</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"Closure Bot 1"</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__s2">"#bot_1"</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
<code class="epub__nx">setupBot</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__s2">"Closure Bot 2"</code><code class="epub__p">,</code> <code class="epub__s2">"#bot_2"</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code></pre>
<p>I am not sure what kind of code you write, but I regularly write code that is responsible for controlling an entire global drone army of closure bots, so this is totally realistic!</p>
<p>(Some) joking aside, essentially <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>whenever</em></span> and <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>wherever</em></span> you treat functions (that access their own respective lexical scopes) as first-class values and pass them around, you are likely to see those functions exercising closure. Be that timers, event handlers, Ajax requests, cross-window messaging, web workers, or any of the other asynchronous (or synchronous!) tasks, when you pass in a <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>callback function</em></span>, get ready to sling some closure around!</p><div class="epub__note" title="Note">
<h3>Note</h3>

<p>Chapter 3 introduced the IIFE pattern. While it is often said that IIFE (alone) is an example of observed closure, I would somewhat disagree, by our previous definition.</p>
</div>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__mi">2</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>

<code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">IIFE</code><code class="epub__p">(){</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
<code class="epub__p">})();</code></pre>
<p>This code works, but it’s not strictly an observation of closure. Why? Because the function (which we named <code class="epub__literal">IIFE</code> here) is not executed outside its lexical scope. It’s still invoked right there in the same scope as it was declared (the enclosing/global scope that also holds <code class="epub__literal">a</code>). <code class="epub__literal">a</code> is found via normal lexical scope look-up, not really via closure.</p>
<p>While closure might technically be happening at declaration time, it is <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>not</em></span> strictly observable, and so, as they say, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>it’s a tree falling in the forest with no one around to hear it.</em></span></p>
<p>Though an IIFE is not <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>itself</em></span> an example of observed closure, it absolutely creates scope, and it’s one of the most common tools we use to create scope which can be closed over. So IIFEs are indeed heavily related to closure, even if not exercising closure themselves.</p>
<p>Put this book down right now, dear reader. I have a task for you. Go open up some of your recent JavaScript code. Look for your functions-as-values and identify where you are already using closure and maybe didn’t even know it before.</p>
<p>I’ll wait.</p>
<p>Now you see!</p>

<div class="epub__sect1" title="Loops and Closure"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>


</body>
</html>
