<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Appendix A. Dynamic Scope</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="sbo-corecss">
<div class="epub__appendix" title="Appendix A. Dynamic Scope" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="appendix" id="appendix-a-dynamic-scope"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2>Appendix A. Dynamic Scope</h2>
</div>

</div>


</div>
<p>In Chapter 2, we talked about dynamic scope as a contrast to the lexical scope model, which is how scope works in JavaScript (and in fact, most other languages).</p>
<p>We will briefly examine dynamic scope, to hammer home the contrast. But, more important, dynamic scope actually is a near cousin to another mechanism (<code class="epub__literal">this</code>) in JavaScript, which we cover in the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>this &amp; Object Prototypes</em></span> title of the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>You Don’t Know JS</em></span> book series.</p>
<p>As we saw in Chapter 2, lexical scope is the set of rules about how the engine can look up a variable and where it will find it. The key characteristic of lexical scope is that it is defined at author time, when the code is written (assuming you don’t cheat with <code class="epub__literal">eval()</code> or <code class="epub__literal">with</code>).</p>
<p>Dynamic scope seems to imply, and for good reason, that there’s a model whereby scope can be determined dynamically at runtime, rather than statically at author time. That is in fact the case. Let’s illustrate via code:</p>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">()</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code> <code class="epub__c1">// 2</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">bar</code><code class="epub__p">()</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__mi">3</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__mi">2</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>

<code class="epub__nx">bar</code><code class="epub__p">();</code></pre>
<p>Lexical scope holds that the RHS reference to <code class="epub__literal">a</code> in <code class="epub__literal">foo()</code> will be resolved to the global variable <code class="epub__literal">a</code>, which will result in value <code class="epub__literal">2</code> being output.</p>
<p>Dynamic scope, by contrast, doesn’t concern itself with how and where functions and scopes are declared, but rather <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>where they are called from</em></span>. In other words, the scope chain is based on the call-stack, not the nesting of scopes in code.</p>
<p>So, if JavaScript had dynamic scope, when <code class="epub__literal">foo()</code> is executed, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>theoretically</em></span> the code below would instead result in <code class="epub__literal">3</code> as the output.</p>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">()</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code> <code class="epub__c1">// 3  (not 2!)</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__kd">function</code> <code class="epub__nx">bar</code><code class="epub__p">()</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__mi">3</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">foo</code><code class="epub__p">();</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__kd">var</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__mi">2</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>

<code class="epub__nx">bar</code><code class="epub__p">();</code></pre>
<p>How can this be? Because when <code class="epub__literal">foo()</code> cannot resolve the variable reference for <code class="epub__literal">a</code>, instead of stepping up the nested (lexical) scope chain, it walks up the call stack, to find where <code class="epub__literal">foo()</code> was <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>called from</em></span>. Since <code class="epub__literal">foo()</code> was called from <code class="epub__literal">bar()</code>, it checks the variables in scope for <code class="epub__literal">bar()</code>, and finds an <code class="epub__literal">a</code> there with value <code class="epub__literal">3</code>.</p>
<p>Strange? You’re probably thinking so, at the moment.</p>
<p>But that’s just because you’ve probably only ever worked on (or at least deeply considered) code that is lexically scoped. So dynamic scoping seems foreign. If you had only ever written code in a dynamically scoped language, it would seem natural, and lexical scope would be the odd ball.</p>
<p>To be clear, JavaScript does not, in fact, have dynamic scope. It has lexical scope. Plain and simple. But the <code class="epub__literal">this</code> mechanism is kind of like dynamic scope.</p>
<p>The key contrast: lexical scope is write-time, whereas dynamic scope (and <code class="epub__literal">this</code>!) are runtime. Lexical scope cares where a function was declared, but dynamic scope cares where a function was called from.</p>
<p>Finally, <code class="epub__literal">this</code> cares how a function was called, which shows how closely related the <code class="epub__literal">this</code> mechanism is to the idea of dynamic scoping. To dig more into <code class="epub__literal">this</code>, read the <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>You Don’t Know JS</em></span> title <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>this &amp; Object Prototypes</em></span>.</p>
</div>
</div>


</body>
</html>
