<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Appendix B. Polyfilling Block Scope</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="sbo-corecss">
<div class="epub__appendix" title="Appendix B. Polyfilling Block Scope" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:type="appendix" id="appendix-b-polyfilling-block-scope"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
<h2>Appendix B. Polyfilling Block Scope</h2>
</div>

</div>


</div>
<p>In Chapter 3, we explored block scope. We saw that <code class="epub__literal">with</code> and the <code class="epub__literal">catch</code> clause are both tiny examples of block scope that have existed in JavaScript since at least the introduction of ES3.</p>
<p>But it’s ES6’s introduction of <code class="epub__literal">let</code> that finally gives full, unfettered block scoping capability to our code. There are many exciting things, both functionally and code-stylistically, that block scope will enable.</p>
<p>But what if we wanted to use block scope in pre-ES6 environments?</p>
<p>Consider this code:</p>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__kd">let</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__mi">2</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code> <code class="epub__c1">// 2</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code> <code class="epub__c1">// ReferenceError</code></pre>
<p>This will work great in ES6 environments. But can we do so pre-ES6? <code class="epub__literal">catch</code> is the answer.</p>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__k">try</code><code class="epub__p">{</code><code class="epub__k">throw</code> <code class="epub__mi">2</code><code class="epub__p">}</code><code class="epub__k">catch</code><code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">a</code><code class="epub__p">){</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code> <code class="epub__c1">// 2</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code> <code class="epub__c1">// ReferenceError</code></pre>
<p>Whoa! That’s some ugly, weird looking code. We see a <code class="epub__literal">try/catch</code> that appears to forcibly throw an error, but the “error” it throws is just a value <code class="epub__literal">2</code>, and then the variable declaration that receives it is in the <code class="epub__literal">catch(a)</code> clause. Mind: blown.</p>
<p>That’s right, the <code class="epub__literal">catch</code> clause has block-scoping to it, which means it can be used as a polyfill for block scope in pre-ES6 environments.</p>
<p>“But”, you say, “no one wants to write ugly code like that!” That’s true. No one writes (some of) the code output by the CoffeeScript compiler, either. That’s not the point.</p>
<p>The point is that tools can transpile ES6 code to work in pre-ES6 environments. You can write code using block scoping, and benefit from such functionality, and let a build-step tool take care of producing code that will actually <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>work</em></span> when deployed.</p>
<p>This is actually the preferred migration path for all (ahem, most) of ES6: to use a code transpiler to take ES6 code and produce ES5-compatible code during the transition from pre-ES6 to ES6.</p>
<div class="epub__sect1" title="Traceur"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>


</body>
</html>
