<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Implicit Versus Explicit Blocks</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="sbo-corecss">
<div><h2 style="clear: both">Implicit Versus Explicit Blocks</h2>






<p>In Chapter 3, we identified some potential pitfalls to code maintainability/refactorability when we introduce block scoping. Is there another way to take advantage of block scope but to reduce this downside?</p>
<p>Consider this alternate form of <code class="epub__literal">let</code>, called the <code class="epub__literal">let</code> block or <code class="epub__literal">let</code> statement (contrasted with <code class="epub__literal">let</code> declarations from before).</p>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__kd">let</code> <code class="epub__p">(</code><code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__mi">2</code><code class="epub__p">)</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code> <code class="epub__c1">// 2</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code> <code class="epub__c1">// ReferenceError</code></pre>
<p>Instead of implicitly hijacking an existing block, the <code class="epub__literal">let</code> statement creates an explicit block for its scope binding. Not only does the explicit block stand out more, and perhaps fare more robustly in code refactoring, it produces somewhat cleaner code by, grammatically, forcing all the declarations to the top of the block. This makes it easier to look at any block and know what’s scoped to it and not.</p>
<p>As a pattern, it mirrors the approach many people take in function scoping when they manually move/hoist all their <code class="epub__literal">var</code> declarations to the top of the function. The <code class="epub__literal">let</code> statement puts them there at the top of the block by intent, and if you don’t use <code class="epub__literal">let</code> declarations strewn throughout, your block-scoping declarations are somewhat easier to identify and maintain.</p>
<p>But, there’s a problem. The <code class="epub__literal">let</code> statement form is not included in ES6. Neither does the official Traceur compiler accept that form of code.</p>
<p>We have two options. We can format using ES6-valid syntax and a little sprinkle of code discipline:</p>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__cm">/*let*/</code> <code class="epub__p">{</code> <code class="epub__kd">let</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__mi">2</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code> <code class="epub__c1">// ReferenceError</code></pre>
<p>But, tools are meant to solve our problems. So the other option is to write explicit <code class="epub__literal">let</code> statement blocks, and let a tool convert them to valid, working code.</p>
<p>So, I built a tool called <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>let-er</em></span><sup>[4]</sup> to address just this issue. <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>let-er</em></span> is a build-step code transpiler, but its only task is to find <code class="epub__literal">let</code> statement forms and transpile them. It will leave alone any of the rest of your code, including any <code class="epub__literal">let</code> declarations. You can safely use <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>let-er</em></span> as the first ES6 transpiler step, and then pass your code through something like Traceur if necessary.</p>
<p>Moreover, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>let-er</em></span> has a configuration flag <code class="epub__literal">--es6</code>, which when turned on (off by default), changes the kind of code produced. Instead of the <code class="epub__literal">try/catch</code> ES3 polyfill hack, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>let-er</em></span> would take our snippet and produce the fully ES6-compliant, non-hacky:</p>
<pre class="epub__programlisting"><code class="epub__p">{</code>
    <code class="epub__kd">let</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__o">=</code> <code class="epub__mi">2</code><code class="epub__p">;</code>
    <code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code>
<code class="epub__p">}</code>

<code class="epub__nx">console</code><code class="epub__p">.</code><code class="epub__nx">log</code><code class="epub__p">(</code> <code class="epub__nx">a</code> <code class="epub__p">);</code> <code class="epub__c1">// ReferenceError</code></pre>
<p>So, you can start using <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>let-er</em></span> right away, and target all pre-ES6 environments, and when you only care about ES6, you can add the flag and instantly target only ES6.</p>
<p>And most important, you can use the more preferable and more explicit <code class="epub__literal">let</code> statement form even though it is not an official part of any ES version (yet).</p>

<div class="epub__sect1" title="Performance"><div class="epub__titlepage"><div>
<div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>


</body>
</html>
