<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Joakim’s journey
      </title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="navtop_left"/>
<div class="navcenter_left"/>
<div class="navbottom_left"/>
<div class="navtop_right"/>
<div class="navcenter_right"/>
<div class="navbottom_right"/>
<div id="HtmlView" data-bow-ajaxcomponent="[&quot;/_ajax_htmlview&quot;,&quot;HtmlView&quot;,0,1,0,&quot;__className=bookhtmlcontent&amp;reader=html&amp;xmlid=9781617291050/pref01lev1sec1_html&quot;,&quot;&quot;]">
  <div>
    <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="sbo-stylesheetcss sbo-pagestylescss">
<div><h3><a id="pref02lev1sec2__title"/>Joakim’s journey
      </h3>
      
      
<p class="epub__noind">In 2008, I was consulting as a Scrum Master in a three-team software development project in a large Swedish company’s IT department.
         To deepen my understanding of agile software development, I was reading up on Lean software development—which led me to the
         amazing story of Toyota and a lot of literature about Lean thinking and the Toyota Way. The studying reached a climax of sorts
         when I went on a study tour to Toyota HQ in Japan together with Mary and Tom Poppendieck, authors of Lean software development
         books, in the spring of 2009.
      </p>
      
      
<p class="epub__noind">In late 2008, my client came to the conclusion that most, if not all, clients paying for software development eventually draw—that
         things are moving too slowly. They wanted more development done more quickly, but without cutting scope or quality. Inspired
         by the Lean thinking around one-piece contiguous flow, I suggested that we should stop planning batches of work in Scrum sprint-planning
         meetings every two or three weeks (a cadence that felt more and more arbitrary to us) and instead try to focus on one or a
         few work items and collaboratively get them done as quickly as possible, in a continuous flow of value. The dozen or so team
         members agreed to not have more than two work items in development and two in testing at any time, and that only when something
         was finished would we pull new work items from the backlog to plan them just-in-time.
      </p>
      
      
<p class="epub__noind">I soon learned about something called kanban that seemed similar to what we were doing, first through Corey Ladas’s blog and
         then through the work of David J. Anderson. In 2009, I connected with the community through the first Lean Kanban conference
         in the UK. I was immediately attracted by the pragmatic approach of looking at what had actually worked for different teams
         and companies in their respective contexts, at a time when I felt that a lot of the agile community focus was on faith-based
         approaches like “How is Scrum telling us how to solve this?”
      </p>
      
      
<p class="epub__noind">The next year, I participated in David J. Anderson’s first kanban coaching workshop ever (now called Advanced Master Class)
         in London, together with, among others, experienced practitioners like Rachel Davies, David P. Joyce, and Martine Devos. I
         cofounded Stockholm Lean Coffee in 2010, where kanban enthusiasts have kept meeting every week since. In 2011, I was invited
         to attend the first Kanban Leadership Retreat hosted by David J. Anderson, during which I became one of the first “David J.
         Anderson approved” kanban trainers.
      </p>
      
      
      
      
</div>
</div>
</div>
  </div>
</div>
<div id="htmlthumbnail">
  <div id="t_block_list"/>
  <div class="clear"/>
</div>

</body>
</html>
