<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>The structure of this book
      </title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="navtop_left"/>
<div class="navcenter_left"/>
<div class="navbottom_left"/>
<div class="navtop_right"/>
<div class="navcenter_right"/>
<div class="navbottom_right"/>
<div id="HtmlView" data-bow-ajaxcomponent="[&quot;/_ajax_htmlview&quot;,&quot;HtmlView&quot;,0,1,0,&quot;__className=bookhtmlcontent&amp;reader=html&amp;xmlid=9781617291050/pref01lev1sec1_html&quot;,&quot;&quot;]">
  <div>
    <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="sbo-stylesheetcss sbo-pagestylescss">
<div><h3><a id="pref03lev1sec1__title"/>The structure of this book
      </h3>
      
      
<p class="epub__noind">This book is divided into four parts, each with a different purpose, aimed at being your companion as you learn kanban:</p>
      
      
<p class="epub__calibre16"/>
      <ul class="epub__calibre17">
         
         <li class="epub__calibre18"><i class="epub__calibre6">Part 1, “Learning kanban”</i>—This is an introduction to kanban in the form of a short story. The idea is that you can quickly skim through this part to
            get a feeling for what kanban is and learn enough about it to get you up and running, just like the fictional team you’ll
            meet in chapter 1. After this introduction, you’ll have all the tools and knowledge you need to start using kanban in real life—you’ll be able
            to start learning by doing kanban. If stories aren’t your thing, or if you don’t like our storytelling style, you can skip
            this chapter and jump straight into the next part.
            
         </li>
         
         <li class="epub__calibre18"><i class="epub__calibre6">Part 2, “Understanding kanban”</i>—This part gives you deeper knowledge about the <i class="epub__calibre6">why</i> (the principles and ideas behind kanban) and the <i class="epub__calibre6">how</i> (lots of practical tips on applying the principles in your context). We’ll take a closer look at the core principles of kanban.
            There will be many commonly used solutions and variations on these, which people in the community have applied in different
            contexts. Our descriptions will be practical and will give you more tools and tips to continue to build your knowledge. The
            team from chapter 1 will pop in from time to time to ask questions.
            
         </li>
         
         <li class="epub__calibre18"><i class="epub__calibre6">Part 3, “Advanced kanban”</i>—OK, you’re up and running with your board, you’re familiar with how WIP limits work, and you’re focused on helping the work
            to flow. Now what? In chapters 8–12, you’ll learn how to use kanban principles to manage risk, facilitate self-organization, plan, and improve. We’ve also included
            a chapter on common pitfalls and how to avoid them. Don’t let the “advanced” scare you: it’s not that complicated, it’s just
            that these practices aren’t what you start with typically when you’re new to kanban.
            
         </li>
         
         <li class="epub__calibre18"><b class="epub__calibre22"><i class="epub__calibre6">Part 4, “Teaching kanban”</i>— </b>If you start using kanban in your organization, you’ll soon find yourself teaching kanban to others. We have found it beneficial
            to do this through games and simulations, because some of the principles seem counterintuitive at first.
            
         </li>
         
      </ul>
      
      
<p class="epub__noind">We make no claim that you’ll come out a kanban master at the end of this book, but it will make a good companion on your learning
         journey. Matched with the practical experience you’ll gain from trying stuff out, this will be a great learning combination.
      </p>
      
      
      
      
</div>
</div>
</div>
  </div>
</div>
<div id="htmlthumbnail">
  <div id="t_block_list"/>
  <div class="clear"/>
</div>

</body>
</html>
