<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>How to read this book
      </title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="navtop_left"/>
<div class="navcenter_left"/>
<div class="navbottom_left"/>
<div class="navtop_right"/>
<div class="navcenter_right"/>
<div class="navbottom_right"/>
<div id="HtmlView" data-bow-ajaxcomponent="[&quot;/_ajax_htmlview&quot;,&quot;HtmlView&quot;,0,1,0,&quot;__className=bookhtmlcontent&amp;reader=html&amp;xmlid=9781617291050/pref01lev1sec1_html&quot;,&quot;&quot;]">
  <div>
    <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="sbo-stylesheetcss sbo-pagestylescss">
<div><h3><a id="pref03lev1sec2__title"/>How to read this book
      </h3>
      
      
<p class="epub__noind">You can choose several ways to read this book:</p>
      
      
<p class="epub__calibre16"/>
      <ul class="epub__calibre17">
         
         <li class="epub__calibre18"><i class="epub__calibre6">If you want to get started as fast as possible,</i> spend an hour reading part 1 (“Learning kanban”), and implement some of the things you learn right away.
            
         </li>
         
         <li class="epub__calibre18"><i class="epub__calibre6">When you need inspiration or get stuck,</i> browse through part 2 (“Understanding kanban”) and steal ideas or be inspired by how others have approached similar challenges.
            
         </li>
         
         <li class="epub__calibre18"><i class="epub__calibre6">If you want to know why things are how they are in kanban-land,</i> read part 2 and learn where kanban comes from and the principles and ideas on which it’s based. You’ll get a hefty dose of practical
            tips along the way.
            
         </li>
         
         <li class="epub__calibre18"><i class="epub__calibre6">If you’re already using kanban and are curious about the next step,</i> take a closer look at the topics in part 3 (“Advanced kanban”). You’ll be sure to pick up something new that applies to your situation.
            
         </li>
         
         <li class="epub__calibre18"><i class="epub__calibre6">When people ask you to teach them kanban,</i> find fun and educational games in part 4 (“Teaching kanban”) to play with them, and tell them about your findings and experiences.
            And then get them a copy of this book!
            
         </li>
         
      </ul>
      
      
<p class="epub__noind">You can also read the entire book from cover to cover. This will give you a gradually deeper and wider understanding of kanban.
         We believe that the best learning experience will come from combining the topics in this book with practical experience.
      </p>
      
      
      
      
</div>
</div>
</div>
  </div>
</div>
<div id="htmlthumbnail">
  <div id="t_block_list"/>
  <div class="clear"/>
</div>

</body>
</html>
