<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>1.10. Summary
      </title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="navtop_left"/>
<div class="navcenter_left"/>
<div class="navbottom_left"/>
<div class="navtop_right"/>
<div class="navcenter_right"/>
<div class="navbottom_right"/>
<div id="HtmlView" data-bow-ajaxcomponent="[&quot;/_ajax_htmlview&quot;,&quot;HtmlView&quot;,0,1,0,&quot;__className=bookhtmlcontent&amp;reader=html&amp;xmlid=9781617291050/pref01lev1sec1_html&quot;,&quot;&quot;]">
  <div>
    <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="sbo-stylesheetcss sbo-pagestylescss">
<div><h3><a id="ch01lev1sec10__title"/>1.10. Summary
      </h3>
      
      
<p class="epub__noind">We leave our heroes there, and the Kanbaneros team is on the way back home, ready to get started with kanban. This whole chapter
         was a fictional story, and it incorporated some simplifications and adjustments to get the story to flow better, but it has
         also shown you how you can get up and running easily.
      </p>
      
      
<p class="epub__noind">Maybe your work, team, and context aren’t exactly the same as for the Kanbaneros, but you can follow along with the reasoning
         and adjust it for yourself. You don’t need to do everything they did; pick and choose what suits your needs best.
      </p>
      
      
<p class="epub__noind">This chapter aimed to get you started with kanban. In the next section of the book, we’ll examine all the elements described
         and more in greater detail, offer variants, and warn you about common pitfalls. We’ll also offer some more background on where
         the concepts originated and how they have been applied in other contexts.
      </p>
      
      
<p class="epub__noind">You’re more than welcome to try kanban out with what you know now, or you can also continue your journey in the next part
         of the book. In the next chapter, we’ll take a short look at the origins of kanban and dive into the principles on which it’s
         built. We’ll also give you a cheat sheet for getting up and running in no time.
      </p>
      
      
      
      
      
      
      <div class="epub__calibre21" id="calibre_pb_15">
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
  </div>
</div>
<div id="htmlthumbnail">
  <div id="t_block_list"/>
  <div class="clear"/>
</div>

</body>
</html>
