<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>2.3. Summary
      </title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="navtop_left"/>
<div class="navcenter_left"/>
<div class="navbottom_left"/>
<div class="navtop_right"/>
<div class="navcenter_right"/>
<div class="navbottom_right"/>
<div id="HtmlView" data-bow-ajaxcomponent="[&quot;/_ajax_htmlview&quot;,&quot;HtmlView&quot;,0,1,0,&quot;__className=bookhtmlcontent&amp;reader=html&amp;xmlid=9781617291050/pref01lev1sec1_html&quot;,&quot;&quot;]">
  <div>
    <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="sbo-stylesheetcss sbo-pagestylescss">
<div><h3><a id="ch02lev1sec3__title"/>2.3. Summary
      </h3>
      
      
<p class="epub__noind">Kanban is an approach to software development based on simple but powerful ideas. It aims to make the work <i class="epub__calibre6">flow</i> fast through the whole value chain, from idea or concept to software in production, delighting your customers. The tools
         that make this happen are a few simple yet powerful principles: visualizing your work and policies, limiting the amount of
         work in progress, and helping the work to flow better through the process.
      </p>
      
      
<p class="epub__noind">These tools can guide you to continuously improve your process to gain an even faster, smoother flow of work through that
         process. This is a never-ending quest that will help you and your team to improve, little by little, every day.
      </p>
      
      
<p class="epub__noind">There—now you’re up and running. As your work progresses, move the items accordingly on the board. Take care of problems that
         are hindering your flow. When a problem occurs, stop and talk about it; these are your improvement opportunities! Don’t waste
         them; handle with care!
      </p>
      
      
<p class="epub__noind">The rest of this book is packed with practical advice about visualizations, how to limit WIP, and different ways of helping
         your work to flow smoothly and quickly through your workflow. We have put a strong focus on practical matters to make sure
         you can use the practices, patterns, and tools we describe right away with your team.
      </p>
      
      
<p class="epub__noind">Let’s jump right in and start looking at visualization—a subject that will get your creative juices going.</p>
      
      
      
      
      
      
      <div class="epub__calibre21" id="calibre_pb_19">
</div>
</div>
</div>
</div>
  </div>
</div>
<div id="htmlthumbnail">
  <div id="t_block_list"/>
  <div class="clear"/>
</div>

</body>
</html>
