<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>6.7. Exercise: WIP it, WIP it real good
      </title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="navtop_left"/>
<div class="navcenter_left"/>
<div class="navbottom_left"/>
<div class="navtop_right"/>
<div class="navcenter_right"/>
<div class="navbottom_right"/>
<div id="HtmlView" data-bow-ajaxcomponent="[&quot;/_ajax_htmlview&quot;,&quot;HtmlView&quot;,0,1,0,&quot;__className=bookhtmlcontent&amp;reader=html&amp;xmlid=9781617291050/pref01lev1sec1_html&quot;,&quot;&quot;]">
  <div>
    <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="sbo-stylesheetcss sbo-pagestylescss">
<div><h3><a id="ch06lev1sec7__title"/>6.7. Exercise: WIP it, WIP it real good
      </h3>
      
      
<p class="epub__noind">The time has come for you to start discussing WIP limits. Again, this should be a team effort. Remember that there’s no optimal
         WIP limit for your team; it’s a tool that you can use to help you improve your work.
      </p>
      
      
<p class="epub__noind">If you don’t have an obvious WIP limit that you can come up with, first discuss the points in sections 6.3, 6.4, and 6.5. Here are some questions you can focus on:
      </p>
      
      
<p class="epub__calibre16"/>
      <ul class="epub__calibre17">
         
         <li class="epub__calibre18">Should you have a single WIP limit for the complete board? Why would that be good for you?
            
         </li>
         
         <li class="epub__calibre18">Can you start by limiting work in some columns? Which ones? Why?
            
         </li>
         
         <li class="epub__calibre18">If you limit work per person, what kind of behavior would that drive or give you?
            
         </li>
         
         <li class="epub__calibre18">Would swim lanes with WIP limits per lane help you in your situation?
            
         </li>
         
      </ul>
      
      
<p class="epub__noind">If you don’t know how to answer these questions, you should try something that seems appropriate, pay attention to what happens,
         and learn from that. When you come up with a good strategy and a number, start to discuss how this policy should be treated
         in your daily work:
      </p>
      
      
<p class="epub__calibre16"/>
      <ul class="epub__calibre17">
         
         <li class="epub__calibre18">What kind of behavior are you encouraging by the way you’ve set up your limit?
            
         </li>
         
         <li class="epub__calibre18">What should you do when you end up in a situation in which you’re breaking the WIP limit?
            
         </li>
         
         <li class="epub__calibre18">Should you count blocked/queued items against the limit?
            
         </li>
         
      </ul>
      
      
<p class="epub__noind">As always, strive to start simple and make your approach more advanced as you see the need.</p>
      
      
      
      
</div>
</div>
</div>
  </div>
</div>
<div id="htmlthumbnail">
  <div id="t_block_list"/>
  <div class="clear"/>
</div>

</body>
</html>
