<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 13. Teaching kanban through games
      </title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="navtop_left"/>
<div class="navcenter_left"/>
<div class="navbottom_left"/>
<div class="navtop_right"/>
<div class="navcenter_right"/>
<div class="navbottom_right"/>
<div id="HtmlView" data-bow-ajaxcomponent="[&quot;/_ajax_htmlview&quot;,&quot;HtmlView&quot;,0,1,0,&quot;__className=bookhtmlcontent&amp;reader=html&amp;xmlid=9781617291050/pref01lev1sec1_html&quot;,&quot;&quot;]">
  <div>
    <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__calibre sbo-stylesheetcss sbo-pagestylescss">

<h2>Chapter 13. <a id="ch13__title"/>Teaching kanban through games
      </h2>
      
      
<p class="epub__noind"><a id="iddle1395"/><i class="epub__calibre6">This chapter covers</i></p>
      
      
<p class="epub__calibre16"/>
      <ul class="epub__calibre17">
         
         <li class="epub__calibre18">Using games and simulations to teach the principles of kanban
            
         </li>
         
         <li class="epub__calibre18">Leading discussions that help teams apply these principles in their daily work
            
         </li>
         
         <li class="epub__calibre18">Using the getKanban simulation as a standalone introduction to kanban
            
         </li>
         
      </ul>
      
      
<p class="epub__noind">This chapter presents some games we’ve played and used to introduce teams to kanban. We didn’t invent them, so we’ll try to
         attribute them correctly. Some of the games in the agile community are almost mythical and seem like they’ve been around forever.
         The true source or creator can be hidden in all the variants and changes made to the game over the years. We’ve gone through
         our network of colleagues to try to find the sources for the games we introduce—hopefully we’ve tracked down the correct ones.
         If we’ve failed to do so, we’re sorry; please help us correct this by sending us a message via the Author Online link at www.manning.com/kanbaninaction.
      </p>
      
      
<p class="epub__noind">As you start to use kanban with your team and at your workplace, you’ll soon find others around you who are interested in
         what you’re doing. It might even be the case that you’ve begun to introduce others to the concepts. If you’re anything like
         us, you’ll soon be teaching kanban concepts and practices.
      </p>
      
      
<p class="epub__noind">You could give your colleagues this book and say, “Talk to me again when you’ve read this!”<sup class="epub__calibre19">[1]</sup> But we’ve found that running a concrete, practical exercise makes the concepts stick much better. This idea is loosely founded
         in the thinking behind experience-based learning defined by David Kolb (<i class="epub__calibre6">Experiential Learning</i>, Prentice Hall, 1984, http://amzn.com/0132952610).<sup class="epub__calibre19">[2]</sup> We often start our presentation with a game or exercise that shows a principle in action and then refer back to what was
         learned as we present the theoretical concepts in kanban. In the introduction, we play Pass the Pennies with the team to show
         them why they’d want to limit WIP.
      </p>
      <blockquote class="epub__smaller">
         
<p class="epub__calibre16"><sup class="epub__calibre23"><a id="ch13fn01">1</a></sup> And by all means do!
         </p>
      </blockquote>
      <blockquote class="epub__smaller">
         
<p class="epub__calibre16"><sup class="epub__calibre23"><a id="ch13fn02">2</a></sup> See also “What is experience-based learning?” at http://mng.bz/9Ik1.
         </p>
      </blockquote>
      
      
<p class="epub__noind">For each game covered here, we add some tips, comments, and questions to get a discussion going and help the learning process.
         The following table shows a short summary of the games and the concepts we’ll talk about.
      </p>
      
      <table cellpadding="8" width="100%" frame="hsides" cellspacing="5" rules="groups" class="epub__calibre31">
         <colgroup span="3" class="epub__calibre8">
            <col width="100" class="epub__calibre9"/>
            <col width="250" class="epub__calibre9"/>
            <col width="250" class="epub__calibre9"/>
         </colgroup>
         <thead class="epub__calibre32">
            <tr class="epub__calibre11">
               <th scope="col" class="epub__docTableCell1" valign="top">
                  
<p class="epub__noind">Section</p>
               </th>
               <th scope="col" class="epub__docTableCell1" valign="top">
                  
<p class="epub__noind">Game</p>
               </th>
               <th scope="col" class="epub__docTableCell1" valign="top">
                  
<p class="epub__noind">Concepts taught</p>
               </th>
            </tr>
         </thead>
         <tbody class="epub__calibre10">
            <tr class="epub__calibre11">
               <td class="epub__docTableCell" valign="top">13.1</td>
               <td class="epub__docTableCell" valign="top">Pass the Pennies</td>
               <td class="epub__docTableCell" valign="top">Limiting WIP leads to shorter lead times.</td>
            </tr>
            <tr class="epub__calibre11">
               <td class="epub__docTableCell" valign="top">13.2</td>
               <td class="epub__docTableCell" valign="top">The Number Multitasking Game</td>
               <td class="epub__docTableCell" valign="top">Limiting WIP leads to shorter lead times. Multitasking leads to lost time and poor focus and quality.</td>
            </tr>
            <tr class="epub__calibre11">
               <td class="epub__docTableCell" valign="top">13.3</td>
               <td class="epub__docTableCell" valign="top">The Dot Game</td>
               <td class="epub__docTableCell" valign="top">Limiting WIP, tweaking the process toward even faster flow, collaboration. Little’s law and pushing more items into the system
                  increases WIP, which in turn slows the flow down.
               </td>
            </tr>
            <tr class="epub__calibre11">
               <td class="epub__docTableCell" valign="top">13.4</td>
               <td class="epub__docTableCell" valign="top">The Bottleneck Game</td>
               <td class="epub__docTableCell" valign="top">Improve flow in a system using the Theory of Constraints.</td>
            </tr>
            <tr class="epub__calibre11">
               <td class="epub__docTableCell" valign="top">13.5</td>
               <td class="epub__docTableCell" valign="top">getKanban</td>
               <td class="epub__docTableCell" valign="top">Improve your process by using the kanban principles in practice.</td>
            </tr>
            <tr class="epub__calibre11">
               <td class="epub__docTableCell" valign="top">13.6</td>
               <td class="epub__docTableCell" valign="top">The Kanban Pizza Game</td>
               <td class="epub__docTableCell" valign="top">Improve your process by applying the kanban principles, limiting WIP, and doing retrospectives in short increments.</td>
            </tr>
         </tbody>
      </table>
      
      
<p class="epub__noind">That’s quite a few games, so let’s get going right away with a quick, practical game that shows why limiting WIP is a great
         idea.
      </p>
      
      
      
      
</div>
</div>
  </div>
</div>
<div id="htmlthumbnail">
  <div id="t_block_list"/>
  <div class="clear"/>
</div>

</body>
</html>
