<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>A.1. Books on Lean and kanban
      </title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="navtop_left"/>
<div class="navcenter_left"/>
<div class="navbottom_left"/>
<div class="navtop_right"/>
<div class="navcenter_right"/>
<div class="navbottom_right"/>
<div id="HtmlView" data-bow-ajaxcomponent="[&quot;/_ajax_htmlview&quot;,&quot;HtmlView&quot;,0,1,0,&quot;__className=bookhtmlcontent&amp;reader=html&amp;xmlid=9781617291050/pref01lev1sec1_html&quot;,&quot;&quot;]">
  <div>
    <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="sbo-stylesheetcss sbo-pagestylescss">
<div><h3><a id="app01lev1sec1__title"/>A.1. Books on Lean and kanban
      </h3>
      
      
<p class="epub__calibre16"/>
      <ul class="epub__calibre17">
         
         <li class="epub__calibre18"><i class="epub__calibre6">Kanban: Successful Evolutionary Change for Your Technology Business</i> (David J. Anderson, Blue Hole Press, 2010, http://amzn.com/0984521402)—This is the book in which David J. Anderson defines and explains the Kanban Method. It’s basically a must-read if you’re
            interested in kanban. This book will teach you everything about how David and others came up with kanban and why and how it
            works.
            
         </li>
         
         <li class="epub__calibre18"><i class="epub__calibre6">This Is Lean: Resolving the Efficiency Paradox</i> (Per Åhlström and Niklas Modig, Rheologica Publishing, 2012, http://amzn.com/919803930X)—This great little book clearly explains the foundational thinking behind Lean and delivers a good definition of what Lean
            means. It’s written by Professor Per Åhlström and researcher Niklas Modig from the Stockholm School of Economics and is an
            easy read of about 160 pages.
            
         </li>
         
         <li class="epub__calibre18"><i class="epub__calibre6">The Toyota Way to Continuous Improvement: Linking Strategy and Operational Excellence to Achieve Superior Performance</i> (Jeffrey K. Liker and James K. Franz, McGraw-Hill, 2011, http://amzn.com/0071477462)—This book is the result of 20 years of studying Toyota and other Lean companies. It describes the philosophy and principles
            behind the Toyota Way and how Toyota implements the Toyota Production System in its daily business. The authors also share
            their advice on how you can change your company into a learning organization.
            
         </li>
         
         <li class="epub__calibre18"><i class="epub__calibre6">Toyota Kata: Managing People for Improvement, Adaptiveness, and Superior Results</i> (Mike Rother, McGraw-Hill, 2009, http://amzn.com/0071635238)—Rother looks beyond what Toyota does and tries to understand how and why. He then formalizes this into a method called the
            Toyota Kata. It’s a real eye-opener. The Kanban Kata that we talk about in chapter 10 is based on this book.
            
         </li>
         
         <li class="epub__calibre18"><i class="epub__calibre6">The Principles of Product Development Flow: Second Generation Lean Product Development</i> (Don Reinertsen, Celeritas Publishing, 2009, http://amzn.com/1935401009)—This dense book on product development contains 175 principles synthesizing knowledge from a vast array of fields, from
            telecommunications networking to military doctrine, into a second-generation Lean theory that goes beyond the faith-based
            approach and advocates applying an economic view to decisions.
            
         </li>
         
         <li class="epub__calibre18"><i class="epub__calibre6">Lean from the Trenches: Managing Large-Scale Projects with Kanban</i> (Henrik Kniberg, Pragmatic Bookshelf, 2011, http://amzn.com/1934356859)—This book presents a short case study on implementing Lean and kanban in the Swedish Police. The author is one of the prominent
            agile figures in Sweden.
            
         </li>
         
      </ul>
      
      
      
      
</div>
</div>
</div>
  </div>
</div>
<div id="htmlthumbnail">
  <div id="t_block_list"/>
  <div class="clear"/>
</div>

</body>
</html>
