<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>A.2. Books on agile
      </title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="navtop_left"/>
<div class="navcenter_left"/>
<div class="navbottom_left"/>
<div class="navtop_right"/>
<div class="navcenter_right"/>
<div class="navbottom_right"/>
<div id="HtmlView" data-bow-ajaxcomponent="[&quot;/_ajax_htmlview&quot;,&quot;HtmlView&quot;,0,1,0,&quot;__className=bookhtmlcontent&amp;reader=html&amp;xmlid=9781617291050/pref01lev1sec1_html&quot;,&quot;&quot;]">
  <div>
    <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="sbo-stylesheetcss sbo-pagestylescss">
<div><h3><a id="app01lev1sec2__title"/>A.2. Books on agile
      </h3>
      
      
<p class="epub__calibre16"/>
      <ul class="epub__calibre17">
         
         <li class="epub__calibre18"><i class="epub__calibre6">Scrum and XP from the Trenches</i> (Henrik Kniberg, Lulu.com, 2007, http://amzn.com/1430322640 or free as a downloadable PDF at www.infoq.com/minibooks/scrum-xp-from-the-trenches)—This book is an excellent, pragmatic introduction to Scrum and some agile practices. It has been the start of the agile
            journey for many people, including Marcus. Thanks, Henrik!
            
         </li>
         
         <li class="epub__calibre18"><i class="epub__calibre6">Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace Change</i> (Kent Beck, Addison-Wesley Professional, 1999, http://amzn.com/0201616416)—This book is an introduction to extreme programming (XP), one of the first agile methods. It describes several of the most
            important agile practices used by many kanban teams.
            
         </li>
         
         <li class="epub__calibre18"><i class="epub__calibre6">The Agile Samurai: How Agile Masters Deliver Great Software</i> (Jonathan Rasmusson, Pragmatic Bookshelf, 2010, http://amzn.com/1934356581)—This book is short, pragmatic, fun, and a good introduction to agile and a lot of practices around it. It includes many
            practical tips and can be used as an introduction. We’ve left this book with clients we’ve visited as reference literature.
            
         </li>
         
         <li class="epub__calibre18"><i class="epub__calibre6">The Art of Agile Development</i> (James Shore and Shane Warden, O’Reilly Media, 2007, http://amzn.com/0596527675)—This detailed introduction to many agile practices (particularly XP) is great for the novice and advanced beginner, but
            it also presents some new perspectives and good exercises for more experienced practitioners.
            
         </li>
         
      </ul>
      
      
      
      
      
</div>
</div>
</div>
  </div>
</div>
<div id="htmlthumbnail">
  <div id="t_block_list"/>
  <div class="clear"/>
</div>

</body>
</html>
