<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>A.3. Books on software development
      </title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="navtop_left"/>
<div class="navcenter_left"/>
<div class="navbottom_left"/>
<div class="navtop_right"/>
<div class="navcenter_right"/>
<div class="navbottom_right"/>
<div id="HtmlView" data-bow-ajaxcomponent="[&quot;/_ajax_htmlview&quot;,&quot;HtmlView&quot;,0,1,0,&quot;__className=bookhtmlcontent&amp;reader=html&amp;xmlid=9781617291050/pref01lev1sec1_html&quot;,&quot;&quot;]">
  <div>
    <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="sbo-stylesheetcss sbo-pagestylescss">
<div><h3><a id="app01lev1sec3__title"/>A.3. Books on software development
      </h3>
      
      
<p class="epub__noind">Even though this isn’t a book on software development as in writing code, we have found the following books interesting and
         have learned a lot from them that we can use in practice to assist our kanban teams:
      </p>
      
      
<p class="epub__calibre16"/>
      <ul class="epub__calibre17">
         
         <li class="epub__calibre18"><i class="epub__calibre6">Specification by Example: How Successful Teams Deliver the Right Software</i> (Gojko Adzic, Manning, 2011, www.manning.com/adzic/)—Specification by example is a practice to ensure that you’re building the right thing: what’s needed, not only what the
            customer wanted. This book does an excellent job of describing all the aspects and consequences of specification by example
            (a.k.a. behavior-driven development or acceptance-driven development).
            
         </li>
         
         <li class="epub__calibre18"><i class="epub__calibre6">Test-Driven Development: By Example</i> (Kent Beck, Addison-Wesley Professional, 2002, http://amzn.com/0321146530)—This book provides a great introduction to test-driven development (TDD) through a thorough case study that shows you the
            how-tos in small, fine-grained steps.
            
         </li>
         
         <li class="epub__calibre18"><i class="epub__calibre6">Growing Object-Oriented Systems Guided by Tests</i> (Steve Freeman and Nat Pryce, Addison-Wesley Professional, 2009, http://amzn.com/0321503627)—In this book (known in inner circles as the GOOS book), the authors show how TDD can be applied in the larger world. It
            includes a lot of practical examples and tips throughout.
            
         </li>
         
         <li class="epub__calibre18"><i class="epub__calibre6">Clean Code: A Handbook of Agile Software Craftsmanship</i> (Robert C. Martin, Prentice Hall, 2008, http://amzn.com/0132350882)—This is a must-read for any agile developer. It shows you how to write clean and maintainable code. It will probably also
            make you ashamed of your own code (as it did for Uncle Bob himself).
            
         </li>
         
         <li class="epub__calibre18"><i class="epub__calibre6">The Clean Coder: A Code of Conduct for Professional Programmers</i> (Robert C. Martin, Prentice Hall, 2011, http://amzn.com/0137081073)—Uncle Bob turns his attention to the professional developer and scrutinizes what it means to be a great developer. This
            is done through many anecdotes and funny stories that make you think about your profession in a new way.
            
         </li>
         
      </ul>
      
      
      
      
</div>
</div>
</div>
  </div>
</div>
<div id="htmlthumbnail">
  <div id="t_block_list"/>
  <div class="clear"/>
</div>

</body>
</html>
