<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>A.4. Books on business and change management
      </title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="navtop_left"/>
<div class="navcenter_left"/>
<div class="navbottom_left"/>
<div class="navtop_right"/>
<div class="navcenter_right"/>
<div class="navbottom_right"/>
<div id="HtmlView" data-bow-ajaxcomponent="[&quot;/_ajax_htmlview&quot;,&quot;HtmlView&quot;,0,1,0,&quot;__className=bookhtmlcontent&amp;reader=html&amp;xmlid=9781617291050/pref01lev1sec1_html&quot;,&quot;&quot;]">
  <div>
    <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="sbo-stylesheetcss sbo-pagestylescss">
<div><h3><a id="app01lev1sec4__title"/>A.4. Books on business and change management
      </h3>
      
      
<p class="epub__calibre16"/>
      <ul class="epub__calibre17">
         
         <li class="epub__calibre18"><i class="epub__calibre6">The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement</i> (Eliyahu M. Goldratt, North River Press, 2012, http://amzn.com/0884271951)—Imagine writing a book on the Theory of Constraints. Imagine how boring that book could be. This is the opposite. It’s a
            gripping and entertaining novel that teaches you about the Theory of Constraints while following the destiny of Alex Rogo.
            This is done in such a subtle way that you almost don’t notice it until you’re done.
            It’s one of the best books we’ve read!
            
         </li>
         
         <li class="epub__calibre18"><i class="epub__calibre6">Switch: How to Change Things When Change Is Hard</i> (Chip Heath and Dan Heath, Crown Business, 2010, http://amzn.com/0385528752)—This book teaches you about making changes: personal changes, helping others change, and changes to organizations. It gives
            you a practical framework for making changes and contains loads of examples and studies to back it all up.
            This book made us feel almost as though we were cheating by knowing all these techniques when we’d finished reading it. You
            can get that feeling, too!
            
         </li>
         
         <li class="epub__calibre18"><i class="epub__calibre6">Made to Stick: Why Some Ideas Survive and Others Die</i> (Chip Heath and Dan Heath, Random House, 2007, http://amzn.com/1400064287)—Here’s another great title by the Heath brothers that talks about making your ideas sticky, which in turn is a way to improve
            the change process. It provides lots of cases (the opening case will stick with you forever, as an example) and practical
            tips.
            
         </li>
         
         <li class="epub__calibre18"><i class="epub__calibre6">Fearless Change: Patterns for Introducing New Ideas</i> (Mary Lynn Manns and Linda Rising, Addison-Wesley, 2004, http://amzn.com/0201741571)—This book contains a lot of small patterns: ways, thoughts, and practices that can help you bring about change. After a
            short narrative about the ideas behind the patterns, the book presents a long list of patterns that you can start tomorrow.
            It’s a must-have for any change agent.
            
         </li>
         
         <li class="epub__calibre18"><i class="epub__calibre6">The Lean Startup: How Today’s Entrepreneurs Use Continuous Innovation to Create Radically Successful Businesses</i> (Eric Ries, Crown Business, 2011, http://theleanstartup.com/book, http://amzn.com/0307887898)—This book talks about applying Lean concepts to ideas: more specifically, business ideas; and even more specifically, startup
            ideas. These ideas range from using the scientific method for exploration to A/B testing to validate your hypothesis. Soon
            after reading it, you’ll start to realize what many others have seen: Lean Startup can be applied to your business regardless
            of whether you’re a startup.
            
         </li>
         
      </ul>
      
      
      
      
</div>
</div>
</div>
  </div>
</div>
<div id="htmlthumbnail">
  <div id="t_block_list"/>
  <div class="clear"/>
</div>

</body>
</html>
