<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Appendix B. Kanban tools
      </title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="navtop_left"/>
<div class="navcenter_left"/>
<div class="navbottom_left"/>
<div class="navtop_right"/>
<div class="navcenter_right"/>
<div class="navbottom_right"/>
<div id="HtmlView" data-bow-ajaxcomponent="[&quot;/_ajax_htmlview&quot;,&quot;HtmlView&quot;,0,1,0,&quot;__className=bookhtmlcontent&amp;reader=html&amp;xmlid=9781617291050/pref01lev1sec1_html&quot;,&quot;&quot;]">
  <div>
    <div class="htmlcontent"><div class="epub__calibre sbo-stylesheetcss sbo-pagestylescss">

<h2>Appendix B. <a id="app02__title"/>Kanban tools
      </h2>
      
      
      
      
<p class="epub__noind"><a id="iddle2095"/>Some of the more common questions and suggestions we get when presenting kanban are about tooling: “Surely there must be an
         electronic tool to track stickies,” “But what if we’re distributed geographically? Would an online board be better?” and so
         on.
      </p>
      
      
<p class="epub__noind">There are loads of tools out there, and many of them are useful and great. We haven’t talked too much about online, electronic
         tools in this book for a simple reason: this is a book about the principles and thinking of kanban and not about the tooling.
         When you understand the principles, you can bend the tools to your will.
      </p>
      
      
<p class="epub__noind">We often suggest to new teams that they start on a physical board and then move to an electronic tool when they’ve got the
         hang of it. Not that you can’t start electronically, but there’s often a tendency to not change much in electronic tools if,
         for example, it’s something that’s hard to do and that takes time.<sup class="epub__calibre19">[1]</sup> When you start using kanban, you want it to be super simple to change your process as you see the need: like wiping a whiteboard
         and starting over.
      </p>
      <blockquote class="epub__smaller">
         
<p class="epub__calibre16"><sup class="epub__calibre23"><a id="app01fn01">1</a></sup> For example, we’ve both worked at a company that had “Greenhopper guys,” who were the only ones who knew how to and had the
            authorization to change the board.
         </p>
      </blockquote>
      
      
<p class="epub__noind">Make sure the tool isn’t dictating what you can do with your process. A tool is something that should serve you, not the other
         way around.
      </p>
      
      
<p class="epub__noind">Here’s a list of tools that we have used or heard good things about. This list was probably old the moment we wrote it down,
         so keep your eyes and ears open for newer, better, and cooler tools.
      </p>
      
      
<p class="epub__noind">The lists ahead are in no particular order. We didn’t get paid by any of these vendors, nor do we lean toward any of the tools
         (because we prefer physical boards when we can have those). We did a quick shout-out on Twitter and got few suggestions.
      </p>
      
      
      
      
</div>
</div>
  </div>
</div>
<div id="htmlthumbnail">
  <div id="t_block_list"/>
  <div class="clear"/>
</div>

</body>
</html>
