<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>1.6. Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">1.6. Exercises</h3>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Regular Expressions.</span> Create regular expressions in Exercises 1-1 to 1-12 that:</p>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1-1.</b></td><td class="docText">Recognize the following strings: “bat,” “bit,” “but,” “hat,” “hit,” or “hut.”</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1-2.</b></td><td class="docText">Match any pair of words separated by a single space, that is, first and last names.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1-3.</b></td><td class="docText">Match any word and single letter separated by a comma and single space, as in last name, first initial.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1-4.</b></td><td class="docText">Match the set of all valid Python identifiers.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1-5.</b></td><td class="docText">Match
 a street address according to your local format (keep your regex 
general enough to match any number of street words, including the type 
designation). For example, American street addresses use the format: 
1180 Bordeaux Drive. Make your regex flexible enough to support 
multi-word street names such as: 3120 De la Cruz Boulevard.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1-6.</b></td><td class="docText">Match simple Web domain names that begin with “www.” and end with a “.com” suffix; for example, www.yahoo.com. Extra Credit: If your regex also supports other high-level domain names, such as .edu, .net, etc. (for example, www.foothill.edu).</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1-7.</b></td><td class="docText">Match the set of the string representations of all Python integers.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1-8.</b></td><td class="docText">Match the set of the string representations of all Python longs.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1-9.</b></td><td class="docText">Match the set of the string representations of all Python floats.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1-10.</b></td><td class="docText">Match the set of the string representations of all Python complex numbers.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1-11.</b></td><td class="docText">Match
 the set of all valid e-mail addresses (start with a loose regex, and 
then try to tighten it as much as you can, yet maintain correct 
functionality).</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1-12.</b></td><td class="docText">Match
 the set of all valid Web site addresses (URLs) (start with a loose 
regex, and then try to tighten it as much as you can, yet maintain 
correct functionality).</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1-13.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis"><tt>type()</tt>.</span> The <tt>type()</tt> built-in function returns a type object, which is displayed as the following Pythonic-looking string:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>&gt;&gt;&gt; type(0)
&lt;type 'int'&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; type(.34)
&lt;type 'float'&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; type(dir)
&lt;type 'builtin_function_or_method'&gt;</pre></div><br/>
Create a regex that would extract the actual type name from the string. Your function should take a string like this <tt>&lt;type 'int'&gt;</tt> and return <tt>int</tt>. (Ditto for all other types, such as <tt>‘float’</tt>, <tt>‘builtin_function_or_method’</tt>, etc.) Note: You are implementing the value that is stored in the <tt>__name__</tt> attribute for classes and some built-in types.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1-14.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Processing Dates.</span> In Section 1.2,
 we gave you the regex pattern that matched the single or double-digit 
string representations of the months January to September (<tt>0?[1-9]</tt>). Create the regex that represents the remaining three months in the standard calendar.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1-15.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Processing Credit Card Numbers.</span> Also in Section 1.2, we gave you the regex pattern that matched credit card (CC) numbers (<tt>[0-9]{15,16}</tt>).
 However, this pattern does not allow for hyphens separating blocks of 
numbers. Create the regex that allows hyphens, but only in the correct 
locations. For example, 15-digit CC numbers have a pattern of 4-6-5, 
indicating four digits-hyphen-six digits-hyphen-five digits; and 
16-digit CC numbers have a 4-4-4-4 pattern. Remember to “balloon” the 
size of the entire string correctly. Extra Credit: There is a standard 
algorithm for determining whether a CC number is valid. Write some code 
that not only recognizes a correctly formatted CC number, but also a 
valid one.</p></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
<p class="docText">Playing with <tt>gendata.py</tt>. The next set of Exercises (1-16 through 1-27) deal specifically with the data that is generated by <tt>gendata.py</tt>. Before approaching Exercises 1-17 and 1-18, you might want to do 1-16 and all the regular expressions first.</p>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1-16.</b></td><td class="docText">Update the code for <tt>gendata.py</tt> so that the data is written directly to <tt>redata.txt</tt> rather than output to the screen.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1-17.</b></td><td class="docText">Determine how many times each day of the week shows up for any incarnation of <tt>redata.txt</tt>. (Alternatively, you can also count how many times each month of the year was chosen.)</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1-18.</b></td><td class="docText">Ensure that there is no data corruption in <tt>redata.txt</tt> by confirming that the first integer of the integer field matches the timestamp given at the beginning of each output line.</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Create Regular Expressions That:</span></p>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1-19.</b></td><td class="docText">Extract the complete timestamps from each line.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1-20.</b></td><td class="docText">Extract the complete e-mail address from each line.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1-21.</b></td><td class="docText">Extract only the months from the timestamps.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1-22.</b></td><td class="docText">Extract only the years from the timestamps.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1-23.</b></td><td class="docText">Extract only the time (HH:MM:SS) from the timestamps.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1-24.</b></td><td class="docText">Extract only the login and domain names (both the main domain name and the high-level domain together) from the e-mail address.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1-25.</b></td><td class="docText">Extract only the login and domain names (both the main domain name and the high-level domain) from the e-mail address.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1-26.</b></td><td class="docText">Replace the e-mail address from each line of data with your e-mail address.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1-27.</b></td><td class="docText">Extract
 the months, days, and years from the timestamps and output them in 
“Mon, Day, Year” format, iterating over each line only once.</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Processing Telephone Numbers</span>. For Exercises 1-28 and 1-29, recall the regular expression introduced in Section 1.2, which matched telephone numbers but allowed for an optional area code prefix: <tt>\d{3}-\d{3}-\d{4}</tt>. Update this regular expression so that:</p>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1-28.</b></td><td class="docText">Area
 codes (the first set of three-digits and the accompanying hyphen) are 
optional, that is, your regex should match both 800-555-1212 as well as 
just 555-1212.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1-29.</b></td><td class="docText">Either
 parenthesized or hyphenated area codes are supported, not to mention 
optional; make your regex match 800-555-1212, 555-1212, and also (800) 
555-1212.</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Regex Utilities</span>. The final set of exercises make useful utility scripts when processing online data:</p>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1-30.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">HTML Generation.</span>
 Given a list of links (and optional short description), whether 
user-provided on command-line, via input from another script, or from a 
database, generate a Web page (<tt>.html</tt>) 
that includes all links as hypertext anchors, which upon viewing in a 
Web browser, allows users to click those links and visit the 
corresponding site. If the short description is provided, use that as 
the hypertext instead of the URL.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1-31.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Tweet Scrub.</span>
 Sometimes all you want to see is the plain text of a tweet as posted to
 the Twitter service by users. Create a function that takes a tweet and 
an optional “meta” flag defaulted <tt>False</tt>,
 and then returns a string of the scrubbed tweet, removing all the 
extraneous information, such as an “RT” notation for “retweet”, a 
leading <tt>.</tt>, and all “#hashtags”. If the meta flag is <tt>True</tt>,
 then also return a dict containing the metadata. This can include a key
 “RT,” whose value is a tuple of strings of users who retweeted the 
message, and/or a key “hashtags” with a tuple of the hashtags. If the 
values don’t exist (empty tuples), then don’t even bother creating a 
key-value entry for them.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>1-32.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Amazon Screenscraper.</span>
 Create a script that helps you to keep track of your favorite books and
 how they’re doing on Amazon (or any other online bookseller that tracks
 book rankings). For example, the Amazon link for any book is of the 
format, http://amazon.com/dp/ISBN (for example, http://amazon.com/dp/0132678209).
 You can then change the domain name to check out the equivalent 
rankings on Amazon sites in other countries, such as Germany (.de), 
France (.fr), Japan (.jp), China (.cn), and the UK (.co.uk). Use regular
 expressions or a markup parser, such as BeautifulSoup, lxml, or 
html5lib to parse the ranking, and then let the user pass in a 
command-line argument that specifies whether the output should be in 
plain text, perhaps for inclusion in an e-mail body, or formatted in 
HTML for Web consumption.</p></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
