<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>2.6. *Introduction to the Twisted Framework</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">2.6. *Introduction to the Twisted Framework</h3>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Twisted</span>
 is a complete event-driven networking framework with which you can both
 use and develop complete asynchronous networked applications and 
protocols. It is <span class="docEmphasis">not</span>
 part of the Python Standard Library as of this writing and must be 
downloaded and installed separately (you can use the link at the end of 
the chapter). It provides a significant amount of support for you to 
build complete systems, including network protocols, threading, security
 and authentication, chat/IM, DBM and RDBMS database integration, 
Web/Internet, e-mail, command-line arguments, GUI toolkit integration, 
etc.</p>
<p class="docText">Using Twisted to implement
 our tiny simplistic example is like using a sledgehammer to pound a 
thumbtack, but you have to get started somehow, and our application is 
the equivalent to the “hello world” of networked applications.</p>
<p class="docText">Like <tt>SocketServer</tt>,
 most of the functionality of Twisted lies in its classes. In particular
 for our examples, we will be using the classes found in the reactor and
 protocol subpackages of Twisted’s Internet component.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EGKAG">2.6.1. Creating a Twisted Reactor TCP Server</h4>
<p class="docText">You will find the code in Example 2-10 similar to that of the <tt>SocketServer</tt>
 example. Instead of a handler class, however, we create a protocol 
class and override several methods in the same manner as installing 
callbacks. Also, this example is asynchronous. Let’s take a look at the 
server now.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EZKAG">Example 2-10. Twisted Reactor Timestamp TCP Server (<tt>tsTservTW.py</tt>)</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<p class="docText">This is a timestamp TCP server that uses Twisted Internet classes.</p>
<pre>1    #!/usr/bin/env python
2
3    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> twisted.internet <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> protocol, reactor
4    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> time <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> ctime
5
6    PORT = 21567
7
8    <span class="docEmphStrong">class</span> TSServProtocol(protocol.Protocol):
9        <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> connectionMade(self):
10            clnt = self.clnt = self.transport.getPeer().host
11            <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> '...connected from:', clnt
12       <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> dataReceived(self, data):
13            self.transport.write('[%s] %s' % (
14                  ctime(), data))
15
16   factory = protocol.Factory()
17   factory.protocol = TSServProtocol
18   <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> 'waiting for connection...'
19   reactor.listenTCP(PORT, factory)
20   reactor.run()</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EHMAG">Line-by-Line Explanation</h5>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0EPMAG">Lines 1–6</h5>
<p class="docText">The setup lines of code include the usual module imports, most notably the <tt>protocol</tt> and <tt>reactor</tt> subpackages of <tt>twisted.internet</tt> and our constant port number.</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0EBOAG">Lines 8–14</h5>
<p class="docText">We derive the <tt>Protocol</tt> class and call ours <tt>TSServProtocol</tt> for our timestamp server. We then override <tt>connectionMade()</tt>, a method that is executed when a client connects to us, and <tt>dataReceived()</tt>,
 called when a client sends a piece of data across the network. The 
reactor passes in the data as an argument to this method so that we can 
get access to it right away without having to extract it ourselves.</p>
<p class="docText">The transport instance object is how we can communicate with the client. You can see how we use it in <tt>connectionMade()</tt> to get the host information about who is connecting to us as well as in <tt>dataReceived()</tt> to return data back to the client.</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0E3OAG">Lines 16–20</h5>
<p class="docText">In the final part of our server, we create a protocol <tt>Factory</tt>.
 It is called a factory because an instance of our protocol is 
“manufactured” every time we get an incoming connection. We then install
 a TCP listener in our reactor to check for service requests; when it 
receives a request, it creates a <tt>TSServProtocol</tt> instance to take care of that client.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EOPAG">2.6.2. Creating a Twisted Reactor TCP Client</h4>
<p class="docText">Unlike the <tt>SocketServer</tt> TCP client, Example 2-11 will not look like all the other clients—this one is distinctly Twisted.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EBQAG">Example 2-11. Twisted Reactor Timestamp TCP Client (<tt>tsTclntTW.py</tt>)</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<p class="docText">Our familiar timestamp TCP client, written from a Twisted point of view.</p>
<pre class="preFixedHeight">1    #!/usr/bin/env python
2
3    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> twisted.internet <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> protocol, reactor
4
5    HOST = 'localhost'
6    PORT = 21567
7
8    <span class="docEmphStrong">class</span> TSClntProtocol(protocol.Protocol):
9        <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> sendData(self):
10           data = raw_input('&gt; ')
11           <span class="docEmphStrong">if</span> data:
12               <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> '...sending %s...' % data
13               self.transport.write(data)
14           <span class="docEmphStrong">else</span>:
15               self.transport.loseConnection()
16
17       <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> connectionMade(self):
18           self.sendData()
19
20       <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> dataReceived(self, data):
21           <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> data
22           self.sendData()
23
24   <span class="docEmphStrong">class</span> TSClntFactory(protocol.ClientFactory):
25       protocol = TSClntProtocol
26       clientConnectionLost = clientConnectionFailed = \
27          <span class="docEmphStrong">lambda</span> self, connector, reason: reactor.stop()
28
29   reactor.connectTCP(HOST, PORT, TSClntFactory())
30   reactor.run()

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EYRAG">Line-by-Line Explanation</h5>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0EASAG">Lines 1–6</h5>
<p class="docText">Again, nothing really new here apart from the import of Twisted components. It is very similar to all of our other clients.</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0EQTAG">Lines 8–22</h5>
<p class="docText">Like the server, we extend <tt>Protocol</tt> by overriding the <tt>connectionMade()</tt> and <tt>dataReceived()</tt> methods. Both execute for the same reason as the server. We also add our own method for when data needs to be sent and call it <tt>sendData()</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Because this time we are the 
client, we are the ones initiating a conversation with the server. Once 
that connection has been established, we take the first step and send a 
message. The server replies, and we handle it by displaying it to the 
screen and sending another message to the server.</p>
<p class="docText">This continues in a loop until we terminate the connection by giving no input when prompted. Instead of calling the <tt>write()</tt> method of the transport object to send another message to the server, <tt>loseConnection()</tt> is executed, closing the socket. When this occurs, the factory’s <tt>clientConnectionLost()</tt> method will be called and our reactor is stopped, completing execution of our script. We also stop the reactor if a <tt>clientConnectionFailed()</tt> for some other reason.</p>
<p class="docText">The final part of the script 
is where we create a client factory and make a connection to the server 
and run the reactor. Note that we instantiate the client factory here 
instead of passing it in to the reactor, as we did in the server. This 
is because we are not the server waiting for clients to talk to us, and 
its factory makes a new protocol object for each connection. <span class="docEmphasis">We</span> are one client, so we make a single protocol object that connects to the server, whose factory makes one to talk to ours.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EYWAG">2.6.3. Executing Our TCP Server and Client(s)</h4>
<p class="docText">The Twisted client displays output similar to all of our other clients:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>$ tsTclntTW.py
&gt; Where is hope
...sending Where is hope...
[Tue Apr 18 23:53:09 2006] Where is hope
&gt; When words fail
...sending When words fail...
[Tue Apr 18 23:53:14 2006] When words fail
&gt;
$</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The server is back to
 a single connection. Twisted maintains the connection and does not 
close the transport after every message:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>$ tsTservTW.py
waiting for connection...
...connected from: 127.0.0.1</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The “connection from” output does not have the other information because we only asked for the host/address from the <tt>getPeer()</tt> method of the server’s transport object.</p>
<p class="docText">Keep in mind that most 
applications based on Twisted are much more complex than the examples 
built in this subsection. It is a feature-rich library, but it does come
 with a level of complexity for which you need to be prepared.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
