<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>2.7. Related Modules</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">2.7. Related Modules</h3>
<p class="docText">Table 2-4 lists some of the other Python modules that are related to network and socket programming. The <tt>select</tt> module is usually used in conjunction with the <tt>socket</tt> module when developing lower-level socket applications. It provides the <tt>select()</tt>
 function, which manages sets of socket objects. One of the most useful 
things it does is to take a set of sockets and listen for active 
connections on them. The <tt>select()</tt> 
function will block until at least one socket is ready for 
communication, and when that happens, it provides you with a set of 
those that are ready for reading. (It can also determine which sockets 
are ready for writing, although that is not as common as the former 
operation.)</p>
<p></p><table cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0" frame="hsides" rules="groups"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 2-4. Network/Socket Programming Related Modules</h5></caption><colgroup align="left" span="2"><col width="200"></col><col width="400"></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell bottomBorder thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Module</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell bottomBorder thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Description</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>socket</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Lower-level networking interface, as discussed in this chapter</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>asyncore/asynchat</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Provide infrastructure to create networked applications that process clients asynchronously</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>select</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Manages multiple socket connections in a single-threaded network server application</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>SocketServer</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">High-level module that provides server classes for networked applications, complete with forking or threading varieties</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>async*</tt> and <tt>SocketServer</tt> modules both provide higher-level functionality as far as creating servers is concerned. Written on top of the <tt>socket</tt> and/or <tt>select</tt>
 modules, they enable more rapid development of client/server systems 
because all the lower-level code is handled for you. All you have to do 
is to create or subclass the appropriate base classes, and you are on 
your way. As we mentioned earlier, <tt>SocketServer</tt>
 even provides the capability of integrating threading or new processes 
into the server, which affords a more parallel-like processing of client
 requests.</p>
<p class="docText">Although <tt>async*</tt>
 provides the only asynchronous development support in the standard 
library, in the previous section, you were introduced to Twisted, a 
third-party package that is more powerful than those older modules.
 Although the example code we have seen in this chapter is slightly 
longer than the barebones scripts, Twisted provides a much more powerful
 and flexible framework and has implemented many protocols for you 
already. You can find out more about Twisted at its Web site:</p>
<blockquote><p></p><p class="docList">http://twistedmatrix.com</p><p></p></blockquote>
<p class="docText">A more modern 
networking framework is Concurrence, which is the engine behind the 
Dutch social network, Hyves. Concurrence is a high-performance I/O 
system paired with <span class="docEmphasis">libevent</span>,
 the lower-level event callback dispatching system. Concurrence follows 
an asynchronous model, using lightweight threads (executing callbacks) 
in an event-driven way to do the work and message-passing for 
interthread communication. You can find out more info about Concurrence 
at:</p>
<blockquote><p></p><p class="docList">http://opensource.hyves.org/concurrence</p><p></p></blockquote>
<p class="docText">Modern networking 
frameworks follow one of many asynchronous models (greenlets, 
generators, etc.) to provide high-performance asynchronous servers. One 
of the goals of these frameworks is to push the complexity of 
asynchronous programming so as to allow users to code in a more 
familiar, synchronous manner.</p>
<p class="docText">The topics we have covered in
 this chapter deal with network programming with sockets in Python and 
how to create custom applications using lower-level protocol suites such
 as TCP/IP and UDP/IP. If you want to develop higher-level Web and 
Internet applications, we strongly encourage you to move ahead to Chapter 3, “Internet Client Programming,” or perhaps skip to Part II of the book.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
