<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>2.8. Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">2.8. Exercises</h3>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2-1.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Sockets.</span> What is the difference between connection-oriented and connectionless sockets?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2-2.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Client/Server Architecture.</span> Describe in your own words what this term means and give several examples.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2-3.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Sockets.</span> Between TCP and UDP, which type of servers accept connections and hands them off to separate sockets for client communication?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2-4.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Clients.</span> Update the TCP (<tt>tsTclnt.py</tt>) and UDP (<tt>tsUclnt.py</tt>)
 clients so that the server name is not hardcoded into the application. 
Allow the user to specify a hostname and port number, and only use the 
default values if either or both parameters are missing.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2-5.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Internetworking and Sockets.</span> Implement the sample TCP client/server programs found in the Python Library Reference documentation on the <tt>socket</tt> module and get them to work. Set up the server and then the client. An online version of the source is also available here:</p>
<blockquote><p></p><p class="docList">http://docs.python.org/library/socket#example</p><p></p></blockquote>
You decide the server is too boring. Update the server so that it can do much more, recognizing the following commands:
<p></p><table cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0" frame="void" rules="none"><colgroup align="left" span="2"><col width="50"></col><col width="450"></col></colgroup><thead></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>date</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Server will return its current date/timestamp, that is, <tt>time.ctime()</tt>.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>os</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Get OS information (<tt>os.name</tt>).</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>ls</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Give a listing of the current directory. (Hints: <tt>os.listdir()</tt> lists a directory, <tt>os.curdir</tt> is the current directory.) Extra Credit: Accept <tt>ls</tt> <tt>dir</tt> and return <tt>dir</tt>’s file listing.</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">You do not need a network to do
 this assignment—your computer can communicate with itself. Be aware 
that after the server exits, the binding must be cleared before you can 
run it again. You might experience “port already bound” errors. The 
operating system usually clears the binding within 5 minutes, so be 
patient.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2-6.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Daytime Service.</span> Use the <tt>socket.getservbyname()</tt> to determine the port number for the “daytime” service under the UDP protocol. Check the documentation for <tt>getservbyname()</tt> to get the exact usage syntax (i.e., <tt>socket.getservbyname.__doc__</tt>).
 Now write an application that sends a dummy message over and wait for 
the reply. Once you have received a reply from the server, display it to
 the screen.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2-7.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Half-Duplex Chat.</span> Create a simple, <span class="docEmphasis">half-duplex</span>
 chat program. By half-duplex, we mean that when a connection is made 
and the service starts, only one person can type. The other participant 
must wait to get a message before being prompted to enter a message. 
Once a message is sent, the sender must wait for a reply before being 
allowed to send another message. One participant will be on the server 
side; the other will be on the client side.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2-8.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Full-Duplex Chat.</span> Update your solution to the previous exercise so that your chat service is now <span class="docEmphasis">full-duplex</span>, meaning that both parties can send and receive, independent of each other.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2-9.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Multi-User Full Duplex Chat.</span> Further update your solution so that your chat service is multi-user.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2-10.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Multi-User, Multiroom, Full Duplex Chat.</span> Now make your chat service multi-user <span class="docEmphasis">and</span> multiroom.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2-11.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Web Client.</span>
 Write a TCP client that connects to port 80 of your favorite Web site 
(remove the “http://” and any trailing information; use only the 
hostname). Once a connection has been established, send the HTTP command
 string <tt>GET</tt> <tt>/\n</tt> and write all the data that the server returns to a file. (The <tt>GET</tt> command retrieves a Web page, the <tt>/</tt> file indicates the file to get, and the <tt>\n</tt>
 sends the command to the server.) Examine the contents of the retrieved
 file. What is it? How can you check to make sure the data you received 
is correct? (Note: You might have to insert one or two NEWLINEs after 
the command string. One usually works.)</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2-12.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Sleep Server.</span> Create a <span class="docEmphasis">sleep</span>
 server. A client will request to be “put to sleep” for a number of 
seconds. The server will issue the command on behalf of the client then 
return a message to the client indicating success. The client should 
have slept or should have been idle for the exact time requested. This 
is a simple implementation of a remote procedure call, where a client’s 
request invokes commands on another computer across the network.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2-13.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Name Server.</span>
 Design and implement a name server. Such a server is responsible for 
maintaining a database of hostname-port number pairs, perhaps along with
 the string description of the service that the corresponding servers 
provide. Take one or more existing servers and have them register their 
service with your name server. (Note that these servers are, in this 
case, clients of the name server.)</p>
Every client that starts up has no idea where the server is that it is 
looking for. Also as clients of the name server, these clients should 
send a request to the name server indicating what type of service they 
are seeking. The name server, in reply, returns a hostname-port number 
pair to this client, which then connects to the appropriate server to 
process its request.
<p class="docText">Extra Credit:</p>
<div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Add caching to your name server for popular requests.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Add
 logging capability to your name server, keeping track of which servers 
have registered and which services clients are requesting.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Your
 name server should periodically ping the registered hosts at their 
respective port numbers to ensure that the service is indeed up. 
Repeated failures will cause a server to be delisted from the list of 
services.</p></div></li></ol></div>
<p class="docText">You can implement real 
services for the servers that register for your name service, or just 
use dummy servers (which merely acknowledge a request).</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2-14.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Error Checking and Graceful Shutdown.</span>
 All of the sample client/server code presented in this chapter is poor 
in terms of error-checking. We do not handle scenarios such as when 
users press Ctrl+C to exit out of a server or Ctrl+D to terminate client
 input, nor do we check other improper input to <tt>raw_input()</tt>
 or handle network errors. Because of this weakness, quite often we 
terminate an application without closing our sockets, potentially losing
 data. Choose a client/server pair of one of our examples, and add 
enough error-checking so that each application properly shuts down, that
 is, closes network connections.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2-15.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Asynchronicity and <tt>SocketServer/socketserver</tt>.</span>
 Take the example TCP server and use either mix-in class to support an 
asynchronous server. To test your server, create and run multiple 
clients simultaneously and show output that your server is serving 
requests from both, interleaved.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2-16.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">*Extending <tt>SocketServer</tt> Classes.</span> In the <tt>SocketServer</tt> TCP server code, we had to change our client from the original base TCP client because the <tt>SocketServer</tt> class does not maintain the connection between requests.</p>
<div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Subclass the <tt>TCPServer</tt> and <tt>StreamRequestHandler</tt> classes and re-design the server so that it maintains and uses a single connection for each client (not one per request).</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Integrate
 your solution for the previous exercise with your solution to part (a),
 such that multiple clients are being serviced in parallel.</p></div></li></ol></div></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>2-17.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">*Asynchronous Systems.</span>
 Research at least five different Python-based asynchronous 
systems—choose from Twisted, Greenlets, Tornado, Diesel, Concurrence, 
Eventlet, Gevent, etc. Describe what they are, categorize them, find 
similarities and differences, and then create some demonstration code 
samples.</p></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
