<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>3.1. What Are Internet Clients?</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">3.1. What Are Internet Clients?</h3>
<p class="docText">Before we take a look at 
these protocols, we first must ask, “What is an Internet client?” To 
answer this question, we simplify the Internet to a place where data is 
exchanged, and this interchange is made up of someone offering a service
 and a user of such services. You will hear the term <span class="docEmphasis">producer-consumer</span>
 in some circles (although this phrase is generally reserved for 
conversations on operating systems). Servers are the producers, 
providing the services, and clients consume the offered services. For 
any one particular service, there is usually only one server (process, 
host, etc.) and more than one consumer. We previously examined the 
client/server model, and although we do not need to create Internet 
clients with the low-level socket operations seen earlier, the model is 
an accurate match.</p>
<p class="docText">In this chapter, we’ll 
explore a variety of these Internet protocols and create clients for 
each. When finished, you should be able to recognize how similar the 
application programming interfaces (APIs) of all of these protocols 
are—this is done by design, as keeping interfaces consistent is a worthy
 cause—and most importantly, the ability to create real clients of these
 and other Internet protocols. And even though we are only highlighting 
these three specific protocols, at the end of this chapter, you should 
feel confident enough to write clients for just about <span class="docEmphasis">any</span> Internet protocol.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
