<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>3.6. Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">3.6. Exercises</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EKDBG">FTP</h4>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3-1.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Simple FTP Client.</span>
 Given the FTP examples from this chapter, write a small FTP client 
program that goes to your favorite Web sites and downloads the latest 
versions of the applications you use. This can be a script that you run 
every few months to ensure that you’re using the “latest and greatest.” 
You should probably keep some sort of table with FTP location, login, 
and password information for your convenience.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3-2.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Simple FTP Client and Pattern-Matching.</span> Use your solution to Exercise 3-1
 as a starting point for creating another simple FTP client that either 
pushes or pulls a set of files from a remote host by using patterns. For
 example, if you want to move a set of Python or PDF files from one host
 to another, allow users to enter <tt>*.py</tt> or <tt>doc*.pdf</tt> and only transfer those files whose names match.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3-3.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Smart FTP Command-Line Client.</span> Create a command-line FTP application similar to the vanilla Unix <tt>/bin/ftp</tt> program; however, make it a “better FTP client,” meaning it should have additional useful features. You can take a look at the <tt>ncFTP</tt> application as motivation. It can be found at http://ncftp.com.
 For example, it has the following features: history, bookmarks (saving 
FTP locations with log in and password), download progress, etc. You 
might need to implement <tt>readline</tt> functionality for history and <tt>curses</tt> for screen control.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3-4.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">FTP and Multithreading.</span>
 Create an FTP client that uses Python threads to download files. You 
can either upgrade your existing Smart FTP client, as in Exercise 3-3,
 or just write a more simple client to download files. This can be 
either a command-line program in which you enter multiple files as 
arguments to the program, or a GUI in which you let the user select 1+ 
file(s) to transfer. Extra Credit: Allow patterns, that is, <tt>*.exe</tt>. Use individual threads to download each file.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3-5.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">FTP and GUI.</span>
 Take the smart FTP client that you developed earlier and add a GUI 
layer on top of it to form a complete FTP application. You can choose 
from any of the modern Python GUI toolkits.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3-6.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Subclassing.</span> Derive <tt>ftplib.FTP</tt> and make a new class FTP2 where you do not need to give <tt>STOR</tt> <tt>filename</tt> and <tt>RETR</tt> <tt>filename</tt> commands with all four (4) <tt>retr*()</tt> and <tt>stor*()</tt>
 methods; you only need to pass in the filename. You can choose to 
either override the existing methods or create new ones with a <tt>2</tt> suffix, for example, <tt>retrlines2()</tt>.</p></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
<p class="docText">The file <tt>Tools/scripts/ftpmirror.py</tt> in the Python source distribution is a script that can mirror FTP sites, or portions thereof, using the <tt>ftplib</tt>
 module. It can be used as an extended example that applies to this 
module. The next five exercises feature the creation of solutions that 
revolve around code such as <tt>ftpmirror.py</tt>. You can use code in <tt>ftpmirror.py</tt> or implement your own solution with its code as your motivation.</p>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3-7.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Recursion.</span> The <tt>ftpmirror.py</tt> script copies a remote directory recursively. Create a simpler FTP client in the spirit of <tt>ftpmirror.py</tt> but one that does <span class="docEmphasis">not</span> recurse by default. Create an <tt>-r</tt> option that instructs the application to recursively copy subdirectories to the local filesystem.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3-8.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Pattern-Matching.</span> The <tt>ftpmirror.py</tt> script has an <tt>-s</tt> option that lets users skip files that match the given pattern, such as <tt>.exe</tt>. Create your own simpler FTP client or update your solution to Exercise 3-7
 so that it lets the user supply a pattern and only copy those files 
matching that pattern. Use your solution to an earlier exercise as a 
starting point.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3-9.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Recursion and Pattern-Matching.</span> Create an FTP client that integrates both Exercises 3-7 and 3-8.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3-10.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Recursion and ZIP files.</span> This exercise is similar to Exercise 3-7;
 however, instead of copying the remote files to the local filesystem, 
either update your existing FTP client or create a new one to download 
remote files and compress them into a ZIP (or TGZ or BZ2) file. This <tt>-z</tt> option allows your users to back up an FTP site in an automated manner.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3-11.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Kitchen Sink.</span> Implement a single, final, all-encompassing FTP application that has all the solutions to Exercises 3-7, 3-8, 3-9, and 3-10, that is, <tt>-r</tt>, <tt>-s</tt>, and <tt>-z</tt> options.</p></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ENMBG">NNTP</h4>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3-12.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Introduction to NNTP.</span> Change Example 3-2 (<tt>getLatestNNTP.py</tt>) so that instead of the most recent article, it displays the first available article, meaningfully.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3-13.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Improving Code.</span> Fix the flaw in <tt>getLatestNNTP.py</tt>
 where triple-quoted lines show up in the output. This is because we 
want to display Python interactive interpreter lines but not 
triple-quoted text. Solve this problem by checking whether the stuff 
that comes after the “<tt>&gt;&gt;&gt;</tt>” is 
real Python code. If so, display it as a line of data; if not, do not 
display this quoted text. Extra Credit: Use your solution to solve 
another minor problem—leading whitespace is not stripped from the body 
because it might represent indented Python code. If it really is code, 
display it; otherwise, it is text, so <tt>lstrip()</tt> that before displaying.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3-14.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Finding Articles.</span>
 Create an NNTP client application that lets the user log in and choose a
 newsgroup of interest. Once that has been accomplished, prompt the user
 for keywords to search article Subject lines. Bring up the list of 
articles that match the requirement and display them to the user. The 
user should then be allowed to choose an article to read from that 
list—display them and provide simple navigation like pagination, etc. If
 no search field is entered, bring up all current articles.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3-15.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Searching Bodies.</span> Upgrade your solution to Exercise 3-14
 by searching both Subject lines and article bodies. Allow for AND or OR
 searching of keywords. Also allow for AND or OR searching of Subject 
lines and article bodies; that is, keyword(s) must be in Subject lines 
only, article bodies only, either, or both.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3-16.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Threaded Newsreader.</span>
 This doesn’t mean write a multithreaded newsreader—it means organize 
related postings into “article threads.” In other words, group related 
articles together, independent of when the individual articles were 
posted. All the articles belonging to individual threads should be 
listed chronologically though. Allow the user to do the following:</p>
<div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Select
 individual articles (bodies) to view, then have the option to go back 
to the list view or to previous or next article, either sequentially or 
related to the current thread.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Allow
 replies to threads, option to copy and quote previous article, and 
reply to the entire newsgroup via another post. Extra Credit: Allow 
personal reply to individual via e-mail.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Permanently
 delete threads—no future related articles should show up in the article
 list. For this, you will have to temporarily keep a persistent list of 
deleted threads so that they don’t show up again. You can assume a 
thread is dead if no one posts an article with the same Subject line 
after several months.</p></div></li></ol></div></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3-17.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">GUI Newsreader.</span> Similar to an FTP exercise above, choose a Python GUI toolkit to implement a complete standalone GUI newsreader application.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3-18.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Refactoring.</span> Like <tt>ftpmirror.py</tt> for FTP, there is a demo script for NNTP: <tt>Demo/scripts/newslist.py</tt>.
 Run it. This script was written a long time ago and can use a facelift.
 For this exercise, you are to refactor this program using features of 
the latest versions of Python as well as your developing skills in 
Python to perform the same task but run and complete in less time. This 
can include using list comprehensions or generator expressions, using 
smarter string concatenation, not calling unnecessary functions, etc.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3-19.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Caching.</span> Another problem with <tt>newslist.py</tt>
 is that, according to its author, “I should really keep a list of 
ignored empty groups and re-check them for articles on every run, but I 
haven’t got around to it yet.” Make this improvement a reality. You can 
use the default version as-is or your newly improved one from Exercise 3-18.</p></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EXRBG">E-Mail</h4>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3-20.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Identifiers.</span> The POP3 method <tt>pass_()</tt> is used to send the password to the server after giving it the login name by using <tt>login()</tt>. Can you give any reasons why you believe this method was named with a trailing underscore (<tt>pass_()</tt>), instead of just plain, old <tt>pass()</tt>?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3-21.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">POP and IMAP.</span> Write an application using one of the <tt>poplib</tt> classes (<tt>POP3</tt> or <tt>POP3_SSL</tt>) to download e-mail, then do the same thing using <tt>imaplib</tt>.
 You can borrow some of the code seen earlier in this chapter. Why would
 you want to leave your login and password information out of the source
 code?</p></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
<p class="docText">The next set of exercises deal with the <tt>myMail.py</tt> application presented in Example 3-3.</p>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3-22.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">E-Mail Headers.</span> In <tt>myMail.py</tt>,
 the last few lines compared the originally sent body with the body in 
the received e-mail. Create similar code to assert the original headers.
 Hint: Ignore newly added headers.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3-23.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Error Checking.</span> Add SMTP and POP error-checking.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3-24.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">SMTP and IMAP.</span> Add support for IMAP. Extra Credit: Support both mail download protocols, giving the user the ability to choose which to use.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3-25.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">E-Mail Composition.</span> Further develop your solution to Exercise 3-24 by giving the users of your application the ability to compose and send e-mail.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3-26.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">E-Mail Application.</span>
 Further develop your e-mail application, turning it into something more
 useful by adding in mailbox management. Your application should be able
 to read in the current set of e-mail messages in a user’s imbeds and 
display their Subject lines. Users should be able to select messages to 
view. Extra Credit: Add support to view attachments via external 
applications.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3-27.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">GUI.</span> Add a GUI layer on top of your solution to the previous problem to make it practically a full e-mail application.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3-28.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Elements of SPAM.</span>
 Unsolicited junk e-mail, or spam, is a very real and significant 
problem today. There are many good solutions out there, validating this 
market. We do not want you to (necessarily) reinvent the wheel, but we 
would like you to get a taste of some of the elements of spam 
processing.</p>
<div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">“mbox” format</span>. Before we can get started, we should convert any e-mail messages you want to work on to a common format, such as the <span class="docEmphasis">mbox</span>
 format. (There are others that you can use if you prefer. Once you have
 several (or all) work messages in mbox format, merge them all into a 
single file. Hint: See the <tt>mailbox</tt> module and <tt>email</tt> package.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Headers.</span>
 Most of the clues of spam lie in the e-mail headers. (You might want to
 use the e-mail package or parse them manually yourself.) Write code 
that answers questions such as:</p><dl><dd><p class="docList">- What e-mail client appears to have originated this message? (Check out the <tt>X-Mailer</tt> header.)</p></dd><dd><p class="docList">- Is the message ID (<tt>Message-ID</tt> header) format valid?</p></dd><dd><p class="docList">- Are there domain name mismatches between the <tt>From</tt>, <tt>Received</tt>, and perhaps <tt>Return-Path</tt> headers? What about domain name and IP address mismatches? Is there an <tt>X-Authentication-Warning</tt> header? If so, what does it report?</p></dd></dl></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Information Servers.</span>
 Based on an IP address or domain, servers such as WHOIS, 
SenderBase.org, etc., might be able to help you identify the location 
where a piece of bulk e-mail originated. Find one or more of these 
services and build code to the find the country of origin, and 
optionally the city, network owner name, contact information, etc.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Keywords.</span>
 Certain words keep popping up in spam. You have no doubt seen them 
before, and in all of their variations, including using a number 
resembling a letter, capitalizing random letters, etc. Build a list of 
frequent words that you have seen definitely tied to spam and quarantine
 them. Extra Credit: Develop an algorithm or add keyword variations to 
spot such trickery in messages.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Phishing.</span>
 These spam messages attempt to disguise themselves as valid e-mail from
 major banking institutions or well-known Internet Web sites. They 
contain links that lure readers to Web sites in an attempt to harvest 
private and extremely sensitive information such as login names, 
passwords, and credit card numbers. These fakers do a pretty good job of
 giving their fraudulent messages an accurate look-and-feel. However, 
they cannot hide the fact that the actual link that they direct users to
 does not belong to the company they are masquerading as. Many of them 
are obvious giveaways; for example, horrible-looking domain names, raw 
IP addresses, and even IP addresses in 32-bit integer format rather than
 in octets. Develop code that can determine whether e-mail that looks 
like official communication is real or bogus.</p></div></li></ol></div></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E6ZBG">E-Mail Composition</h4>
<p class="docText">The following set of 
exercises deal with composing e-mail messages by using the e-mail 
package and specifically refers to the code we looked at in <tt>email-examples.py</tt>.</p>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3-29.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Multipart Alternative.</span> What does multipart alternative mean, anyway? We took a quick look at it earlier in the <tt>make_mpa_msg()</tt> function, but what does it really signify? How would the behavior of <tt>make_mpa_msg()</tt> change if we removed <tt>'alternative'</tt> when we instantiated the <tt>MIMEMultipart</tt> class, that is, <tt>email = MIMEMultipart()</tt>?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3-30.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Python 3.</span> Port the <tt>email-examples.py</tt> script to Python 3 (or create a hybrid that runs without modification under both versions 2.x and 3.x).</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3-31.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Multiple attachments.</span> In the section on composing e-mail, we looked at the <tt>make_img_msg()</tt>
 function, which created a single e-mail message made up of a single 
image. While that’s a great start, it isn’t as useful in the real world.
 Create a more generalized function called <tt>attachImgs()</tt>, <tt>attach_images()</tt>,
 or whatever you want to call it, with which users can pass in more than
 one image file. Take those files and make them individual attachments 
of the entire e-mail message body and return a single multipart message 
object.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3-32.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Robustness.</span> Improve the solution for Exercise 3-31 for <tt>attachImgs()</tt>
 by making sure that users are passing in only image files (and throwing
 exceptions if not). In other words, check the filename to ensure that 
the extension matches .png, .jpg, .gif, .tif, etc. Extra Credit: Support
 file introspection to take files with <span class="docEmphasis">any</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">incorrect</span>, or <span class="docEmphasis">no</span> extension and determine what type they really are. To help you get started, check out the Wikipedia page at http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File_format.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3-33.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Robustness, Networking.</span> Further enhance the <tt>attachImgs()</tt> function so that in addition to local files, users can pass in a URL to an online picture such as http://docs.python.org/_static/py.png.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3-34.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Spreadsheets.</span> Create a function called <tt>attachSheets()</tt> that attaches one or more spreadsheet files to a multipart e-mail message. Support the most common formats such as <tt>.csv</tt>, <tt>.xls</tt>, <tt>.xlsx</tt>, <tt>.ods</tt>, <tt>.uof/.uos</tt>, etc.). You can use <tt>attachImgs()</tt> as a model; however, instead of using <tt>email.mime.image.MIMEImage</tt>, you’ll be using <tt>email.mime.base.MIMEBase</tt> as well as need to specify an appropriate MIME type (for example, <tt>'application/</tt><tt>vnd.ms-excel'</tt>). Also don’t forget the <tt>Content-Disposition</tt> header.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3-35.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Documents.</span> Similar to Exercise 3-34, create a function called <tt>attachDocs()</tt> that attaches document files to a multipart e-mail message. Support common formats, such as <tt>.doc</tt>, <tt>.docx</tt>, <tt>.odt</tt>, <tt>.rtf</tt>, <tt>.pdf</tt>, <tt>.txt</tt>, <tt>.uof/.uot</tt>, etc.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3-36.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Multiple Attachment Types.</span> Let’s broaden the scope defined by your solutions to Exercise 3-35. Create a new, more generalized function called <tt>attachFiles()</tt>, which takes <span class="docEmphasis">any</span> type of attachment. You are welcome to merge any of the code from the solutions for any of these exercises.</p></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EABAI">Miscellaneous</h4>
<p class="docText">A list of various Internet protocols, including the three highlighted in this chapter, can be found at http://networksorcery.com/enp/topic/ipsuite.htm. A list of specific Internet protocols supported by Python can be found at http://docs.python.org/library/internet.</p>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3-37.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Developing Alternate Internet Clients.</span>
 Now that you have seen four examples of how Python can help you to 
develop Internet clients, choose another protocol with client support in
 a Python Standard Library module and write a client application for it.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>3-38.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">*Developing New Internet Clients.</span> Much more difficult: find an uncommon or upcoming protocol <span class="docEmphasis">without</span>
 Python support and implement it. Be serious enough that you will 
consider writing and submitting a PEP to have your module included in 
the standard library distribution of a future Python release.</p></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
