<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 4. Multithreaded Programming</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h2 class="docChapterTitle" id="title-ID0EOGBG">Chapter 4. Multithreaded Programming</h2>
<blockquote>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">&gt;
 With Python you can start a thread, but you can’t stop it. &gt; Sorry. 
You’ll have to wait until it reaches the end of execution. So, just the 
same as [comp.lang.python], then?</span></p>
<p class="docText">—Cliff Wells, Steve Holden (and Timothy Delaney), February 2002</p></blockquote>
<p></p><table border="1" cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0" rules="none" width="98%"><tbody><tr><td><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E5GBG">In this chapter...</h4></td></tr><tr><td>
<ul><li><p class="docList">Introduction/Motivation</p></li><li><p class="docList">Threads and Processes</p></li><li><p class="docList">Threads and Python</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>thread</tt> Module</p></li><li><p class="docList">The <tt>threading</tt> Module</p></li><li><p class="docList">Comparing Single vs. Multithreaded Execution</p></li><li><p class="docList">Multithreading in Practice</p></li><li><p class="docList">Producer-Consumer Problem and the Queue/<tt>queue</tt> Module</p></li><li><p class="docList">Alternative Considerations to Threads</p></li><li><p class="docList">Related Modules</p></li></ul>
</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
<p class="docText">In
 this section, we will explore the different ways by which you can 
achieve more parallelism in your code. We will begin by differentiating 
between processes and threads in the first few of sections of this 
chapter. We will then introduce the notion of multithreaded programming 
and present some multithreaded programming features found in Python. 
(Those of you already familiar with multithreaded programming can skip 
directly to Section 4.3.5<a name="sections of"></a>.) The final sections of this chapter present some examples of how to use the <tt>threading</tt> and <tt>Queue</tt> modules to accomplish multithreaded programming with Python.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
