<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>4.1. Introduction/Motivation</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">4.1. Introduction/Motivation</h3>
<p class="docText">Before the advent of <span class="docEmphasis">multithreaded</span>
 (MT) programming, the execution of computer programs consisted of a 
single sequence of steps that were executed in synchronous order by the 
host’s CPU. This style of execution was the norm whether the task itself
 required the sequential ordering of steps or if the entire program was 
actually an aggregation of multiple subtasks. What if these subtasks 
were independent, having no <span class="docEmphasis">causal</span>
 relationship (meaning that results of subtasks do not affect other 
subtask outcomes)? Is it not logical, then, to want to run these 
independent tasks all at the same time? Such parallel processing could 
significantly improve the performance of the overall task. This is what 
MT programming is all about.</p>
<p class="docText">MT programming is ideal for 
programming tasks that are asynchronous in nature, require multiple 
concurrent activities, and where the processing of each activity might 
be <span class="docEmphasis">nondeterministic</span>,
 that is, random and unpredictable. Such programming tasks can be 
organized or partitioned into multiple streams of execution wherein each
 has a specific task to accomplish. Depending on the application, these 
subtasks might calculate intermediate results that could be merged into a
 final piece of output.</p>
<p class="docText">While CPU-bound tasks might
 be fairly straightforward to divide into subtasks and executed 
sequentially or in a multithreaded manner, the task of managing a 
single-threaded process with multiple external sources of input is not 
as trivial. To achieve such a programming task without multithreading, a
 sequential program must use one or more timers and implement a 
multiplexing scheme.</p>
<p class="docText">A sequential program 
will need to sample each I/O terminal channel to check for user input; 
however, it is important that the program does not block when reading 
the I/O terminal channel, because the arrival of user input is 
nondeterministic, and blocking would prevent processing of other I/O 
channels. The sequential program must use non-blocked I/O or blocked I/O
 with a timer (so that blocking is only temporary).</p>
<p class="docText">Because
 the sequential program is a single thread of execution, it must juggle 
the multiple tasks that it needs to perform, making sure that it does 
not spend too much time on any one task, and it must ensure that user 
response time is appropriately distributed. The use of a sequential 
program for this type of task often results in a complicated flow of 
control that is difficult to understand and maintain.</p>
<p class="docText">Using an MT program with a shared data structure such as a <tt>Queue</tt>
 (a multithreaded queue data structure, discussed later in this 
chapter), this programming task can be organized with a few threads that
 have specific functions to perform:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList"><tt>UserRequestThread:</tt>
 Responsible for reading client input, perhaps from an I/O channel. A 
number of threads would be created by the program, one for each current 
client, with requests being entered into the queue.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>RequestProcessor:</tt>
 A thread that is responsible for retrieving requests from the queue and
 processing them, providing output for yet a third thread.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>ReplyThread:</tt>
 Responsible for taking output destined for the user and either sending 
it back (if in a networked application) or writing data to the local 
file system or database.</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">Organizing this 
programming task with multiple threads reduces the complexity of the 
program and enables an implementation that is clean, efficient, and well
 organized. The logic in each thread is typically less complex because 
it has a specific job to do. For example, the <tt>UserRequestThread</tt>
 simply reads input from a user and places the data into a queue for 
further processing by another thread, etc. Each thread has its own job 
to do; you merely have to design each type of thread to do one thing and
 do it well. Use of threads for specific tasks is not unlike Henry 
Ford’s assembly line model for manufacturing automobiles.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
