<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>4.2. Threads and Processes</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">4.2. Threads and Processes</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EGIBG">4.2.1. What Are Processes?</h4>
<p class="docText">Computer <span class="docEmphasis">programs</span>
 are merely executables, binary (or otherwise), which reside on disk. 
They do not take on a life of their own until loaded into memory and 
invoked by the operating system. A <span class="docEmphasis">process</span> (sometimes called a <span class="docEmphasis">heavyweight process</span>)
 is a program in execution. Each process has its own address space, 
memory, a data stack, and other auxiliary data to keep track of 
execution. The operating system manages the execution of all processes 
on the system, dividing the time fairly between all processes. Processes
 can also <span class="docEmphasis">fork</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">spawn</span>
 new processes to perform other tasks, but each new process has its own 
memory, data stack, etc., and cannot generally share information unless <span class="docEmphasis">interprocess communication</span> (IPC) is employed.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EJKBG">4.2.2. What Are Threads?</h4>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Threads</span> (sometimes called <span class="docEmphasis">lightweight processes</span>)
 are similar to processes except that they all execute within the same 
process, and thus all share the same context. They can be thought of as 
“mini-processes” running in parallel within a main process or “main 
thread.”</p>
<p class="docText">A thread has a beginning, 
an execution sequence, and a conclusion. It has an instruction pointer 
that keeps track of where within its context it is currently running. It
 can be preempted (interrupted) and temporarily put on hold (also known 
as <span class="docEmphasis">sleeping</span>) while other threads are running—this is called <span class="docEmphasis">yielding</span>.</p>
<p class="docText">Multiple threads within a 
process share the same data space with the main thread and can therefore
 share information or communicate with one another more easily than if 
they were separate processes. Threads are generally executed in a 
concurrent fashion, and it is this parallelism and data sharing that 
enable the coordination of multiple tasks. Naturally, it is impossible 
to run truly in a concurrent manner in a single CPU system, so threads 
are scheduled in such a way that they run for a little bit, then yield 
to other threads (going to the proverbial back of the line to await more
 CPU time again). Throughout the execution of the entire process, each 
thread performs its own, separate tasks, and communicates the results 
with other threads as necessary.</p>
<p class="docText">Of course, such sharing is 
not without its dangers. If two or more threads access the same piece of
 data, inconsistent results can arise because of the ordering of data 
access. This is commonly known as a <span class="docEmphasis">race condition</span>.
 Fortunately, most thread libraries come with some sort of 
synchronization primitives that allow the thread manager to control 
execution and access.</p>
<p class="docText">Another caveat is that threads
 cannot be given equal and fair execution time. This is because some 
functions block until they have completed. If not written specifically 
to take threads into account, this skews the amount of CPU time in favor
 of such greedy functions.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
