<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>4.4. The thread Module</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">4.4. The <tt>thread</tt> Module</h3>
<p class="docText">Let’s take a look at what the <tt>thread</tt> module has to offer. In addition to being able to spawn threads, the <tt>thread</tt> module also provides a basic synchronization data structure called a <span class="docEmphasis">lock object</span> (a.k.a. <span class="docEmphasis">primitive lock</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">simple lock</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">mutual exclusion lock</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">mutex</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">binary semaphore</span>). As we mentioned earlier, such synchronization primitives go hand in hand with thread management.</p>
<p class="docText">Table 4-1 lists the more commonly used thread functions and <tt>LockType</tt> lock object methods.</p>
<p class="docText"></p><p></p><table cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0" frame="hsides" rules="groups"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 4-1. <tt>thread</tt> Module and Lock Objects</h5></caption><colgroup align="left" span="2"><col width="200"></col><col width="400"></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell bottomBorder thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Function/Method</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell bottomBorder thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Description</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell bottomBorder" colspan="2" valign="top"><span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>thread</tt> <span class="docEmphasis">Module Functions</span></span></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>start_new_thread(</tt><span class="docEmphasis"><tt>function,</tt></span> <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>args, kwargs</tt></span><tt>=None)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Spawns a new thread and executes <tt>function</tt> with the given <tt>args</tt> and optional <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>kwargs</tt></span></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>allocate_lock()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Allocates <tt>LockType</tt> lock object</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell bottomBorder" valign="top"><tt>exit()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell bottomBorder" valign="top">Instructs a thread to exit</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell bottomBorder" colspan="2" valign="top"><span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>LockType Lock</tt> <span class="docEmphasis">Object Methods</span></span></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>acquire(</tt><span class="docEmphasis"><tt>wait</tt></span><tt>=None)</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Attempts to acquire lock object</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>locked()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Returns <tt>True</tt> if lock acquired, <tt>False</tt> otherwise</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>release()</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Releases lock</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">The key function of the <tt>thread</tt> module is <tt>start_new_thread()</tt>.
 It takes a function (object) plus arguments and optionally, keyword 
arguments. A new thread is spawned specifically to invoke the function.</p>
<p class="docText">Let’s take our <tt>onethr.py</tt> example and integrate threading into it. By slightly changing the call to the <tt>loop*()</tt> functions, we now present <tt>mtsleepA.py</tt> in Example 4-2:</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E4UBG">Example 4-2. Using the <tt>thread</tt> Module (<tt>mtsleepA.py</tt>)</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<p class="docText">The same loops from <tt>onethr.py</tt> are executed, but this time using the simple multithreaded mechanism provided by the <tt>thread</tt>
 module. The two loops are executed concurrently (with the shorter one 
finishing first, obviously), and the total elapsed time is only as long 
as the slowest thread rather than the total time for each separately.</p>
<pre class="preFixedHeight">1    #!/usr/bin/env python
2
3    <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> thread
4    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> time <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> sleep, ctime
5
6    <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> loop0():
7        <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> 'start loop 0 at:', ctime()
8        sleep(4)
9        <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> 'loop 0 done at:', ctime()
10
11   <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> loop1():
12       <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> 'start loop 1 at:', ctime()
13       sleep(2)
14       <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> 'loop 1 done at:', ctime()
15
16   <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> main():
17       <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> 'starting at:', ctime()
18       thread.start_new_thread(loop0, ())
19       thread.start_new_thread(loop1, ())
20       sleep(6)
21       <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> 'all DONE at:', ctime()
22
23   <span class="docEmphStrong">if</span> __name__ == '__main__':
24       main()

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText"><tt>start_new_thread()</tt>
 requires the first two arguments, so that is the reason for passing in 
an empty tuple even if the executing function requires no arguments.</p>
<p class="docText">Upon execution of this 
program, our output changes drastically. Rather than taking a full 6 or 7
 seconds, our script now runs in 4 seconds, the length of time of our 
longest loop, plus any overhead.</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>$ mtsleepA.py
starting at: Sun Aug 13 05:04:50 2006
start loop 0 at: Sun Aug 13 05:04:50 2006
start loop 1 at: Sun Aug 13 05:04:50 2006
loop 1 done at: Sun Aug 13 05:04:52 2006
loop 0 done at: Sun Aug 13 05:04:54 2006
all DONE at: Sun Aug 13 05:04:56 2006</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The pieces of code that 
sleep for 4 and 2 seconds now occur concurrently, contributing to the 
lower overall runtime. You can even see how loop 1 finishes before loop 
0.</p>
<p class="docText">The only other major change to our application is the addition of the <tt>sleep(6)</tt>
 call. Why is this necessary? The reason is that if we did not stop the 
main thread from continuing, it would proceed to the next statement, 
displaying “all done” and exit, killing both threads running <tt>loop0()</tt> and <tt>loop1()</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">We did not have any code that 
directed the main thread to wait for the child threads to complete 
before continuing. This is what we mean by threads requiring some sort 
of synchronization. In our case, we used another <tt>sleep()</tt> call as our synchronization mechanism. We used a value of
 6 seconds because we know that both threads (which take 4 and 2 
seconds) should have completed by the time the main thread has counted 
to 6.</p>
<p class="docText">You are probably thinking that 
there should be a better way of managing threads than creating that 
extra delay of 6 seconds in the main thread. Because of this delay, the 
overall runtime is no better than in our single-threaded version. Using <tt>sleep()</tt>
 for thread synchronization as we did is not reliable. What if our loops
 had independent and varying execution times? We could be exiting the 
main thread too early or too late. This is where locks come in.</p>
<p class="docText">Making yet another update to our code to include locks as well as getting rid of separate loop functions, we get <tt>mtsleepB.py</tt>, which is presented in Example 4-3. Running it, we see that the output is similar to <tt>mtsleepA.py</tt>. The only difference is that we did not have to wait the extra time for <tt>mtsleepA.py</tt>
 to conclude. By using locks, we were able to exit as soon as both 
threads had completed execution. This renders the following output:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>$ mtsleepB.py
starting at: Sun Aug 13 16:34:41 2006
start loop 0 at: Sun Aug 13 16:34:41 2006
start loop 1 at: Sun Aug 13 16:34:41 2006
loop 1 done at: Sun Aug 13 16:34:43 2006
loop 0 done at: Sun Aug 13 16:34:45 2006
all DONE at: Sun Aug 13 16:34:45 2006</pre></div><br/>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EV1BG">Example 4-3. Using <tt>thread</tt> and Locks (<tt>mtsleepB.py</tt>)</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<p class="docText">Rather than using a call to <tt>sleep()</tt> to hold up the main thread as in <tt>mtsleepA.py</tt>, the use of locks makes more sense.</p>
<pre class="preFixedHeight">1    #!/usr/bin/env python
2
3    <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> thread
4    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> time <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> sleep, ctime
5
6    loops = [4,2]
7
8    <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> loop(nloop, nsec, lock):
9        <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> 'start loop', nloop, 'at:', ctime()
10       sleep(nsec)
11       <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> 'loop', nloop, 'done at:', ctime()
12       lock.release()
13
14      <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> main():
15          <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> 'starting at:', ctime()
16          locks = []
17          nloops = range(len(loops))
18
19       <span class="docEmphStrong">for</span> i <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> nloops:
20           lock = thread.allocate_lock()
21           lock.acquire()
22           locks.append(lock)
23
24    <span class="docEmphStrong">for</span> i <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> nloops:
25        thread.start_new_thread(loop,
26            (i, loops[i], locks[i]))
27
28       <span class="docEmphStrong">for</span> i <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> nloops:
29           <span class="docEmphStrong">while</span> locks[i].locked(): <span class="docEmphStrong">pass</span>
30
31       <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> 'all DONE at:', ctime()
32
33   <span class="docEmphStrong">if</span> __name__ == '__main__':
34       main()

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">So how did we accomplish our task with locks? Let’s take a look at the source code.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E14BG">Line-by-Line Explanation</h4>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EC5BG">Lines 1–6</h5>
<p class="docText">After the Unix startup line, we import the <tt>thread</tt> module and a few familiar attributes of the <tt>time</tt> module. Rather than hardcoding separate functions to count to 4 and 2 seconds, we use a single <tt>loop()</tt> function and place these constants in a list, <tt>loops</tt>.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EW5BG">Lines 8–12</h5>
<p class="docText">The <tt>loop()</tt> function acts as a proxy for the deleted <tt>loop*()</tt> functions from our earlier examples. We had to make some cosmetic changes to <tt>loop()</tt>
 so that it can now perform its duties using locks. The obvious changes 
are that we need to be told which loop number we are as well as the 
sleep duration. The last piece of new information is the lock itself. 
Each thread will be allocated an acquired lock. When the <tt>sleep()</tt> time has concluded, we release the corresponding lock, indicating to the main thread that this thread has completed.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EK6BG">Lines 14–34</h5>
<p class="docText">The bulk of the work is done here in <tt>main()</tt>, using three separate <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>for</tt></span> loops. We first create a list of locks, which we obtain by using the <tt>thread.allocate_lock()</tt> function and acquire (each lock) with the <tt>acquire()</tt> method. Acquiring a lock has the effect of “locking the lock.” Once it is locked, we add the lock to the lock list, <tt>locks</tt>. The next loop actually spawns the threads, invoking the <tt>loop()</tt>
 function per thread, and for each thread, provides it with the loop 
number, the sleep duration, and the acquired lock for that thread. So 
why didn’t we start the threads in the lock acquisition loop? There are 
two reasons. First, we wanted to synchronize the threads, so that all 
the horses started out the gate around the same time, and second, locks 
take a little bit of time to be acquired. If your thread executes too 
fast, it is possible that it completes before the lock has a chance to 
be acquired.</p>
<p class="docText">It is up to each thread to 
unlock its lock object when it has completed execution. The final loop 
just sits and spins (pausing the main thread) until both locks have been
 released before continuing execution. Because we are checking each lock
 sequentially, we might be at the mercy of all the slower loops if they 
are more toward the beginning of the set of loops. In such cases, the 
majority of the wait time may be for the first loop(s). When that lock 
is released, remaining locks may have already been unlocked (meaning 
that corresponding threads have completed execution). The result is that
 the main thread will fly through those lock checks without pause. 
Finally, you should be well aware that the final pair of lines will 
execute <tt>main()</tt> only if we are invoking this script directly.</p>
<p class="docText">As hinted in the earlier Core Note, we presented the <tt>thread</tt> module only to introduce the reader to threaded programming. Your MT application should use higher-level modules such as the <tt>threading</tt> module, which we discuss in the next section.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
