<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>4.6. Comparing Single vs. Multithreaded Execution</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">4.6. Comparing Single vs. Multithreaded Execution</h3>
<p class="docText">The <tt>mtfacfib.py</tt> script, presented in Example 4-8
 compares execution of the recursive Fibonacci, factorial, and summation
 functions. This script runs all three functions in a single-threaded 
manner. It then performs the same task by using threads to illustrate 
one of the advantages of having a threading environment.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ESTBG">Example 4-8. Fibonacci, Factorial, Summation (<tt>mtfacfib.py</tt>)</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<p class="docText">In this MT application, 
we execute three separate recursive functions—first in a single-threaded
 fashion, followed by the alternative with multiple threads.</p>
<pre class="preFixedHeight">1    #!/usr/bin/env python
2
3    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> myThread <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> MyThread
4    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> time <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> ctime, sleep
5
6    <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> fib(x):
7        sleep(0.005)
8        <span class="docEmphStrong">if</span> x &lt; 2: <span class="docEmphStrong">return</span> 1
9        <span class="docEmphStrong">return</span> (fib(x-2) + fib(x-1))
10
11   <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> fac(x):
12       sleep(0.1)
13       <span class="docEmphStrong">if</span> x &lt; 2: <span class="docEmphStrong">return</span> 1
14       <span class="docEmphStrong">return</span> (x * fac(x-1))
15
16   <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> sum(x):
17       sleep(0.1)
18       <span class="docEmphStrong">if</span> x &lt; 2: <span class="docEmphStrong">return</span> 1
19       <span class="docEmphStrong">return</span> (x + sum(x-1))
20
21   funcs = [fib, fac, sum]
22   n = 12
23
24   <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> main():
25       nfuncs = range(len(funcs))
26
27       <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> '*** SINGLE THREAD'
28       <span class="docEmphStrong">f</span><span class="docEmphStrong">or</span> i <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> nfuncs:
29           <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> 'starting', funcs[i].__name__, 'at:', \
30               ctime()
31           <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> funcs[i](n)
32           <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> funcs[i].__name__, 'finished at:', \
33               ctime()
34
35       <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> '\n*** MULTIPLE THREADS'
36       threads = []
37       <span class="docEmphStrong">for</span> i <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> nfuncs:
38           t = MyThread(funcs[i], (n,),
39               funcs[i].__name__)
40           threads.append(t)
41
42       <span class="docEmphStrong">for</span> i <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> nfuncs:
43           threads[i].start()
44
45       <span class="docEmphStrong">for</span> i <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> nfuncs:
46           threads[i].join()
47           <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> threads[i].getResult()
48
49       <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> 'all DONE'
50
51   <span class="docEmphStrong">if</span> __name__ == '__main__':
52       main()

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Running
 in single-threaded mode simply involves calling the functions one at a 
time and displaying the corresponding results right after the function 
call.</p>
<p class="docText">When running in multithreaded mode, we do not display the result right away. Because we want to keep our <tt>MyThread</tt>
 class as general as possible (being able to execute callables that do 
and do not produce output), we wait until the end to call the <tt>getResult()</tt> method to finally show you the return values of each function call.</p>
<p class="docText">Because these functions 
execute so quickly (well, maybe except for the Fibonacci function), you 
will notice that we had to add calls to <tt>sleep()</tt>
 to each function to slow things down so that we can see how threading 
can improve performance, if indeed the actual work had varying execution
 times—you certainly wouldn’t pad your work with calls to <tt>sleep()</tt>. Anyway, here is the output:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedHeight">$ mtfacfib.py
*** SINGLE THREAD
starting fib at: Wed Nov 16 18:52:20 2011
233
fib finished at: Wed Nov 16 18:52:24 2011
starting fac at: Wed Nov 16 18:52:24 2011
479001600
fac finished at: Wed Nov 16 18:52:26 2011
starting sum at: Wed Nov 16 18:52:26 2011
78
sum finished at: Wed Nov 16 18:52:27 2011

*** MULTIPLE THREADS
starting fib at: Wed Nov 16 18:52:27 2011
starting fac at: Wed Nov 16 18:52:27 2011
starting sum at: Wed Nov 16 18:52:27 2011
fac finished at: Wed Nov 16 18:52:28 2011
sum finished at: Wed Nov 16 18:52:28 2011
fib finished at: Wed Nov 16 18:52:31 2011
233
479001600
78
all DONE

					  </pre></div><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
