<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>4.11. Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">4.11. Exercises</h3>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4-1.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Processes versus Threads.</span> What are the differences between processes and threads?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4-2.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Python Threads.</span> Which type of multithreaded application will tend to fare better in Python, I/O-bound or CPU-bound?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4-3.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Threads.</span>
 Do you think anything significant happens if you have multiple threads 
on a multiple CPU system? How do you think multiple threads run on these
 systems?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4-4.</b></td><td class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Threads and Files</span>.
<div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Create
 a function that obtains a byte value and a filename (as parameters or 
user input) and displays the number of times that byte appears in the 
file.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Suppose
 now that the input file is extremely large. Multiple readers in a file 
is acceptable, so modify your solution to create multiple threads that 
count in different parts of the file such that each thread is 
responsible for a certain part of the file. Collate the data from each 
thread and provide the correct total. Use the <tt>timeit</tt>
 module to time both the single- threaded new multithreaded solutions 
and say something about the difference in performance, if any.</p></div></li></ol></div></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4-5.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Threads, Files, and Regular Expressions.</span>
 You have a very large mailbox file—if you don’t have one, put all of 
your e-mail messages together into a single text file. Your job is to 
take the regular expressions you designed earlier in this book that 
recognize e-mail addresses and Web site URLs and use them to convert all
 e-mail addresses and URLs in this large file into live links so that 
when the new file is saved as an <tt>.html</tt> (or <tt>.htm</tt><tt>)</tt>
 file, it will show up in a Web browser as live and clickable. Use 
threads to segregate the conversion process across the large text file 
and collate the results into a single new <tt>.html</tt> file. Test the results on your Web browser to ensure the links are indeed working.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4-6.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Threads and Networking.</span>
 Your solution to the chat service application in the previous chapter 
required you to use heavyweight threads or processes as part of your 
solution. Convert your solution to be multithreaded.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4-7.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">*Threads and Web Programming.</span> The <tt>Crawler</tt> application in Chapter 10,
 “Web Programming: CGI and WSGI,” is a single-threaded application that 
downloads Web pages. It would benefit from MT programming. Update <tt>crawl.py</tt> (you could call it <tt>mtcrawl.py</tt>)
 such that independent threads are used to download pages. Be sure to 
use some kind of locking mechanism to prevent conflicting access to the 
links queue.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4-8.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Thread Pools.</span> Instead of a producer thread and a consumer thread, change the code for <tt>prodcons.py</tt>, in Example 4-12 so that you have any number of consumer threads (a <span class="docEmphasis">thread pool</span>) which can process or consume more than one item from the <tt>Queue</tt> at any given moment.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4-9.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Files.</span>
 Create a set of threads to count how many lines there are in a set of 
(presumably large) text files. You can choose the number of threads to 
use. Compare the performance against a single-threaded version of this 
code. Hint: Review the exercises at the end of the Chapter 9, in <span class="docEmphasis">Core Python Programming</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">Core Python Language Fundamentals</span>.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4-10.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Concurrent Processing.</span> Take your solution to Exercise 4-9
 and adopt it to a task of your selection, for example, processing a set
 of e-mail messages, downloading Web pages, processing RSS or Atom 
feeds, enhancing message processing as part of a chat server, solving a 
puzzle, etc.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4-11.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Synchronization Primitives.</span>
 Investigate each of the synchronization primitives in the threading 
module. Describe what they do, what they might be useful for, and create
 working code examples for each.</p></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
<p class="docText">The next couple of exercises deal with the <tt>candy.py</tt> script featured in Example 4-11.</p>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4-12.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Porting to Python 3.</span> Take the <tt>candy.py</tt> script and run the <tt>2to3</tt> tool on it to create a Python 3 version called <tt>candy3.py</tt>.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>4-13.</b></td><td class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">The</span> <tt>threading</tt> <span class="docEmphasis">module</span>.
 Add debugging to the script. Specifically, for applications that use 
semaphores (whose initial value is going to be greater than 1), you 
might need to know exactly the counter’s value at any given time. Create
 a variation of <tt>candy.py</tt>, perhaps calling it <tt>candydebug.py</tt>, and give it the ability to display the counter’s value. You will need to look at the <tt>threading.py</tt>
 source code, as alluded to earlier in the CORE TIP sidebar. Once you’re
 done with the modifications, you can alter its output to look something
 like the following:
<div class="docText"><pre>$ python candydebug.py
starting at: Mon Apr  4 00:24:28 2011
THE CANDY MACHINE (full with 5 bars)!
Buying candy... inventory: 4
Refilling candy... inventory: 5
Refilling candy... full, skipping
Buying candy... inventory: 4
Buying candy... inventory: 3
Refilling candy... inventory: 4
Buying candy... inventory: 3
Buying candy... inventory: 2
Buying candy... inventory: 1
Buying candy... inventory: 0
Buying candy... empty, skipping
all DONE at: Mon Apr  4 00:24:36 2011</pre></div><br/></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
