<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 5. GUI Programming</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h2 class="docChapterTitle" id="title-ID0ELAAI">Chapter 5. GUI Programming</h2>
<blockquote>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">GUI stuff is</span> supposed <span class="docEmphasis">to be hard. It builds character.</span></p>
<p class="docText">—Jim Ahlstrom, May 1995 (verbally at Python Workshop)</p></blockquote>
<p></p><table border="1" cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0" rules="none" width="98%"><tbody><tr><td><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E1AAI">In this chapter...</h4></td></tr><tr><td>
<ul><li><p class="docList">Introduction</p></li><li><p class="docList">Tkinter and Python Programming</p></li><li><p class="docList">Tkinter Examples</p></li><li><p class="docList">A Brief Tour of Other GUIs</p></li><li><p class="docList">Related Modules and Other GUIs</p></li></ul>
</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
<p class="docText">In
 this chapter, we will give you a brief introduction to the subject of 
graphical user interface (GUI) programming. If you are somewhat new to 
this area or want to learn more about it, or if you want to see how it 
is done in Python, then this chapter is for you. We cannot show you 
everything about GUI application development in this one chapter, but we
 will give you a very solid introduction to it. The primary GUI toolkit 
we will be using is Tk, Python’s default GUI. We’ll access Tk from its 
Python interface called Tkinter (short for “Tk interface”).</p>
<p class="docText">Tk is not the latest and 
greatest, nor does it have the most robust set of GUI building blocks, 
but it is fairly simple to use, and with it, you can build GUIs that run
 on most platforms. We will present several simple and intermediate 
examples using Tkinter, followed by a few examples using other toolkits.
 Once you have completed this chapter, you will have the skills to build
 more complex applications and/or move to a more modern toolkit. Python 
has <span class="docEmphasis">bindings</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">adapters</span> to most of the current major toolkits, including commercial systems.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
