<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>5.6. Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">5.6. Exercises</h3>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5-1.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Client/Server Architecture.</span> Describe the roles of a windows (or windowing) server and a windows client.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5-2.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Object-Oriented Programming.</span> Describe the relationship between child and parent widgets.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5-3.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis"><tt>Label</tt> Widgets.</span> Update the <tt>tkhello1.py</tt> script to display your own message instead of “Hello World!”</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5-4.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis"><tt>Label</tt> and <tt>Button</tt> Widgets.</span> Update the <tt>tkhello3</tt><tt>.py</tt>
 script so that there are three new buttons in addition to the QUIT 
button. Pressing any of the three buttons will result in changing the 
text label so that it will then contain the text of the <tt>Button</tt>
 (widget) that was pressed. Hint: You will need three separate handlers 
or customize one handler with arguments preset (still three function 
objects).</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5-5.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis"><tt>Label</tt>, <tt>Button</tt>, and <tt>Radiobutton</tt> Widgets.</span> Modify your solution to Exercise 5-4 so that there are three <tt>Radiobuttons</tt> presenting the choices of text for the <tt>Label</tt>.
 There are two buttons: the QUIT button and an Update button. When the 
Update button is pressed, the text label will then be changed to contain
 the text of the selected <tt>Radiobutton</tt>. If no <tt>Radiobutton</tt> has been checked, the <tt>Label</tt> will remain unchanged.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5-6.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis"><tt>Label</tt>, <tt>Button</tt>, and <tt>Entry</tt> Widgets.</span> Modify your solution to Exercise 5-5 so that the three <tt>Radiobuttons</tt> are replaced by a single <tt>Entry</tt> text field widget with a default value of “Hello World!” (to reflect the initial string in the <tt>Label</tt>). The <tt>Entry</tt> field can be edited by the user with a new text string for the <tt>Label</tt>, which will be updated if the Update button is pressed.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5-7.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis"><tt>Label</tt> and <tt>Entry</tt> Widgets and Python I/O.</span> Create a GUI application that provides an <tt>Entry</tt> field in which the user can provide the name of a text file. Open the file and read it, displaying its contents in a <tt>Label</tt>.</p>
Extra Credit (Menus): Replace the <tt>Entry</tt>
 widget with a menu that has a File Open option that pops up a window to
 allow the user to specify the file to read. Also add an Exit or Quit 
option to the menu to augment the QUIT button.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5-8.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Simple Text Editor.</span>
 Use your solution to the previous problem to create a simple text 
editor. A file can be created from scratch or read and displayed into a <tt>Text</tt>
 widget that can be edited by the user. When the user quits the 
application (either by using the QUIT button or the Quit/Exit menu 
option), the user is prompted whether to save the changes or quit 
without saving.</p>
Extra Credit: Interface your script to a spellchecker and add a button 
or menu option to spellcheck the file. The words that are misspelled 
should be highlighted by using a different foreground or background 
color in the <tt>Text</tt> widget.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5-9.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Multithreaded Chat Applications.</span>
 The chat programs from the earlier chapters need completion. Create a 
fully-functional, multithreaded chat server. A GUI is not really 
necessary for the server unless you want to create one as a front-end to
 its configuration, for example, port number, name, connection to a name
 server, etc. Create a multithreaded chat client that has separate 
threads to monitor user input (and sends the message to the server for 
broadcast) and another thread to accept incoming messages to display to 
the user. The client front-end GUI should have two portions of the chat 
window: a larger section with multiple lines to hold all the dialog, and
 a smaller text entry field to accept input from the user.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5-10.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Using Other GUIs.</span>
 The example GUI applications using the various toolkits are very 
similar; however, they are not the same. Although it is impossible to 
make them all look <span class="docEmphasis">exactly</span> alike, tweak them so that they are more consistent than they are now.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>5-11.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Using GUI Builders.</span>
 GUI builders help you to create GUI applications faster by 
auto-generating the boilerplate code for you so that all you have to do 
is “the hard stuff.” Download a GUI builder tool and implement the 
animal GUI by just dragging the widgets from the corresponding palette. 
Hook it up with callbacks so that they behave just like the sample 
applications we looked at in this chapter.</p>
What GUI builders are out there? For wxWidgets, see PythonCard, wxGlade,
 XRCed, wxFormBuilder, or even Boa Constructor (no longer maintained), 
and for GTK+, there’s Glade (plus its friend GtkBuilder). For more tools
 like these, check out the “GUI Design Tools and IDEs” section of the 
GUI tools wiki page at http://wiki.python.org/moin/GuiProgramming.</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
