<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>6.4. Non-Relational Databases</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">6.4. Non-Relational Databases</h3>
<p class="docText">At
 the beginning of this chapter, we introduced you to SQL and looked at 
relational databases. We then showed you how to get data to and from 
those types of systems and presented a short lesson in porting to Python
 3, as well. Those sections were followed by sections on ORMs and how 
they let
 users avoid SQL by taking on more of an “object” approach, instead. 
However, under the hood, both SQLAlchemy and SQLObject generate SQL on 
your behalf. In the final section of this chapter, we’ll stay on objects
 but move away from relational databases.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EVMBI">6.4.1. Introduction to NoSQL</h4>
<p class="docText">Recent trends in Web and social 
services have led to the generation of data in amounts and/or rates 
greater than relational databases can handle. Think Facebook or Twitter 
scale data generation. Developers of Facebook games or applications that
 handle Twitter stream data, for example, might have applications that 
need to write to persistent storage at a rate of millions of rows or 
objects per hour. This scalability issue has led to the creation, 
explosive growth, and deployment of <span class="docEmphasis">non-relational</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">NoSQL</span> databases.</p>
<p class="docText">There are plenty of options available here, but they’re not all the same. In the non-relational (or <span class="docEmphasis">non-rel</span>
 for short) category alone, there are object databases, key-value 
stores, document stores (or datastores), graph databases, tabular 
databases, columnar/extensible record/wide-column databases, multivalue 
databases, etc. At the end of the chapter, we’ll provide some links to 
help you with your NoSQL research. At the time of this writing, one of 
the more popular document store non-rel databases is MongoDB.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EKNBI">6.4.2. MongoDB</h4>
<p class="docText">MongoDB has experienced a
 recent boost in popularity. Besides users, documentation, community, 
and professional support, it has its own regular set of 
conferences—another sign of adoption. The main Web site claims a variety
 of marquee users, including Craigslist, Shutterfly, foursquare, bit.ly,
 SourceForge, etc. See http://www.mongodb.org/display/DOCS/Production+Deployments
 for these and more. Regardless of its user base, we feel that MongoDB 
is a good choice to introduce readers to NoSQL and document datastores. 
For those who are curious, MongoDB’s document storage system is written 
in C++.</p>
<p class="docText">If you were to compare document
 stores (MongoDB, CouchDB, Riak, Amazon SimpleDB) in general to other 
non-rel databases, they fit somewhere between simple key-value stores, 
such as Redis, Voldemort, Amazon Dynamo, etc., and column-stores, such 
as Cassandra, Google Bigtable, and HBase. They’re somewhat like 
schemaless derivatives of relational databases,
 simpler and less constrained than columnar-based storage but more 
flexible than plain key-value stores. They generally store their data as
 JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) objects, which allows for data types,
 such as strings, numbers, lists, as well as for nesting.</p>
<p class="docText">Some of the MongoDB (and 
NoSQL) terminology is also different from those of relational database 
systems. For example, instead of thinking about rows and columns, you 
might have to consider documents and collections, instead. To better 
wrap your head around the change in terms, you can take a quick look at 
the SQL-to-Mongo Mapping Chart at http://www.mongodb.org/display/DOCS/SQL+to+Mongo+Mapping+Chart</p>
<p class="docText">MongoDB in particular stores
 its JSON payloads (documents)—think a single Python dictionary—in a 
binary-encoded serialization, commonly known as BSON format. However, 
regardless of its storage mechanism, the main idea is that to 
developers, it looks like JSON, which in turn looks like Python 
dictionaries, which brings us to where we want to be. MongoDB is popular
 enough to have adapters available for most platforms, including Python.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EEQBI">6.4.3. PyMongo: MongoDB and Python</h4>
<p class="docText">Although there are a variety 
of MongoDB drivers for Python, the most formal of them is PyMongo. The 
others are either more lightweight adapters or are special-purpose. You 
can perform a search on <span class="docEmphasis">mongo</span> at the Cheeseshop (http://pypi.python.org)
 to see all MongoDB-related Python packages. You can try any of them, as
 you prefer, but our example in this chapter uses PyMongo.</p>
<p class="docText">Another benefit of the <tt>pymongo</tt>
 package is that it has been ported to Python 3. Given the techniques 
already used earlier in this chapter, we will only present one Python 
application that runs on both Python 2 and 3, and depending on which 
interpreter you use to execute the script, it in turn will utilize the 
appropriately-installed version of <tt>pymongo</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">We won’t spend much time on 
installation as that is primarily beyond the scope of this book; 
however, we can point you to mongodb.org to download MongoDB and let you
 know that you can use <tt>easy_install</tt> or <tt>pip</tt> to install PyMongo and/or PyMongo3. (Note: I didn’t have any problems getting <tt>pymongo3</tt>
 on my Mac, but the install process choked in Windows.) Whichever one 
you install (or both), it’ll look the same from your code: <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>import</tt></span> <tt>pymongo</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">To confirm that you have MongoDB installed and working correctly, check out the QuickStart guide at http://www.mongodb.org/display/DOCS/Quickstart and similarly, to confirm the same for PyMongo, ensure that you can import the <tt>pymongo</tt> package. To get a feel for using MongoDB with Python, run through the PyMongo tutorial at http://api.mongodb.org/python/current/tutorial.html.</p>
<p class="docText">What we’re going to do here is port our existing user shuffle (<tt>ushuffle_*.py</tt>)
 application that we’ve been looking at throughout this chapter to use 
MongoDB as its persistent storage. You’ll notice that the flavor of the 
application is similar to that of SQLAlchemy and SQLObject, but it is 
even less substantial in that there isn’t as much overhead with MongoDB 
as there is a typical relational database system such as MySQL. Example 6-4 presents the Python 2 and 3-compatible <tt>ushuffle_mongo.py</tt>, followed by the line-by-line explanation.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EUSBI">Example 6-4. MongoDB Example (<tt>ushuffle_mongo.py</tt>)</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<p class="docText">Our user shuffle Python 2.x and 3.x-compatible MongoDB and <tt>PyMongo</tt> application.</p>
<pre class="preFixedHeight">1    #!/usr/bin/env python
2
3    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> distutils.log <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> warn <span class="docEmphStrong">as</span> printf
4    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> random <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> randrange <span class="docEmphStrong">as</span> rand
5    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> pymongo <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> Connection, errors
6    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> ushuffle_dbU <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> DBNAME, randName, FIELDS, tformat, cformat
7
8    COLLECTION = 'users'
9
10   <span class="docEmphStrong">class</span> MongoTest(object):
11       <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> __init__(self):
12           <span class="docEmphStrong">try</span>:
13               cxn = Connection()
14           <span class="docEmphStrong">except</span> errors.AutoReconnect:
15               <span class="docEmphStrong">raise</span> RuntimeError()
16           self.db = cxn[DBNAME]
17           self.users = self.db[COLLECTION]
18
19       <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> insert(self):
20           self.users.insert(
21               dict(login=who, userid=uid, projid=rand(1,5)) \
22               <span class="docEmphStrong">for</span> who, uid <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> randName())
23
24       <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> update(self):
25           fr = rand(1,5)
26           to = rand(1,5)
27           i = -1
28           <span class="docEmphStrong">for</span> i, user <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> enumerate(self.users.find({'projid': fr})):
29               self.users.update(user,
30                   {'$set': {'projid': to}})
31           <span class="docEmphStrong">return</span> fr, to, i+1
32
33       <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> delete(self):
34           rm = rand(1,5)
35           i = -1
36           <span class="docEmphStrong">for</span> i, user <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> enumerate(self.users.find({'projid': rm})):
37                self.users.remove(user)
38           <span class="docEmphStrong">return</span> rm, i+1
39
40       <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> dbDump(self):
41           printf('\n%s' % ''.join(map(cformat, FIELDS)))
42           <span class="docEmphStrong">for</span> user <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> self.users.find():
43               printf(''.join(map(tformat,
44                   (user[k] <span class="docEmphStrong">for</span> k <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> FIELDS))))
45
46       <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> finish(self):
47           self.db.connection.disconnect()
48
49   <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> main():
50       printf('*** Connect to %r database' % DBNAME)
51       <span class="docEmphStrong">try</span>:
52           mongo = MongoTest()
53       <span class="docEmphStrong">except</span> RuntimeError:
54           printf('\nERROR: MongoDB server unreachable, exit')
55           <span class="docEmphStrong">return</span>
56
57       printf('\n*** Insert names into table')
58       mongo.insert()
59       mongo.dbDump()
60
61       printf('\n*** Move users to a random group')
62       fr, to, num = mongo.update()
63       printf('\t(%d users moved) from (%d) to (%d)' % (num, fr, to))
64       mongo.dbDump()
65
66       printf('\n*** Randomly delete group')
67       rm, num = mongo.delete()
68       printf('\t(group #%d; %d users removed)' % (rm, num))
69       mongo.dbDump()
70
71       printf('\n*** Drop users table')
72       mongo.db.drop_collection(COLLECTION)
73       printf('\n*** Close cxns')
74       mongo.finish()
75
76   <span class="docEmphStrong">if</span> __name__ == '__main__':
77      main()

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EZWBI">Line-by-Line Explanation</h5>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0EBXBI">Lines 1–8</h5>
<p class="docText">The main import line is to bring in PyMongo’s <tt>Connection</tt> object and the package’s exceptions (<tt>errors</tt>).
 Everything else you’ve seen earlier in this chapter. Like the ORM 
examples, we yet again borrow most constants and common functions from 
our earlier <tt>ushuffle_dbU.py</tt> application. The last statement sets our collection (“table”) name.</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0EOYBI">Lines 10–17</h5>
<p class="docText">The first part of the initializer for our <tt>MongoTest</tt>
 class creates a connection, raising an exception if the server cannot 
be reached (lines 12–15). The next two lines are very easy to skip over 
because they look like mere assignments, but under the hood, these 
create a database or reuse an existing one (line 16) and create or reuse
 an existing “users” collection, which you can sort of consider as 
analogous to a database table.</p>
<p class="docText">Tables have defined columns 
then rows for each record, whereas collections don’t have any schema 
requirements; they have individual documents for each record. You will 
notice the conspicuous absence of a “data model” class definition in 
this part of the code. Each record defines itself, so to speak—whatever 
record you save is what goes into the collection.</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0E5YBI">Lines 19–22</h5>
<p class="docText">The <tt>insert()</tt> 
method adds values to a MongoDB collection. A collection is made up of 
documents. You can think of a document as a single record in the form of
 a Python dictionary. We create one by using the <tt>dict()</tt> factory function of those for each record, and all are streamed to the collection’s <tt>insert()</tt> method via a generator expression.</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0EQZBI">Lines 24–31</h5>
<p class="docText">The <tt>update()</tt> method works in the same manner as earlier in the chapter. The difference is the collection’s <tt>update()</tt> method which, gives developers more options than a typical database system. Here, (lines 29–30) we use the MongoDB <tt>$set</tt> directive, which updates an existing value explicitly.</p>
<p class="docText">Each MongoDB directive 
represents a modifier operation that is both highly-efficient, useful, 
and convenient to the developer when updating existing values. In 
addition to <tt>$set</tt>, there are also 
operations for incrementing a field by a value, removing a field 
(key-value pair), appending and removing values to/from an array, etc.</p>
<p class="docText">Working backward somewhat, 
before the update, however, we first need to query for all the users in 
the system (line 28) to find those with a project ID (<tt>projid</tt>) that matches the group we want to update. To do this, you use the collection <tt>find()</tt> method and pass in the criteria. This takes the place of a SQL <tt>SELECT</tt> statement.</p>
<p class="docText">It’s also possible to use the <tt>Collection.update()</tt>
 method to modify multiple documents; you would just need to set the 
multi flag to True. The only bad news with this is that it currently 
doesn’t return the total number of documents modified.</p>
<p class="docText">For more complex queries than 
just the single criteria for our simple script, check the corresponding 
page in the official documentation at http://www.mongodb.org/display/DOCS/Advanced+Queries.</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0EF2BI">Lines 33–38</h5>
<p class="docText">The <tt>delete()</tt> method reuses the same query as for <tt>update()</tt>. Once we have all the users that match the query, we <tt>remove()</tt>
 them one at a time (lines 36–37) and return the results. If you don’t 
care about the total number of documents removed, then you can simply 
make a single call to <tt>self.users.remove()</tt>, which deletes all documents from a collection.</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0EZ2BI">Lines 40–44</h5>
<p class="docText">The query performed in <tt>dbDump()</tt>
 has no criteria (line 42), so all users in the collection are returned,
 followed by the data, string-formatted and displayed to the user (lines
 43–44).</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0EH3BI">Lines 46–47</h5>
<p class="docText">The final method defined and called during application execution disconnects from the MongoDB server.</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0ES3BI">Lines 49–77</h5>
<p class="docText">The <tt>main()</tt> driver 
function is self-documenting and following the exact same script as the 
previous applications seen in this chapter: connect to database server 
and do preparation work; insert users into the collection (“table”) and 
dump database contents; move users from one project to another (and dump
 contents); remove an entire group (and dump contents); drop the entire 
collection; and then finally, disconnect.</p>
<p class="docText">While this closes our 
look at non-relational databases for Python, it should only be the 
beginning for you. As mentioned at the beginning of this section, there 
are plenty of NoSQL options to look at, and you’ll need to investigate 
and perhaps prototype each to determine which among them might be the 
right tool for the job. In the next section, we give various additional 
references for you to read further.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EE4BI">6.4.4. Summary</h4>
<p class="docText">We
 hope that we have provided you with a good introduction to using 
relational databases with Python. When your application’s needs go 
beyond those offered by plain files, or specialized files, such as DBM, 
pickled, etc., you have many options. There are a good number of RDBMSs 
out there, not to mention one completely implemented in Python, freeing 
you from having to install, maintain, or administer a real database 
system.</p>
<p class="docText">In the following section, you 
will find information on many of the Python adapters plus database and 
ORM systems. Furthermore, the community has been augmented with 
non-relational databases now to help out in those situations when 
relational databases don’t scale to the level that your application 
needs.</p>
<p class="docText">We also suggest checking out 
the DB-SIG pages as well as the Web pages and mailing lists of all 
systems of interest. Like all other areas of software development, 
Python makes things easy to learn and simple to experiment with.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
