<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>6.6. Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">6.6. Exercises</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EHNBI">Databases</h4>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6-1.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Database API.</span> What is the Python DB-API? Is it a good thing? Why (or why not)?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6-2.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Database API.</span> Describe the differences between the database module parameter styles (see the <tt>paramstyle</tt> module attribute).</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6-3.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Cursor Objects.</span> What are the differences between the cursor <tt>execute*()</tt> methods?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6-4.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Cursor Objects.</span> What are the differences between the cursor <tt>fetch*()</tt> methods?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6-5.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Database Adapters.</span>
 Research your RDBMS and its Python module. Is it DB-API compliant? What
 additional features are available for that module that are extras not 
required by the API?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6-6.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Type Objects.</span> Study using <tt>Type</tt> objects for your database and DB-API adapter, and then write a small script that uses at least one of those objects.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6-7.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Refactoring.</span> In the <tt>ushuffle_dbU.create()</tt> function, a table that already exists is dropped and re-created by recursively calling <tt>create()</tt>
 again. This is dangerous, because if recreation of the table fails 
(again), you will then have infinite recursion. Fix this problem by 
creating a more practical solution that does not involve copying the 
create query (<tt>cur.execute()</tt>) again 
in the exception handler. Extra Credit: Try to recreate the table a 
maximum of three times before returning failure back to the caller.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6-8.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Database and HTML.</span>
 Take any existing database table, and use your Web programming 
knowledge to create a handler that outputs the contents of that table as
 HTML for browsers.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6-9.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Web Programming and Databases.</span> Take our user shuffle example (<tt>ushuffle_db.py</tt>) and create a Web interface for it.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6-10.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">GUI Programming and Databases.</span> Take our user shuffle example (<tt>ushuffle_db.py</tt>) and throw a GUI for it.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6-11.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Stock Portfolio Class.</span>
 Create an application that manages the stock portfolios for multiple 
users. Use a relational database as the back-end and provide a Web-based
 user interface. You can use the stock database class from the 
object-oriented programming chapter of <span class="docEmphasis">Core Python Language Fundamentals</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">Core Python Programming</span>.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6-12.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Debugging &amp; Refactoring.</span> The <tt>update()</tt> and <tt>remove()</tt> functions each have a minor flaw: <tt>update()</tt>
 might move users from one group into the same group. Change the random 
destination group to be different from the group from which the user is 
moving. Similarly, <tt>remove()</tt> might try to remove people from a group that has no members (because they don’t exist or were moved up with <tt>update()</tt>).</p></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EEUBI">ORMs</h4>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6-13.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Stock Portfolio Class.</span> Create an alternative solution to the Stock Portfolio (Exercise 6-11) by using an ORM instead of direct to an RDBMS.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6-14.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Debugging and Refactoring.</span> Port your solutions to Exercise 6-13 to both the SQLAlchemy and SQLObject examples.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6-15.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Supporting Different RDBMSs.</span> Take either the SQL-Alchemy (<tt>ushuffle_sad.py</tt>) or SQLObject (<tt>ushuffle_so.py</tt>) application, which currently support MySQL and SQLite, and add yet another relational database of your choice.</p></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
<p class="docText">For the next four exercises, focus on the <tt>ushuffle_dbU.py</tt>
 script, which features some code near the top (lines 7–12) that 
determines which function should be used to get user input from the 
command-line.</p>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6-16.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Importing and Python.</span> Review that code again. Why do we need to check if <tt>__builtins__</tt> is a <tt>dict</tt> versus a module?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6-17.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Porting to Python 3.</span> Using <tt>distutils.log.warn()</tt> is not a perfect substitute for <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>print</tt></span>/<tt>print()</tt>. Prove it. Provide code snippets to show where <tt>warn()</tt> is not compatible with <tt>print()</tt>.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6-18.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Porting to Python 3.</span> Some users believe that they can use <tt>print()</tt> in Python 2 just like in Python 3. Prove them wrong. Hint: From Guido himself: <tt>print(x,</tt> <tt>y)</tt></p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6-19.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Python Language.</span> Assume that you want to use <tt>print()</tt> in Python 3 but <tt>distutils.log.warn()</tt> in Python 2, and you want to use the <tt>printf()</tt> name. What’s wrong with the code below?</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> distutils.log <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> warn
<span class="docEmphStrong">if</span> hasattr(__builtins__, 'print'):
    printf = print
<span class="docEmphStrong">else</span>:
    printf = warn</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6-20.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Exceptions.</span> When establishing our connection to the server using our designated database name in <tt>ushuffle_sad.py</tt>, a failure (<tt>exc.OperationalError</tt>)
 indicated that our table did not exist, so we had to back up and create
 the database first before retrying the database connection. However, 
this is not the only source of errors: if using MySQL and the server 
itself is down, the same exception is also thrown. In this situation, 
execution of <tt>CREATE DATABASE</tt> will fail, as well. Add another handler to take care of this situation, raising <tt>RuntimeError</tt> back to the code attempting to create an instance.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6-21.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">SQLAlchemy.</span> Augment the <tt>ushuffle_sad.dbDump()</tt> function by adding a new default parameter named <tt>newest5</tt> which defaults to <tt>False</tt>. If <tt>True</tt> is passed in, rather than displaying all users, reverse sort the list by order of <tt>Users.userid</tt> and show only the top five representing the newest employees. Make this special call in <tt>main()</tt> right after the call to <tt>orm.insert()</tt> and <tt>orm.dbDump()</tt>.</p>
<div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Use the <tt>Query</tt> <tt>limit()</tt> and <tt>offset()</tt> methods.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Use the Python slicing syntax, instead.</p></div></li></ol></div>
The updated output would look something like this:
<div class="docText"><pre>. . .
Jess      7912      4
Aaron     8312      3
Melissa   8602      2

*** Top 5 newest employees

LOGIN     USERID    PROJID
Melissa   8602      2
Aaron     8312      3
Jess      7912      4
Elliot    7911      3
Davina    7902      3

*** Move users to a random group
        (4 users moved) from (3) to (1)

LOGIN     USERID    PROJID
Faye      6812      4
Serena    7003      2
Amy       7209      1
. . .</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6-22.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">SQLAlchemy.</span> Change <tt>ushuffle_sad.update()</tt> to use the <tt>Query</tt> <tt>update()</tt> method, dropping down to 5 lines of code. Use the <tt>timeit</tt> module to show whether it’s faster than the original.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6-23.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">SQLAlchemy.</span> Same as Exercise 6-22 but for <tt>ushuffle_ sad.delete()</tt>, use the <tt>Query</tt> <tt>delete()</tt> method.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6-24.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">SQLAlchemy.</span> In the explicitly non-declarative version of <tt>ushuffle_sad.py</tt>, <tt>ushuffle_sae.py</tt>,
 we removed the use of the declarative layer as well as sessions. While 
using an Active Record model is more optional, the concept of <tt>Session</tt>s isn’t a bad idea at all. Change all of the code that performs database operations in <tt>ushuffle_sae.py</tt> so that they all use/share a <tt>Session</tt> object, as in the declarative <tt>ushuffle_sad.py</tt>.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6-25.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Django Data Models.</span> Take the <tt>Users</tt>
 data model class, as implemented in our SQLAlchemy or SQLObject 
examples, and create the equivalent by using the Django ORM. You might 
want to read ahead to Chapter 11, “Web Frameworks: Django.”</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6-26.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Storm ORM.</span> Port the <tt>ushuffle_s*.py</tt> application to the Storm ORM.</p></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E36BI">Non-Relational (NoSQL) Databases</h4>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6-27.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">NoSQL.</span>
 What are some of reasons why non-relational databases have become 
popular? What do they offer over traditional relational databases?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6-28.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">NoSQL.</span>
 There are at least four different types of non-relational databases. 
Categorize each of the major types and name the most well-known projects
 in each category. Note the specific ones that have at least one Python 
adapter.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>6-29.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">CouchDB.</span>
 CouchDB is another document datastore that’s often compared to MongoDB.
 Review some of the online comparisons in the final section of this 
chapter, and then download and install CouchDB. Morph <tt>ushuffle_mongo.py</tt> into a CouchDB-compatible <tt>ushuffle_couch.py</tt>.</p></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
