<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>7.1. Introduction</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">7.1. Introduction</h3>
<p class="docText">Like it or not, we developers 
live in a world in which we will interact with Windows-based PCs. It 
might be intermittent or something you have to deal with on a daily 
basis, but regardless of how much exposure you face, the power of Python
 can be used to make our lives easier.</p>
<p class="docText">In this chapter, we will 
explore COM client programming by using Python to control and 
communicate with Microsoft Office applications such as Word, Excel, 
PowerPoint, and Outlook. COM is a service through which PC applications 
can interact with each other. Specifically, well-known applications such
 as those in the Office suite provide COM services, and COM client 
programs can be written to drive these applications.</p>
<p class="docText">Traditionally, COM clients 
are written in Microsoft Visual Basic (VB)/Visual Basic for Applications
 (VBA) or (Visual) C++, two very powerful but very different tools. For 
COM programming, Python is often viewed as a viable substitute because 
it is more powerful than VB, and it is more expressive and less 
time-consuming than developing in C++.</p>
<p class="docText">IronPython, .NET, and VSTO are 
all newer tools that help you to write applications that communicate 
with Office tools, as well, but if you look under the hood, you’ll find 
COM, so the material in this chapter still applies, even if you’re using
 some of these more advanced tools.</p>
<p class="docText">This chapter is designed for 
both COM developers who want to learn how they can apply Python in their
 world, and also for Python programmers who need to learn how to create 
COM clients to automate tasks such as generating Excel spreadsheets, 
creating form letters as Word documents, building slide presentations by
 using PowerPoint, sending e-mail via Outlook, etc. We will not be 
discussing the principles or concepts of COM, waxing philosophically on 
such thoughts as “Why COM?” Nor will we be learning about COM+, ATL, 
IDL, MFC, DCOM, ADO, .NET, IronPython, VSTO, etc.</p>
<p class="docText">Instead, we will immerse you in COM client programming by learning how to use Python to communicate with Office applications.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
