<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>8.4. Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">8.4. Exercises</h3>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>8-1.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Extending Python.</span> What are some of the advantages of Python extensions?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>8-2.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Extending Python.</span> Can you see any disadvantages or dangers of using extensions?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>8-3.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Writing Extensions.</span>
 Obtain a C/C++ compiler and (re)familiarize yourself with C/C++ 
programming. Create a simple utility function that you can make 
available and configure as an extension. Demonstrate that your utility 
executes in both C/C++ and Python.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>8-4.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Porting from Python to C.</span> Take several of the exercises you did in earlier chapters and port them to C/C++ as extension modules.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>8-5.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Wrapping C Code.</span>
 Find a piece of C/C++ code, which you might have done a long time ago 
but want to port to Python. Instead of porting, make it an extension 
module.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>8-6.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Writing Extensions.</span> In one of the exercises in the object-oriented programming chapter of <span class="docEmphasis">Core Python Programming</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">Core Python Language Fundamentals</span>, you created a <tt>dollarize()</tt>
 function as part of a class to format a floating-point value into a 
financial numeric string. Create an extension featuring a wrapped <tt>dollarize()</tt> function and integrate a regression testing function, for example, <tt>test()</tt>, into the module. Extra Credit: In addition to creating a C extension, also rewrite <tt>dollarize()</tt> in Pyrex or Cython.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>8-7.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Extending vs. Embedding.</span> What is the difference between extending and embedding?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>8-8.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Not Writing Extensions.</span> Take the C/C++ code you used in Exercise 8-3, 8-4, or 8-5
 and redo it in pseudo-Python via Pyrex or Cython. Describe your 
experiences using Pyrex/Cython versus integrating that code all as part 
of a C extension.</p></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
