<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>9.3. Web Clients</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">9.3. Web Clients</h3>
<p class="docText">Web browsers are basic Web
 clients. They are used primarily for searching and downloading 
documents from the Web. You can also create Web clients that do more 
than that, though. We’ll take a look at several in this section.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EYVCI">9.3.1. A Simple Web Crawler/Spider/Bot</h4>
<p class="docText">One example of a slightly more complex Web client is a <span class="docEmphasis">crawler</span> (a.k.a. <span class="docEmphasis">spider</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">[ro]bot</span>). These are programs that explore and download pages from the Internet for a variety of reasons, some of which include:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">Indexing into a large search engine such as Google or Yahoo!</p></li><li><p class="docList">Offline
 browsing—downloading documents onto a local hard disk and rearranging 
hyperlinks to create almost a mirror image for local browsing</p></li><li><p class="docList">Downloading and storing for historical or archival purposes, or</p></li><li><p class="docList">Web page caching to save superfluous downloading time on Web site revisits.</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">The crawler in Example 9-3, <tt>crawl.py</tt>,
 takes a starting Web address (URL), downloads that page and all other 
pages whose links appear in succeeding pages, but only those that are in
 the same domain as the starting page. Without such limitations, you 
will run out of disk space.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EPXCI">Example 9-3. Web Crawler (<tt>crawl.py</tt>)</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<p class="docText">The crawler consists of two classes: one to manage the entire crawling process (<tt>Crawler</tt>), and one to retrieve and parse each downloaded Web page (<tt>Retriever</tt>). (Refactored from earlier editions of this book.)</p>
<pre class="preFixedHeight">1    #!/usr/bin/env python
2
3    <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> cStringIO
4    <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> formatter
5    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> htmllib <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> HTMLParser
6    <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> httplib
7    <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> os
8    <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> sys
9    <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> urllib
10   <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> urlparse
11
12   <span class="docEmphStrong">class</span> Retriever(object):
13       __slots__ = ('url', 'file')
14       <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> __init__(self, url):
15           self.url, self.file = self.get_file(url)
16
17       <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> get_file(self, url, default='index.html'):
18           'Create usable local filename from URL'
19           parsed = urlparse.urlparse(url)
20           host = parsed.netloc.split('@')[-1].split(':')[0]
21           filepath = '%s%s' % (host, parsed.path)
22           <span class="docEmphStrong">if not</span> os.path.splitext(parsed.path)[1]:
23               filepath = os.path.join(filepath, default)
24           linkdir = os.path.dirname(filepath)
25           <span class="docEmphStrong">if not</span> os.path.isdir(linkdir):
26               <span class="docEmphStrong">if</span> os.path.exists(linkdir):
27                   os.unlink(linkdir)
28               os.makedirs(linkdir)
29           <span class="docEmphStrong">return</span> url, filepath
30
31       <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> download(self):
32           'Download URL to specific named file'
33           <span class="docEmphStrong">try</span>:
34               retval = urllib.urlretrieve(self.url, self.file)
35           <span class="docEmphStrong">except</span> (IOError, httplib.InvalidURL) <span class="docEmphStrong">as</span> e:
36               retval = (('*** ERROR: bad URL "%s": %s' % (
37                   self.url, e)),)
38           <span class="docEmphStrong">return</span> retval
39
40       <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> parse_links(self):
41           'Parse out the links found in downloaded HTML file'
42           f = open(self.file, 'r')
43           data = f.read()
44           f.close()
45           parser = HTMLParser(formatter.AbstractFormatter(
46               formatter.DumbWriter(cStringIO.StringIO())))
47           parser.feed(data)
48           parser.close()
49           <span class="docEmphStrong">return</span> parser.anchorlist
50
51   <span class="docEmphStrong">class</span> Crawler(object):
52       count = 0
53
54       <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> __init__(self, url):
55           self.q = [url]
56           self.seen = set()
57           parsed = urlparse.urlparse(url)
58           host = parsed.netloc.split('@')[-1].split(':')[0]
59           self.dom = '.'.join(host.split('.')[-2:])
60
61       <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> get_page(self, url, media=False):
62           'Download page &amp; parse links, add to queue if nec'
63           r = Retriever(url)
64           fname = r.download()[0]
65           <span class="docEmphStrong">if</span> fname[0] == '*':
66               <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> fname, '... skipping parse'
67               <span class="docEmphStrong">return</span>
68           Crawler.count += 1
69           <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> '\n(', Crawler.count, ')'
70           <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> 'URL:', url
71           <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> 'FILE:', fname
72           self.seen.add(url)
73           ftype = os.path.splitext(fname)[1]
74           <span class="docEmphStrong">if</span> ftype <span class="docEmphStrong">not in</span> ('.htm', '.html'):
75               <span class="docEmphStrong">return</span>
76
77           <span class="docEmphStrong">for</span> link <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> r.parse_links():
78               <span class="docEmphStrong">if</span> link.startswith('mailto:'):
79                   <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> '... discarded, mailto link'
80                   <span class="docEmphStrong">continue</span>
81               <span class="docEmphStrong">if not</span> media:
82                   ftype = os.path.splitext(link)[1]
83                   <span class="docEmphStrong">if</span> ftype <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> ('.mp3', '.mp4', '.m4v', '.wav'):
84                       <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> '... discarded, media file'
85                       <span class="docEmphStrong">continue</span>
86               <span class="docEmphStrong">if not</span> link.startswith('http://'):
87                   link = urlparse.urljoin(url, link)
88               <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> '*', link,
89               <span class="docEmphStrong">if</span> link <span class="docEmphStrong">not in</span> self.seen:
90                   <span class="docEmphStrong">if</span> self.dom <span class="docEmphStrong">not in</span> link:
91                       <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> '... discarded, not in domain'
92                   <span class="docEmphStrong">else</span>:
93                       <span class="docEmphStrong">if</span> link <span class="docEmphStrong">not in</span> self.q:
94                           self.q.append(link)
95                           <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> '... new, added to Q'
96                       <span class="docEmphStrong">else</span>:
97                           <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> '... discarded, already in Q'
98               <span class="docEmphStrong">else</span>:
99                       <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> '... discarded, already processed'
100
101      <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> go(self, media=False):
102          'Process next page in queue (if any)'
103          <span class="docEmphStrong">while</span> self.q:
104              url = self.q.pop()
105              self.get_page(url, media)
106
107  <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> main():
108      <span class="docEmphStrong">if</span> len(sys.argv) &gt; 1:
109          url = sys.argv[1]
110      <span class="docEmphStrong">else</span>:
111          <span class="docEmphStrong">try</span>:
112              url = raw_input('Enter starting URL: ')
113          <span class="docEmphStrong">except</span> (KeyboardInterrupt, EOFError):
114              url = ''
115      <span class="docEmphStrong">if not</span> url:
116          <span class="docEmphStrong">return</span>
117      <span class="docEmphStrong">if not</span> url.startswith('http://') <span class="docEmphStrong">and</span> \
118          <span class="docEmphStrong">not</span> url.startswith('ftp://'):
119              url = 'http://%s/' % url
120     robot = Crawler(url)
121     robot.go()
122
123  <span class="docEmphStrong">if</span> __name__ == '__main__':
124     main()

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EC6CI">Line-by-Line (Class-by-Class) Explanation</h5>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0EK6CI">Lines 1–10</h5>
<p class="docText">The
 top part of the script consists of the standard Python Unix startup 
line and the import of the modules/packages to be used. Here are some 
brief explanations:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList"><tt>cStringIO</tt>, <tt>formatter</tt>, <tt>htmllib</tt> We use various classes in these modules for parsing HTML.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>httplib</tt> We only need an exception from this module.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>os</tt> This provides various file system functions.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>sys</tt> We are just using <tt>argv</tt> for command-line arguments.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>urllib</tt> We only need the <tt>urlretrieve()</tt> function for downloading Web pages.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>urlparse</tt> We use the u<tt>rlparse()</tt> and <tt>urljoin()</tt> functions for URL manipulation.</p></li></ul>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0E1EDI">Lines 12–29</h5>
<p class="docText">The <tt>Retriever</tt> class 
has the responsibility of downloading pages from the Web and parsing the
 links located within each document, adding them to the “to-do” queue, 
if necessary. A <tt>Retriever</tt> instance object is created for each page that is downloaded from the Internet. <tt>Retriever</tt> consists of several methods to aid in its functionality: a constructor (<tt>__init__()</tt>), <tt>get_file()</tt>, <tt>download()</tt>, and <tt>parse_links()</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Skipping ahead momentarily, the <tt>get_file()</tt>
 method takes the given URL and comes up with a safe and sane 
corresponding filename to store the file locally—we are downloading this
 file from the Web. Basically, it works by removing the <tt>http://</tt>
 prefix from the URL, getting rid of any extras such as username, 
password, and port number in order to arrive at the hostname (line 20).</p>
<p class="docText">URLs without trailing file extensions will be given the default filename <tt>index.html</tt> and can be overridden by the caller. You can see how this works as well as the final <tt>filepath</tt> created on lines 21–23.</p>
<p class="docText">We then pull out the final 
destination directory (line 24) and check if it is already a 
directory—if so, we leave it alone and return the URL-filepath pair. If 
we enter this <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>if</tt></span>
 clause, this means the directory either doesn’t exist or is a plain 
file. In the case it is the latter, so it will be erased. Finally, the 
target directory and any parents are created by using <tt>os.makedirs()</tt> in line 28.</p>
<p class="docText">Now let’s go back up to the initializer <tt>__init__()</tt>. A <tt>Retriever</tt> object is created and stores both the URL (<tt>str</tt>) and the corresponding filename returned by <tt>get_file()</tt>
 as (instance) attributes. In our current design, instances are created 
for every file downloaded. In the case of a Web site with many, many 
files, a small instance like this can cause additional memory usage. To 
help minimize consumed resources, we create a <tt>__slots__</tt> variable, indicating that the only attributes that instances can have are <tt>self.url</tt> and <tt>self.file</tt>.</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0E3GDI">Lines 31–49</h5>
<p class="docText">We’ll see the crawler momentarily, but this is a heads-up that it creates <tt>Retriever</tt> objects for each downloaded file. The <tt>download()</tt> method, as you can imagine, actually goes out to the Internet to download the page with the given link (line 34). It calls <tt>urllib.</tt><tt>urlretrieve()</tt> with the URL and saves it to the filename (the one returned by <tt>get_file()</tt>).</p>
<p class="docText">If the download was successful, the filename is returned (line 34), but if there’s an error, an error string prefixed with <span class="docEmphStrong">***</span> is returned instead (lines 35–36). The crawler checks this return value and calls <tt>parse_links()</tt> to parse links out of the just-downloaded page only if all went well.</p>
<p class="docText">The more serious method in this part of our application is the <tt>parse_links()</tt> method. Yes, the job of a crawler is to download Web pages, but a <span class="docEmphasis">recursive</span>
 crawler (like ours) looks for additional links in each downloaded page 
and processes them, too. It first opens up the downloaded Web page and 
extracts the entire HTML content as a single string (lines 42–44).</p>
<p class="docText">The magic you see in lines 45–49 is a well-known recipe that uses the <tt>htmllib.</tt><tt>HTMLParser</tt>
 class. We would like to say something to the effect that this is a 
recipe that’s been passed down by Python programmers from generation to 
generation, but we would just be lying to you. Anyway, we digress.</p>
<p class="docText">The main point of how it works is that the parser class doesn’t do I/O, so it takes a <tt>formatter</tt> object to handle that. Formatter objects—Python only has one real formatter: <tt>formatter.</tt><tt>AbstractFormatter</tt>—parse the data and use a writer object to dispatch its output. Similarly, Python only has one useful writer object: <tt>formatter.DumbWriter</tt>.
 It optionally takes a file object to which to write the output. If you 
omit it, it writes to standard output, which is probably undesirable. To
 that effect, we instantiate a <tt>cStringIO. StringIO</tt> object to absorb this output (think <tt>/dev/null</tt>,
 if you know what that is.) You can search online for any of the class 
names and find similar code snippets in many places along with 
additional commentary.</p>
<p class="docText">Because <tt>htmllib.HTMLParser</tt>
 is fairly long in the tooth and deprecated starting in version 2.6, a 
smaller example demonstrating some of the more contemporary tools comes 
in the next subsection. We leave it in this example because it is/was 
such a common recipe and still can be the right tool for this job.</p>
<p class="docText">Anyway, all the 
complexity in creating the parser is entirely contained in a single call
 (lines 45–46). The rest of this block consists of passing in the HTML, 
closing the parser, and then returning a list of parsed links/anchors.</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0ERKDI">Lines 51–59</h5>
<p class="docText">The <tt>Crawler</tt>
 class is the star of the show, managing the entire crawling process for
 one Web site. If we added threading to our application, we would create
 separate instances for each site crawled. The <tt>Crawler</tt> consists of three items stored by the constructor during the instantiation phase, the first of which is <tt>self.q</tt>,
 a queue of links to download. Such a list will fluctuate during 
execution, shrinking as each page is processed and expanding as new 
links are discovered within each downloaded page.</p>
<p class="docText">The other two data values for the <tt>Crawler</tt> include <tt>self.seen</tt>,
 a set containing all the links that we have seen (downloaded) already. 
And finally, we store the domain name for the main link, <tt>self.dom</tt>,
 and use that value to determine whether any succeeding links are part 
of the same domain. All three values are created in the initializer 
method <tt>__init__()</tt> in lines 54–59.</p>
<p class="docText">Note that we parse the domain by using <tt>urlparse.urlparse()</tt> (line 58) in the same way that we grab the hostname out of the URL in the <tt>Retriever</tt>.
 The domain name comes by just taking the final two parts of the 
hostname. Note that because we don’t use the host for anything else, you
 can make your code harder to read by combining lines 58 and 59 like 
this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>self.dom = '.'.join(urlparse.urlparse(
    url).netloc.split('@')[-1].split(':')[0].split('.')[-2:])</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Right above <tt>__init__()</tt>, the <tt>Crawler</tt> also has a static data item named <tt>count</tt>.
 The purpose of this counter is just to keep track of the number of 
objects we have downloaded from the Internet. It is incremented for 
every successfully downloaded page.</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0EANDI">Lines 61-105</h5>
<p class="docText"><tt>Crawler</tt> has a pair of other methods in addition to its constructor: <tt>get_page()</tt> and <tt>go()</tt>. <tt>go()</tt> is simply the method that is used to start the <tt>Crawler</tt>. It is called from the main body of code. <tt>go()</tt>
 consists of a loop that will continue to execute as long as there are 
new links in the queue that need to be downloaded. The workhorse of this
 class, though, is the <tt>get_page()</tt> method.</p>
<p class="docText"><tt>get_page()</tt> instantiates a <tt>Retriever</tt>
 object with the first link and lets it go off to the races. If the page
 was downloaded successfully, the counter is incremented (otherwise, 
links that error-out are skipped [lines 65–67]) and the link added to 
the “already seen” set (line 72). We use a set because order doesn’t 
matter and its lookup is much faster than using a list.</p>
<p class="docText"><tt>get_page()</tt> looks at 
all the links featured inside each downloaded page (skipping all non-Web
 pages [lines 73–75]) and determines whether any more links should be added to the queue (lines 77–99). The main loop in <tt>go()</tt> will continue to process links until the queue is empty, at which time victory is declared (lines 103–105).</p>
<p class="docText">Links that are a part of another 
domain (lines 90–91), or have already been downloaded (lines 98–99), are
 already in the queue waiting to be processed (lines 96–97), or are <tt>mailto</tt>: links are ignored and not added to the queue (lines 78–80). The same applies for media files (lines 81–85).</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0EXODI">Lines 107–124</h5>
<p class="docText"><tt>main()</tt> needs a URL 
to begin processing. If one is entered on the command line (for example,
 when this script is invoked directly; lines 108–109), it will just go 
with the one given. Otherwise, the script enters interactive mode, 
prompting the user for a starting URL (line 112). With a starting link 
in hand, the <tt>Crawler</tt> is instantiated, and away we go (lines 120–121).</p>
<p class="docText">One sample invocation of <tt>crawl.py</tt> might look like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedHeight">$ crawl.py
Enter starting URL: http://www.null.com/home/index.html

( 1 )
URL: http://www.null.com/home/index.html
FILE: www.null.com/home/index.html
* http://www.null.com/home/overview.html ... new, added to Q
* http://www.null.com/home/synopsis.html ... new, added to Q
* http://www.null.com/home/order.html ... new, added to Q
* mailto:postmaster@null.com ... discarded, mailto link
* http://www.null.com/home/overview.html ... discarded, already in Q
* http://www.null.com/home/synopsis.html ... discarded, already in Q
* http://www.null.com/home/order.html ... discarded, already in Q
* mailto:postmaster@null.com ... discarded, mailto link
* http://bogus.com/index.html ... discarded, not in domain

( 2 )
URL: http://www.null.com/home/order.html
FILE: www.null.com/home/order.html
* mailto:postmaster@null.com ... discarded, mailto link
* http://www.null.com/home/index.html ... discarded, already processed
* http://www.null.com/home/synopsis.html ... discarded, already in Q
* http://www.null.com/home/overview.html ... discarded, already in Q

( 3 )
URL: http://www.null.com/home/synopsis.html
FILE: www.null.com/home/synopsis.html
* http://www.null.com/home/index.html ... discarded, already processed
* http://www.null.com/home/order.html ... discarded, already processed
* http://www.null.com/home/overview.html ... discarded, already in Q

( 4 )
URL: http://www.null.com/home/overview.html
FILE: www.null.com/home/overview.html
* http://www.null.com/home/synopsis.html ... discarded, already
processed
* http://www.null.com/home/index.html ... discarded, already processed
* http://www.null.com/home/synopsis.html ... discarded, already
processed
* http://www.null.com/home/order.html ... discarded, already processed

					  </pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">After execution, a www.null.com directory would be created in the local file system, with a <tt>home</tt> subdirectory. You will find all the processed files within <tt>home</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">If after reviewing the 
code you’re still wondering where writing a crawler in Python can get 
you, you might be surprised to learn that the original Google Web 
crawlers were written in Python. For more information, see http://infolab.stanford.edu/~backrub/google.html.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EWSDI">9.3.2. Parsing Web Content</h4>
<p class="docText">In the previous subsection, we took a look at a crawler Web client. Part of the spidering process involved parsing of links, or <span class="docEmphasis">anchors</span> as they’re officially called. For a long while, the well-known recipe <tt>htmllib.HTMLParser</tt>
 was employed for parsing Web pages; however, newer and improved modules
 and packages have come along. We’ll be demonstrating some of these in 
this subsection.</p>
<p class="docText">In Example 9-4, we explore one standard library tool, the <tt>HTMLParser</tt> class in the <tt>HTMLParser</tt> module (added in version 2.2). <tt>HTMLParser.HTMLParser</tt> was supposed to replace <tt>htmllib.HTMLParser</tt>
 because it was simpler, provided a lower-level view of the content, and
 handled XHTML, whereas the latter was older and more complex because it
 was based on the <tt>sgmllib</tt> module 
(meaning it had to understand the intricacies of Standard Generalized 
Markup Language [SGML]). The official documentation is fairly sparse 
when describing how to use <tt>HTMLParser.HTMLParser</tt>, so hopefully we’ll give a more useful example here.</p>
<p class="docText">We’ll also demonstrate the use of two of the other three most popular Web parsers, <tt>BeautifulSoup</tt> and <tt>html5lib</tt>,
 which are available as separate downloads outside of the standard 
library. You can access them both at the Cheeseshop, or from http://pypi.python.org. For a less stressful installation, you can also use the <tt>easy_install</tt> or <tt>pip</tt> tools to get either one.</p>
<p class="docText">The one we skipped was <tt>lxml</tt>;
 we’ll leave that as an exercise for you to undertake. You’ll find more 
exercises at the end of the chapter that will help you learn these more 
thoroughly by substituting them for <tt>htmllib. HTMLParser</tt> in the crawler.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>parse_links.py</tt> script in Example 9-4
 only consists of parsing anchors out of any input data. Given a URL, it
 will extract all links, attempt to make any necessary adjustments to 
make them full URLs, sort, and display them to the user. It runs each 
URL through all three parsers. For <tt>BeautifulSoup</tt>
 in particular, we provide two different solutions: the first one is 
simpler, parsing all tags then looking for all the anchor tags; the 
second requires the use of the <tt>SoupStrainer</tt> class, which specifically targets anchor tags and only parses those.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EPVDI">Example 9-4. Link Parser (<tt>parse_links.py</tt>)</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<p class="docText">This script uses three different parsers to extract links from HTML anchor tags. It features the <tt>HTMLParser</tt> standard library module as well as the third-party <tt>BeautifulSoup</tt> and <tt>html5lib</tt> packages.</p>
<pre class="preFixedHeight">1    #!/usr/bin/env python
2
3    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> HTMLParser <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> HTMLParser
4    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> cStringIO <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> StringIO
5    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> urllib2 <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> urlopen
6    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> urlparse <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> urljoin
7
8    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> BeautifulSoup <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> BeautifulSoup, SoupStrainer
9    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> html5lib <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> parse, treebuilders
10
11   URLs = (
12       'http://python.org',
13       'http://google.com',
14   )
15
16   <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> output(x):
17       <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> '\n'.join(sorted(set(x)))
18
19   <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> simpleBS(url, f):
20       'simpleBS() - use BeautifulSoup to parse all tags to get anchors'
21       output(urljoin(url, x['href']) <span class="docEmphStrong">for</span> x <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> BeautifulSoup(
22           f).findAll('a'))
23
24   <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> fasterBS(url, f):
25       'fasterBS() - use BeautifulSoup to parse only anchor tags'
26       output(urljoin(url, x['href']) <span class="docEmphStrong">for</span> x <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> BeautifulSoup(
27           f, parseOnlyThese=SoupStrainer('a')))
28
29   <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> htmlparser(url, f):
30       'htmlparser() - use HTMLParser to parse anchor tags'
31       <span class="docEmphStrong">class</span> AnchorParser(HTMLParser):
32           <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> handle_starttag(self, tag, attrs):
33               <span class="docEmphStrong">if</span> tag != 'a':
34                   <span class="docEmphStrong">return</span>
35               <span class="docEmphStrong">if not</span> hasattr(self, 'data'):
36                   self.data = []
37               <span class="docEmphStrong">for</span> attr <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> attrs:
38                   <span class="docEmphStrong">if</span> attr[0] == 'href':
39                       self.data.append(attr[1])
40       parser = AnchorParser()
41       parser.feed(f.read())
42       output(urljoin(url, x) <span class="docEmphStrong">for</span> x <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> parser.data)
43
44   <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> html5libparse(url, f):
45       'html5libparse() - use html5lib to parse anchor tags'
46       output(urljoin(url, x.attributes['href']) \
47           <span class="docEmphStrong">for</span> x <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> parse(f) <span class="docEmphStrong">if</span> isinstance(x,
48           treebuilders.simpletree.Element) <span class="docEmphStrong">and</span> \
49           x.name == 'a')
50
51   <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> process(url, data):
52       <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> '\n*** simple BS'
53       simpleBS(url, data)
54       data.seek(0)
55       <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> '\n*** faster BS'
56       fasterBS(url, data)
57       data.seek(0)
58       <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> '\n*** HTMLParser'
59       htmlparser(url, data)
60       data.seek(0)
61       <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> '\n*** HTML5lib'
62       html5libparse(url, data)
63
64   <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> main():
65       <span class="docEmphStrong">for</span> url <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> URLs:
66           f = urlopen(url)
67           data = StringIO(f.read())
68           f.close()
69           process(url, data)
70
71    <span class="docEmphStrong">if</span> __name__ == '__main__':
72       main()

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EQ1DI">Line-by-Line Explanation</h5>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0EY1DI">Lines 1–9</h5>
<p class="docText">In this script, we use four modules from the standard library. <tt>HTMLParser</tt>
 is one of the parsers; the other three are for general use throughout. 
The second group of imports are of third-party (non-standard library) 
modules/packages. This ordering is the generally accepted standard for 
imports: standard library modules/packages first, followed by 
third-party installations, and finally, any modules/packages local to 
the application.</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0EL4DI">Lines 11–17</h5>
<p class="docText">The <tt>URLs</tt> variable contains the Web pages to parse; feel free to add, change, or remove URLs here. The <tt>output()</tt>
 function takes an iterable of links, removes duplicates by putting them
 all into a set, sorts them in lexicographic order, and then merges them
 into a NEWLINE-delimited string that is displayed to the user.</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0E24DI">Lines 19–27</h5>
<p class="docText">We highlight the use of <tt>BeautifulSoup</tt> in the <tt>simpleBS()</tt> and <tt>fasterBS()</tt> functions. In <tt>simpleBS()</tt>, the parsing happens when you instantiate <tt>BeautifulSoup</tt>
 with the file handle. In the following short snippet, we do exactly 
that, using an already downloaded page from the PyCon Web site as <tt>pycon.html</tt>.</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>&gt;&gt;&gt; <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> BeautifulSoup <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> BeautifulSoup <span class="docEmphStrong">as</span> BS
&gt;&gt;&gt; f = open('pycon.html')
&gt;&gt;&gt; bs = BS(f)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">When you get the instance and call its <tt>findAll()</tt> method requesting anchor (‘a’) tags, it returns a list of tags, as shown here:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>&gt;&gt;&gt; type(bs)
&lt;class 'BeautifulSoup.BeautifulSoup'&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; tags = bs.findAll('a')
&gt;&gt;&gt; type(tags)
&lt;type 'list'&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; len(tags)
19
&gt;&gt;&gt; tag = tags[0]
&gt;&gt;&gt; tag
&lt;a href="/2011/"&gt;PyCon 2011 Atlanta&lt;/a&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; type(tag)
&lt;class 'BeautifulSoup.Tag'&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; tag['href']
u'/2011/'</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Because the <tt>Tag</tt> object is an anchor, it should have an <tt>'href'</tt> tag, so we ask for it. We then call <tt>urlparse.</tt><tt>urljoin()</tt> and pass along the head URL along with the link to get the full URL. Here’s our continuing example (assuming the PyCon URL):</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>&gt;&gt;&gt; <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> urlparse <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> urljoin
&gt;&gt;&gt; url = 'http://us.pycon.org'
&gt;&gt;&gt; urljoin(url, tag['href'])
u'http://us.pycon.org/2011/'</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The generator expression iterates over all the final links created by <tt>urlparse.urljoin()</tt> from all of the anchor tags and sends them to <tt>output()</tt>,
 which processes them as just described. If the code is slightly more 
difficult to understand because of the use of the generator expression, 
we can expand out the code to the equivalent:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> simpleBS(url, f):
    parsed = BeautifulSoup(f)
    tags = parsed.findAll('a')
    links = [urljoin(url, tag['href']) <span class="docEmphStrong">for</span> tag <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> tags]
    output(links)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">For readability purposes, 
this wins over our single line version, and we would recommend that when
 developing open-source, work, or group collaborative projects, you 
always consider this over a more cryptic one-liner.</p>
<p class="docText">Although the <tt>simpleBS()</tt>
 function is fairly easy to understand, one of its drawbacks is that the
 way we’re processing it isn’t as efficient as it can be. We use <tt>BeautifulSoup</tt> to parse all the tags in this document and <span class="docEmphasis">then</span> look for the anchors. It would be quicker if we could just filter only the anchor tags (and ignore the rest).</p>
<p class="docText">This is what <tt>fasterBS()</tt> does, accomplishing what we just described by using the <tt>SoupStrainer</tt> helper class (and passing that request to filter only anchor tags as the <tt>parseOnlyThese</tt> parameter). By using <tt>SoupStrainer</tt>, you can tell <tt>BeautifulSoup</tt>
 to skip all the elements it isn’t interested in when building the parse
 tree, so it saves time as well as memory. Also, once parsing has 
completed, only the anchors make up the parse tree, so there’s no need 
to use the <tt>findAll()</tt> method before iterating.</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0EQDAK">Lines 29–42</h5>
<p class="docText">In <tt>htmlparser()</tt>, we use the standard library class <tt>HTMLParser.HTMLParser</tt> to do the parsing. You can see why <tt>BeautifulSoup</tt> is a popular parser; code is shorter and less complex than using <tt>HTMLParser</tt>. Our use of <tt>HTMLParser</tt> is also slower here because you have to manually build a list, that is, create an empty list and repeatedly call its <tt>append()</tt> method.</p>
<p class="docText">You can also tell that <tt>HTMLParser</tt> is lower level than <tt>BeautifulSoup</tt>. You subclass it and have to create a method called <tt>handle_starttag()</tt>
 that’s called every time a new tag is encountered in the file stream 
(lines 31–39). We skip all non-anchor tags (lines 33–34), and then add 
all anchor links to <tt>self.data</tt> (lines 37–39), initializing <tt>self.data</tt> when necessary (lines 35–36).</p>
<p class="docText">To use your new parser, you instantiate and feed it (lines 40–41). The results, as you know, are placed into <tt>parser.data</tt>, and we create the full URLs and display them (line 42) as in our previous <tt>BeautifulSoup</tt> example.</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0EZGAK">Lines 44–49</h5>
<p class="docText">The final example uses <tt>html5lib</tt>, a parser for HTML documents that follow the HTML5 specification. The simplest way of using <tt>html5lib</tt> is to call its <tt>parse()</tt> function with the payload (line 47). It builds and outputs a tree in its custom <tt>simpletree</tt> format.</p>
<p class="docText">You can also choose to use any of a variety of popular tree formats, including <tt>minidom</tt>, <tt>ElementTree</tt>, <tt>lxml</tt>, or <tt>BeautifulSoup</tt>. To choose an alternative tree format, just pass the name of the desired format in to <tt>parse()</tt> as the <tt>treebuilder</tt> argument:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> html5lib
f = open("pycon.html")
tree = html5lib.parse(f, treebuilder="lxml")
f.close()</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Unless you need a specific tree, usually <tt>simpletree</tt> is good enough. If you were to perform a trial run and parse a generic document, you’d see output looking something like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedHeight">&gt;&gt;&gt; <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> html5lib
&gt;&gt;&gt; f = open("pycon.html")
&gt;&gt;&gt; tree = html5lib.parse(f)
&gt;&gt;&gt; f.close()
&gt;&gt;&gt; <span class="docEmphStrong">for</span> x <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> data:
...  <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> x, type(x)
...
&lt;html&gt; &lt;class 'html5lib.treebuilders.simpletree.DocumentType'&gt;
&lt;html&gt; &lt;class 'html5lib.treebuilders.simpletree.Element'&gt;
&lt;head&gt; &lt;class 'html5lib.treebuilders.simpletree.Element'&gt;
&lt;None&gt; &lt;class 'html5lib.treebuilders.simpletree.TextNode'&gt;
&lt;meta&gt; &lt;class 'html5lib.treebuilders.simpletree.Element'&gt;
&lt;None&gt; &lt;class 'html5lib.treebuilders.simpletree.TextNode'&gt;
&lt;title&gt; &lt;class 'html5lib.treebuilders.simpletree.Element'&gt;
&lt;None&gt; &lt;class 'html5lib.treebuilders.simpletree.TextNode'&gt;
&lt;None&gt; &lt;class 'html5lib.treebuilders.simpletree.CommentNode'&gt;
        . . .
&lt;img&gt; &lt;class 'html5lib.treebuilders.simpletree.Element'&gt;
&lt;None&gt; &lt;class 'html5lib.treebuilders.simpletree.TextNode'&gt;
&lt;h1&gt; &lt;class 'html5lib.treebuilders.simpletree.Element'&gt;
&lt;a&gt; &lt;class 'html5lib.treebuilders.simpletree.Element'&gt;
&lt;None&gt; &lt;class 'html5lib.treebuilders.simpletree.TextNode'&gt;
&lt;h2&gt; &lt;class 'html5lib.treebuilders.simpletree.Element'&gt;
&lt;None&gt; &lt;class 'html5lib.treebuilders.simpletree.TextNode'&gt;
        . . .

					  </pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Most of the traversed items are either <tt>Element</tt> or <tt>TextNode</tt> objects. We don’t really care about <tt>TextNode</tt> objects in our example here; we’re only concerned with one specific type of <tt>Element</tt> object, the anchor. To filter these out, we have two checks in the <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>if</tt></span> clause of the generator expression: only look at <tt>Element</tt>s, and of those, only anchors (lines 47–49). For those that meet this criteria, we pull out their <tt>'href'</tt> attribute, merge into a complete URL, and output that as before (line 46).</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0EVKAK">Lines 51–72</h5>
<p class="docText">The drivers of this application are the <tt>main()</tt>
 function, which process each of links found on lines 11–14. It makes 
one call to download the Web page and immediately sticks the data into a
 <tt>StringIO</tt> object (lines 65–68) so that we can iterate over them using each of the parsers (line 69) via a call to <tt>process()</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>process()</tt> function (lines 51–62) takes the target URL and the <tt>StringIO</tt>
 object, and then calls on each parser to perform its duty and output 
its result. With every successive parse (after the first), <tt>process()</tt> must also reset the <tt>StringIO</tt> object back to the beginning (lines 54, 57, and 60) for the next parser.</p>
<p class="docText">Once you’re satisfied with 
the code and have it working, you can run it and see how each parser 
outputs all links (sorted in alphabetical order) found in anchor tags 
within the Web page’s URL. Note that at the time of this writing, there 
is a preliminary port of <tt>BeautifulSoup</tt> to Python 3 but not <tt>html5lib</tt>.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E2LAK">9.3.3. Programmatic Web Browsing</h4>
<p class="docText">In this final section
 on Web clients, we’ll present a slightly different example that uses a 
third-party tool, Mechanize (based on a similarly-named tool written for
 Perl), which is designed to simulate a browser. It also spawned off a 
Ruby version.</p>
<p class="docText">In the previous example (<tt>parse_links.py</tt>), <tt>BeautifulSoup</tt> was one of the parsers we used to decipher Web page content. We’ll use that again here.</p>
<p class="docText">If you wish to play along, you’ll need to have both Mechanize and <tt>BeautifulSoup</tt> installed on your system. Again, you can obtain and install them separately, or you can use a tool like <tt>easy_install</tt> or <tt>pip</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Example 9-5 presents the <tt>mech.py</tt> script, which is very much of a <span class="docEmphasis">script</span> or batch-style application. There are no classes or functions. The whole thing is just one large <tt>main()</tt>
 broken up into seven parts, each of which explores one page of the Web 
site we’re examining today: the PyCon conference Web site from 2011. We 
chose this because the site is not likely to change over time (more 
recent conferences will get their own customized application).</p>
<p class="docText">If it <span class="docEmphasis">does</span>
 change, however, there are many Web sites to which you can adapt this 
example, such as logging in to any Web-based e-mail service you 
subscribe to or some tech news or blog site you frequent. By going over <tt>mech.py</tt> and what it does, you should have a good enough understanding of how it works to easily port the sample code to work elsewhere.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E1NAK">Example 9-5. Programmatic Web Browsing (<tt>mech.py</tt>)</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<p class="docText">In a very batch-like, 
straightforward script, we employ the Mechanize third-party tool to 
explore the PyCon 2011 Web site, parsing it with another non-standard 
tool, <tt>BeautifulSoup</tt>.</p>
<pre class="preFixedHeight">1    #!/usr/bin/env python
2
3    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> BeautifulSoup <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> BeautifulSoup, SoupStrainer
4    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> mechanize <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> Browser
5
6    br = Browser()
7
8    # home page
9    rsp = br.open('http://us.pycon.org/2011/home/')
10   <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> '\n***', rsp.geturl()
11   <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> "Confirm home page has 'Log in' link; click it"
12   page = rsp.read()
13   <span class="docEmphStrong">assert</span> 'Log in' <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> page, 'Log in not in page'
14   rsp = br.follow_link(text_regex='Log in')
15
16   # login page
17   <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> '\n***', rsp.geturl()
18   <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> 'Confirm at least a login form; submit invalid creds'
19   <span class="docEmphStrong">assert</span> len(list(br.forms())) &gt; 1, 'no forms on this page'
20   br.select_form(nr=0)
21   br.form['username'] = 'xxx'  # wrong login
22   br.form['password'] = 'xxx'  # wrong passwd
23   rsp = br.submit()
24
25   # login page, with error
26   <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> '\n***', rsp.geturl()
27   <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> 'Error due to invalid creds; resubmit w/valid creds'
28   <span class="docEmphStrong">assert</span> rsp.geturl() == 'http://us.pycon.org/2011/account/login/',
   rsp.geturl()
29   page = rsp.read()
30   err = str(BS(page).find("div",
31       {"id": "errorMsg"}).find('ul').find('li').string)
32   <span class="docEmphStrong">assert</span> err == 'The username and/or password you specified are not cor-
   rect.', err
33   br.select_form(nr=0)
34   br.form['username'] = YOUR_LOGIN
35   br.form['password'] = YOUR_PASSWD
36   rsp = br.submit()
37
38   # login successful, home page redirect
39   <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> '\n***', rsp.geturl()
40   <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> 'Logged in properly on home page; click Account link'
41   <span class="docEmphStrong">assert</span> rsp.geturl() == 'http://us.pycon.org/2011/home/',
   rsp.geturl()
42   page = rsp.read()
43   <span class="docEmphStrong">assert</span> 'Logout' <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> page, 'Logout not in page'
44   rsp = br.follow_link(text_regex='Account')
45
46   # account page
47   <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> '\n***', rsp.geturl()
48   <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> 'Email address parseable on Account page; go back'
49   <span class="docEmphStrong">assert</span> rsp.geturl() == 'http://us.pycon.org/2011/account/email/',
   rsp.geturl()
50   page = rsp.read()
51   <span class="docEmphStrong">assert</span> 'Email Addresses' <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> page, 'Missing email addresses'
52   <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> '    Primary e-mail: %r' % str(
53       BS(page).find('table').find('tr').find('td').find('b').string)
54   rsp = br.back()
55
56   # back to home page
57   <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> '\n***', rsp.geturl()
58   <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> 'Back works, on home page again; click Logout link'
59   <span class="docEmphStrong">assert</span> rsp.geturl() == 'http://us.pycon.org/2011/home/', rsp.geturl()
60   rsp = br.follow_link(url_regex='logout')
61
62   # logout page
63   <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> '\n***', rsp.geturl()
64   <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> 'Confirm on Logout page and Log in link at the top'
65   <span class="docEmphStrong">assert</span> rsp.geturl() == 'http://us.pycon.org/2011/account/logout/',
   rsp.geturl()
66   page = rsp.read()
67   <span class="docEmphStrong">assert</span> 'Log in' <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> page, 'Log in not in page'
68   <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> '\n*** DONE'

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EZRAK">Line-by-Line Explanation</h5>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0EBSAK">Lines 1–6</h5>
<p class="docText">This
 script is fairly simplistic. In fact, we don’t use any standard library
 packages/modules, so all you see here are the imports of the <tt>Mechanize.Browser</tt> and <tt>BeautifulSoup.BeautifulSoup</tt> classes.</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0EXTAK">Lines 8–14</h5>
<p class="docText">The first place we visit on 
the PyCon 2011 Web site is the home page. We display the URL to the user
 as a confirmation (line 10). Note that this is the final URL that is 
visited because the original link might have redirected the user 
elsewhere. The last part of this section (lines 12–14) confirms that the
 user is not logged in by looking for the <tt>'</tt><tt>Log in</tt><tt>'</tt> link and following it.</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0EHUAK">Lines 16–23</h5>
<p class="docText">Once we’ve confirmed that we’re
 on a login page (that has at least one form on it), we select the first
 (and only) form, fill in the authentication fields with erroneous data 
(unless, unfortunately, your login and password are both <tt>'xxx'</tt>), and submit it.</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0EVUAK">Lines 25–36</h5>
<p class="docText">Upon confirmation of a login
 error on the login page (lines 28–32), we fill in the fields with the 
correct credentials (which the reader must supply [<tt>YOUR_LOGIN</tt>, <tt>YOUR_PASSWD</tt>]) and resubmit.</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0EFVAK">Lines 38–44</h5>
<p class="docText">Once authentication has been 
validated, you are directed back to the home page. This is confirmed (on
 lines 41–43) by checking for a “Logout” link (which wouldn’t be there 
if you had not successfully logged in). We then click the Account link.</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0EQVAK">Lines 46–54</h5>
<p class="docText">You must register by using an
 e-mail address. You can have more than one, but there must be a single 
primary address. Your e-mail addresses are the first tab that you arrive
 at when visiting this page for your Account information. We use <tt>BeautifulSoup</tt>
 to parse and display the e-mail address table and peek into the first 
cell of the first row of the table (lines 52–53). The next step is to 
click the “click on the back button” to return to the home page.</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0E5VAK">Lines 56–60</h5>
<p class="docText">This
 is the shortest of all the sections; we really don’t do much here 
except confirm that we’re back on the home page (lines 59), then follow 
the “Logout” link.</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0ECYAK">Lines 62–68</h5>
<p class="docText">The last section confirms 
we’re on the logout page and that you’re not logged in. This is 
accomplished by checking to see if there’s a “Log in” link on this page 
(lines 66–67).</p>
<p class="docText">This application demonstrates that, using <tt>Mechanize.Browser</tt>
 is fairly straightforward. You just need to mentally map user activity 
in a browser to the right method calls. Ultimately, the primary concern 
is whether the underlying Web page or application will be altered by its
 developers, potentially rendering our script out-of-date. Note that at 
the time of this writing, there is no Python 3 port of Mechanize yet.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ETYAK">Summary</h5>
<p class="docText">This concludes our look at various types of Web clients. We can now turn our attention to Web servers.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
