<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>9.6. Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">9.6. Exercises</h3>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9-1.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis"><tt>urllib</tt> Module.</span> Write a program that takes a user-input URL (either a Web page or an FTP file such as http://python.org or ftp://ftp.python.org/pub/python/README),
 and downloads it to your computer with the same filename (or modified 
name similar to the original if it is invalid on your system). Web pages
 (HTTP) should be saved as .<tt>htm</tt> or .<tt>html</tt> files, and FTP’d files should retain their extension.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9-2.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis"><tt>urllib</tt> Module.</span> Rewrite the <tt>grabWeb.py</tt> script of Example 11-4 of <span class="docEmphasis">Core Python Programming</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">Core Python Language Fundamentals</span>, which downloads a Web page and displays the first and last non-blank lines of the resulting HTML file so that you use <tt>urlopen()</tt> instead of <tt>urlretrieve()</tt> to process the data directly (as opposed to downloading the entire file first before processing it).</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9-3.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">URLs and Regular Expressions.</span>
 Your browser can save your favorite Web site URLs as a bookmarks HTML 
file (Mozilla-flavored browsers do this) or as a set of .url files in a 
“favorites” directory (Internet Explorer does this). Find your browser’s
 method of recording your “hot links” and the location of where and how 
they are stored. Without altering any of the files, strip the URLs and 
names of the corresponding Web sites (if given) and produce a two-column
 list of names and links as output, and then store this data into a disk
 file. Truncate site names or URLs to keep each line of output within 80
 characters in length.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9-4.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">URLs, <tt>urllib</tt> Module, Exceptions, and Regular Expressions.</span> As a follow-up problem to Exercise 9-3,
 add code to your script to test each of your favorite links. Report 
back a list of dead links (and their names) such as Web sites that are 
no longer active or a Web page that has been removed. Only output and 
save to disk the still-valid links.</p></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
<p class="docText">Exercises 9-5 to 9-8 below pertain to <span class="docEmphasis">Web server access log files and regular expressions</span>. Web servers (and their administrators) generally have to maintain an access log file (usually <tt>logs/access_log</tt>
 from the main Web, server directory) which tracks requests. Over a 
period of time, such files become large and either need to be stored or 
truncated. Why not save only the pertinent information and delete the 
files to conserve disk space? The exercises below are designed to give 
you some exercise with regular expressions and how they can be used to 
help archive and analyze Web server data.</p>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9-5.</b></td><td class="docText">Count how many of each type of request (GET versus POST) exist in the log file.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9-6.</b></td><td class="docText">Count
 the successful page/data downloads. Display all links that resulted in a
 return code of 200 (OK [no error]) and how many times each link was 
accessed.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9-7.</b></td><td class="docText">Count
 the errors: Show all links that resulted in errors (return codes in the
 400s or 500s) and how many times each link was accessed.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9-8.</b></td><td class="docText">Track IP addresses: for each IP address, output a list of each page/data downloaded and how many times that link was accessed.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9-9.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Web Browser Cookies and Web Site Registration.</span> The user login registration database you worked on in various chapters (7, 9, 13) of <span class="docEmphasis">Core Python Programming</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">Core Python Language Fundamentals</span>
 had you creating a pure text-based, menu-driven script. Port it to the 
Web so that your user-password information should now be site 
authentication system.</p>
Extra Credit: Familiarize yourself with setting Web browser cookies and 
maintain a login session for four hours from the last successful login.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9-10.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Creating Web Servers.</span> Our code for <tt>myhttpd.py</tt> (Example 9-6) is only able to read HTML files and return them to the calling client. Add support for plain text files with the .<tt>txt</tt> ending. Be sure that you return the correct MIME type of “text/plain.”</p>
Extra Credit: Add support for JPEG files ending with either .<tt>jpg</tt> or .<tt>jpeg</tt> and having a MIME type of “image/jpeg.”</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
<p class="docText">Exercises 9-11 through 9-14 require you to update Example 9-3, <tt>crawl.py</tt>, the Web crawler.</p>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9-11.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Web Clients.</span> Port <tt>crawl.py</tt> so that it uses either <tt>HTMLParser</tt>, <tt>BeautifulSoup</tt>, <tt>html5lib</tt>, or <tt>lxml</tt> parsing systems.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9-12.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Web Clients.</span> URLs given as input to <tt>crawl.py</tt> must have the leading “http://” protocol indicator and top-level URLs must contain a trailing slash, for example, http://www.prenhallprofessional.com/. Make <tt>crawl.py</tt>
 more robust by allowing the user to input just the hostname (without 
the protocol part [make it assume HTTP]) and also make the trailing 
slash optional. For example, www.prenhallprofessional.com should now be acceptable input.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9-13.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Web Clients.</span> Update the <tt>crawl.py</tt> script to also download links that use the <tt>ftp</tt>: scheme. All <tt>mailto</tt>: links are ignored by <tt>crawl.py</tt>. Add support to ensure that it also ignores <tt>telnet</tt>:, <tt>news</tt>:, <tt>gopher</tt>:, and <tt>about</tt>: links.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9-14.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Web Clients.</span> The <tt>crawl.py</tt> script only downloads <tt>.html</tt>
 files via links found in Web pages at the same site and does not 
handle/save images that are also valid “files” for those pages. It also 
does not handle servers that are susceptible to URLs that are missing 
the trailing slash (/). Add a pair of classes to <tt>crawl.py</tt> to deal with these problems.</p>
A <tt>My404UrlOpener</tt> class should subclass <tt>urllib.Fancy URLOpener</tt> and consist of a single method, <tt>http_error_404()</tt>
 which determines if a 404 error was reached because of a URL without a 
trailing slash. If so, it adds the slash and retries the request again 
(and only once). If it still fails, return a real 404 error. You must 
set <tt>urllib._urlopener</tt> with an instance of this class so that <tt>urllib</tt> uses it.
<p class="docText">Create another class called <tt>LinkImageParser</tt>, which derives from <tt>htmllib.HTMLParser</tt>.
 This class should contain a constructor to call the base class 
constructor as well as initialize a list for the image files parsed from
 Web pages. The <tt>handle_ image()</tt> 
method should be overridden to add image filenames to the image list 
(instead of discarding them like the current base class method does).</p></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
<p class="docText">The final set of exercises pertain to the <tt>parse_links.py</tt> file, shown earlier in this chapter as Example 9-4.</p>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9-15.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Command-line Arguments.</span>
 Add command-line arguments to let the user see output from one or more 
parsers (instead of just all of them [which could be the default]).</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9-16.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis"><tt>lxml</tt> Parser.</span> Download and install <tt>lxml</tt>, and then add support for <tt>lxml</tt> to <tt>parse_links.py</tt>.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9-17.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Markup Parsers.</span> Subsitute each parser into the crawler replacing <tt>htmllib.HTMLParser</tt>.</p>
<div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>HTMLParser.HTMLParser</tt></p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>html5lib</tt></p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>BeaufifulSoup</tt></p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>lxml</tt></p></div></li></ol></div></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9-18.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Refactoring.</span> Change the <tt>output()</tt> function to be able to support other forms of output.</p>
<div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Writing to a file</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Sending to another process (i.e., writing to a socket)</p></div></li></ol></div></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9-19.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Pythonic Coding.</span> In the Line-by-Line Explanation of <tt>parse_links.py</tt>, we expanded <tt>simpleBS()</tt> from a less-readable one-liner to a block of properly formatted Python code. Do the same thing with <tt>fasterBS()</tt> and <tt>html5libparse()</tt>.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9-20.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Performance and Profiling.</span> Earlier, we described how <tt>fasterBS()</tt> performs better than <tt>simpleBS()</tt>. Use <tt>timeit</tt>
 to show it runs faster, and then find a Python memory tool online to 
show it saves memory. Describe what the memory profiler tool is and 
where you found it. Do any of the three standard library profilers (<tt>profile</tt>, <tt>hotshot</tt>, <tt>cProfile</tt>) show memory usage information?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9-21.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Best Practices.</span> In <tt>htmlparser()</tt>, suppose that we didn’t like the thought of having to create a blank list and having to call its <tt>append()</tt>
 method repeatedly to build the list; instead, you wanted to use a list 
comprehension to replace lines 35–39 with the following single line of 
code:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>self.data = [v <span class="docEmphStrong">for</span> k, v <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> attrs <span class="docEmphStrong">if</span> k == 'href']</pre></div><br/>
Is this a valid substitution? In other words, could we make this change 
and still have it all execute correctly? Why (or why not)?</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>9-22.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Data Manipulation.</span> In <tt>parse_links.py</tt>, we sort the URLs alphabetically (actually lexicographically). However, this might not be the best way to organize links:</p>
<blockquote><p></p><p class="docList">http://python.org/psf/</p><p></p><p></p><p class="docList">http://python.org/search</p><p></p><p></p><p class="docList">http://roundup.sourceforge.net/</p><p></p><p></p><p class="docList">http://sourceforge.net/projects/mysql-python</p><p></p><p></p><p class="docList">http://twistedmatrix.com/trac/</p><p></p><p></p><p class="docList">http://wiki.python.org/moin/</p><p></p><p></p><p class="docList">http://wiki.python.org/moin/CgiScripts</p><p></p><p></p><p class="docList">http://www.python.org/</p><p></p></blockquote>
Instead, a sort by domain name might make more sense:
<blockquote><p></p><p class="docList">http://python.org/psf/</p><p></p><p></p><p class="docList">http://python.org/search</p><p></p><p></p><p class="docList">http://wiki.python.org/moin/</p><p></p><p></p><p class="docList">http://wiki.python.org/moin/CgiScripts</p><p></p><p></p><p class="docList">http://www.python.org/</p><p></p><p></p><p class="docList">http://roundup.sourceforge.net/</p><p></p><p></p><p class="docList">http://sourceforge.net/projects/mysql-python</p><p></p><p></p><p class="docList">http://twistedmatrix.com/trac/</p><p></p></blockquote>
<p class="docText">Give your script the ability to sort by domain in addition to the alpha/lexicographic sort.</p></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
