<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>10.7. Real-World Web Development</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">10.7. Real-World Web Development</h3>
<p class="docText">CGI was the way things used to 
work, and the concepts it brought still apply in Web programming today; 
hence, the reason why we spent so much time looking at it. The 
introduction to WSGI brought you one step closer to reality.</p>
<p class="docText">Today, new Python Web 
programmers have a wealth of choices, and while the big names in the Web
 framework space are still Django, Pyramid, and Google App Engine, there
 are plenty more options for users to choose from—perhaps a mind-numbing
 selection, actually. Frameworks aren’t even necessary: you could go 
straight down to a WSGI-compliant Web server without any of the extra 
“fluff” or framework features. However, the chances are more likely that
 you will go with a framework because of the convenience of having the 
rest of the Web stack available to you.</p>
<p class="docText">A modern Web execution 
environment will likely consist of either a multithreaded or 
multiprocess server model, signed/secure cookies, basic user 
authentication, and session management. Many of these things regular 
application developers already know; authentication represents user 
registration with a login name and password, and cookies are ways of 
maintaining user information, sometimes session information, as well. We
 also know that in order to scale, Web servers need to be able to handle
 requests from multiple users; hence, the use of threads or processes. 
However, one thing that hasn’t been covered is the need for sessions.</p>
<p class="docText">If you look at all the 
application code in this entire chapter that runs on Web servers, it 
might take a while for you to know that aside from the obvious 
differences from scripts that run from beginning to end or server loops which just run forever, Web applications (or <span class="docEmphasis">servlets</span>
 in Java parlance) are executed for every request. There’s no state 
saved within the code, and we already mentioned that HTTP is stateless, 
as well. In other words, don’t expect data to be saved in variables, 
global or otherwise. Think of a request like a single transaction. It 
comes in, does its business, and finishes, leaving nothing behind in the
 codebase.</p>
<p class="docText">This is why <span class="docEmphasis">session management</span>—saving
 of a user’s state across one or more requests within a well-defined 
duration of time—is needed. Generally, this is accomplished by using 
some sort of persistent storage, such as memcache, flat (or not-so-flat)
 files, and even databases. Developers can certainly roll their own, 
especially when writing lower-level code, as we’ve seen in this chapter.
 But without question this wheel has already been (re)invented several 
times, which is why many of the larger, more well-known Web frameworks, 
including Django, come with their own session management software. (This
 leads directly into our next chapter.)</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
