<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>10.9. Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">10.9. Exercises</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ERYDI">CGI and Web Applications</h4>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>10-1.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis"><tt>urllib</tt> Module and Files.</span> Update the <tt>friendsC.py</tt>
 script so that it stores names and corresponding number of friends into
 a two-column text file on disk and continues to add names each time the
 script is run.</p>
Extra Credit: Add code to dump the contents of such a file to the Web 
browser (in HTML format). Additional Extra Credit: Create a link that 
clears all the names in this file.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>10-2.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Error Checking.</span> The <tt>friendsC.py</tt>
 script reports an error if no radio button was selected to indicate the
 number of friends. Update the CGI script to also report an error if no 
name (e.g., blank or whitespace) is entered.</p>
Extra Credit: We have so far explored only server-side error checking. 
Explore JavaScript programming and implement client-side error checking 
by creating JavaScript code to check for both error situations so that 
these errors are stopped before they reach the server.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>10-3.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Simple CGI.</span>
 Create a “Comments” or “Feedback” page for a Web site. Take user 
feedback via a form, process the data in your script, and then return a 
“thank you” screen.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>10-4.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Simple CGI.</span>
 Create a Web guestbook. Accept a name, an e-mail address, and a journal
 entry from a user, and then log it to a file (format of your choice). 
Like Exercise 10-3, return a “thanks for filling out a guestbook entry” page. Also provide a link so that users can view guestbooks.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>10-5.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Web Browser Cookies and Web Site Registration.</span>
 Create a user authentication service for a Web site. Manager user names
 and passwords in an encrypted way. You may have done a plain text 
version of this exercise in either <span class="docEmphasis">Core Python Programming</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">Core Python Language Fundamentals</span> and can use parts of that solution if you wish.</p>
Extra Credit: Familiarize yourself with setting Web browser cookies and 
maintain a login session for four hours from the last successful login.
<p class="docText">Extra Credit: Allow for <span class="docEmphasis">federated authentication</span>
 via OpenID, allowing users to log in via Google, Yahoo!, AOL, 
WordPress, or even proprietary authentication systems such as “Facebook 
Connect” or “sign in with Twitter.” You can also use the Google Identity
 Toolkit that you can download from http://code.google.com/apis/identitytoolkit.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>10-6.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Errors.</span> What happens when a CGI script crashes? How can the <tt>cgitb</tt> module be helpful?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>10-7.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">CGI, File Updates, and Zip Files.</span>
 Create a CGI application that not only saves files to the server’s 
disk, but also intelligently unpacks Zip files (or other archive) into a
 subdirectory named after the archive file.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>10-8.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Web Database Application.</span>
 Think of a database schema that you want to provide as part of a Web 
database application. For this multi-user application, you want to grant
 everyone read access to the entire contents of the database, but 
perhaps only write access to each individual. One example might be an 
address book for your family and relatives. Each family member, once 
successfully logged in, is presented with a Web page with several 
options, add an entry, view my entry, update my entry, remove or delete 
my entry, and view all entries (entire database).</p>
Design a <tt>UserEntry</tt> class and create a
 database entry for each instance of this class. You can use any 
solution created for any previous problem to implement the registration 
framework. Finally, you can use any type of storage mechanism for your 
database, either a relational database such as MySQL or some of the 
simpler Python persistent storage modules such as <tt>anydbm</tt> or <tt>shelve</tt>.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>10-9.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Electronic Commerce Engine.</span>
 Create an e-commerce/online shopping Web service that is generic and 
can be “reskinned” for multiple clients. Add your own authentication 
system as well as classes for users and shopping carts (If you have <span class="docEmphasis">Core Python Programming</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">Core Python Language Fundamentals</span>,
 you can use the classes created for your solutions to Exercises 4 and 
11 in the Object-Oriented Programming chapter.) Don’t forget that you 
will also need code to manage your products, whether they are hard goods
 or services. You might want to connect to a payment system such as 
those offered by PayPal or Google. After reading the next few chapters, 
port this temporary CGI solution to Django, Pyramid, or Google App 
Engine.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>10-10.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Python 3.</span> Examine the differences between <tt>friendsC.py</tt> and <tt>friendsC3.py</tt>. Describe each change.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>10-11.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Python 3, Unicode/Text vs. Data/Bytes.</span> Port the Unicode example, <tt>uniCGI.py</tt>, to Python 3.</p></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EV6DI">WSGI</h4>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>10-12.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Background.</span> What is WSGI and what were some of the reasons behind its creation?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>10-13.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Background.</span> What are/were some of the techniques used to get around the scalability issue of CGI?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>10-14.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Background.</span> Name some well-known frameworks that are WSGI-compliant, and do some research to find some that are not.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>10-15.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Background.</span> What is the difference between WSGI and CGI?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>10-16.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">WSGI Applications.</span> WSGI applications can be what kind(s) of Python object(s)?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>10-17.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">WSGI Applications.</span> What are the two required arguments for a WSGI application? Go into more detail about the second one.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>10-18.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">WSGI Applications.</span> What is (are) the possible return type(s) of a WSGI application?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>10-19.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">WSGI Applications.</span> Solutions to Exercises 10-1 through 10-11
 only work if/when your server processes form data in the same manner as
 CGI. Choose one of them to port to WSGI, where it will work regardless 
of which WSGI-compliant server you choose, with perhaps only slight 
modifications.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>10-20.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">WSGI Servers.</span> The WSGI servers presented in Section 10.6.5 featured a sample <tt>run_wsgi_app()</tt> server function which executes a WSGI application.</p>
<div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">The <tt>run_wsgi_app()</tt> function currently does not feature the optional third parameter <tt>exc_info</tt>. Study PEPs 333 and 3333 and add support for <tt>exc_info</tt>.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Create a Python 3 port of this function.</p></div></li></ol></div></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>10-21.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Case Study.</span>
 Compare and contrast the WSGI implementations of the following Python 
Web frameworks: Werkzeug, WebOb, Django, Google App Engine’s webapp.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>10-22.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Standards.</span>
 While PEP 3333 includes clarifications and enhancements to PEP 333 for 
Python 3, PEP 444 is something else. Describe what PEP 444 is all about 
and how it relates to the existing PEPs.</p></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
