<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>11.1. Introduction</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">11.1. Introduction</h3>
<p class="docText">In
 this chapter, we’ll go outside the Python Standard Library and explore 
one popular Web framework for Python: Django. We’ll first go over Web 
frameworks in general, and then expose you to developing applications by
 using Django. This discussion starts with the basics and a “Hello 
World” application then takes you beyond that with other areas that 
you’ll likely come across when developing a real application. This 
roadmap essentially defines the structure of this chapter: a solid 
introduction followed by an intermediate application involving Twitter, 
e-mail, and OAuth, which is an open protocol for <span class="docEmphasis">authorization</span> to gain access to data via application programming interfaces (APIs).</p>
<p class="docText">The goal is to introduce you to a
 real tool that Python developers use every day to get their jobs done. 
We’ll give you the skills and provide enough knowledge for you to build 
more complex applications via Django. You can also take these skills and
 jump to any of the other Python Web frameworks. To get started, let’s 
define the topic.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
