<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>11.2. Web Frameworks</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">11.2. Web Frameworks</h3>
<p class="docText">We hope that you gained a greater understanding of Web development from the material presented in Chapter 10,
 “Web Programming: CGI and WSGI.” Rather than doing everything by hand, 
you can take advantage of the significant body of work done by others to
 make your life easier. These Web development environments are 
generically called <span class="docEmphasis">Web frameworks</span>,
 and their goal is to help you to perform your job by pushing common 
tasks “under the hood” and/or providing resources for you to create, 
update, execute, and scale applications with a minimal amount of work.</p>
<p class="docText">Also, we explained earlier, 
using CGI is no longer an option, due to scalability limitations. So, 
people in the Python community look to more powerful Web server 
solutions such as Apache, ligHTTPD (pronounced as “lighty”), or nginx. 
Some servers, such as Pylons and CherryPy, have their own framework 
ecosystem around them. However, serving content is only one aspect of 
creating Web applications. You still need to worry about ancillary tools
 such as a JavaScript framework, an object-relational mapper (ORM) or 
lower-level database adapter, a web templating system, and orthogonal 
but necessary for any type of development: a unit-testing and/or 
continuous integration framework. Python Web frameworks are either 
individual (or multiple) subcomponents or complete <span class="docEmphasis">full-stack</span> systems.</p>
<p class="docText">The
 term full-stack means that you can develop code for all phases and 
levels of a Web application. Frameworks that are considered as such will
 provide all related services, such as a Web server, database ORM, 
templating, and all necessary middleware hooks. Some even provide a 
JavaScript library. Django is arguably one of the most well-known Web 
frameworks on the market today; many consider it as Python’s answer to 
Ruby on Rails. It includes all of the services mentioned above as a 
single, all-in-one solution (except for a built-in JavaScript library, 
because you can use whichever one you like). We’ll see in Chapter 12,
 “Cloud Computing: Google App Engine,” that Google App Engine also 
provides many of these components but is geared more specifically for 
scalability and fast request/response Web <span class="docEmphasis">and</span> non-Web applications hosted by the Internet giant.</p>
<p class="docText">Although Django was created as a
 single entity by one engineering team, not all frameworks follow in 
this philosophy. TurboGears, for example, is a best-of-breed full-stack 
system, built by a scattered team of developers, serving as glue code 
that ties together well-known individual components in the stack, such 
as ToscaWidgets (high-level Web widgets that can utilize a variety of 
JavaScript frameworks, such as Ex1tJS, jQuery, etc.), SQLAlchemy (ORM), 
Pylons (Web server), and Genshi (templating). Frameworks that follow 
this architectural style provide greater flexibility in that users can 
choose from a variety of templating systems, JS libraries, tools to 
generate raw SQL, and multiple Web servers. You only need to sacrifice a
 bit of consistency and any peace of mind that comes with using only one
 tool. However, that might not be that different from what you’re used 
to.</p>
<p class="docText">Pyramid is also very popular and is the successor to both <tt>repoze.bfg</tt>
 (or “BFG” for short) and the Pylons Web frameworks. Its approach is 
even simpler: it only provides with you the basics, such as URL 
dispatch, templating, security, and resources. If you need anything 
else, you must add those capabilities yourself. Its minimalistic 
approach along with its strong sense of testing and documentation, plus 
its inheritance of users from both the Pylons and BFG communities, make 
it a strong contender in today’s set of Web frameworks available for 
Python.</p>
<p class="docText">If you’re new to Python, you
 might be coming from Rails or perhaps PHP, which has significantly 
expanded from its original intention as an HTML-embedded scripting 
language to its own large monolithic universe. One benefit you gain from
 Python is that you’re not locked to a “single language, single 
framework” type of scenario. There are many frameworks out there from 
which to choose; hence, the quote at the beginning of this
 chapter. Web framework popularity was accelerated by the creation of 
the web server gateway interface (WSGI) standard, defined by PEP 333 at http://python.org/dev/peps/pep-0333.</p>
<p class="docText">If you don’t already know 
about WSGI, it’s not really code or an API as much as it is an interface
 definition that frees the Web framework developer from having to create
 a custom Web server for the framework, which in turn frees application 
developers from having to <span class="docEmphasis">use</span>
 that server when perhaps they would prefer something else. With WSGI, 
it’s easy for application developers to swap between WSGI-compliant 
servers (or develop new ones) without worrying about being forced to 
change application code. For more on WSGI, take a look back at Chapter 10.</p>
<p class="docText">I don’t know if it’s a good thing
 to say this (especially in print), but when passionate Python 
developers become dissatisfied with the choices out there, they’ll just 
come up with a new framework. After all, there are more Web frameworks 
than keywords in Python, right? Other frameworks you’ll undoubtedly hear
 about at some point will include web2py, web.py, Tornado, Diesel, and 
Zope. One good resource is the wiki page on the Python Web site at http://wiki.python.org/moin/WebFrameworks.</p>
<p class="docText">Okay, enough idle chatter, let’s engage our Web development knowledge and take a look at Django.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
