<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>11.7. The Python Application Shell</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">11.7. The Python Application Shell</h3>
<p class="docText">Python programmers 
know how useful the interactive interpreter is. The creators of Django 
know this as well, and have integrated it to aid in everyday Django 
development. In these subsections, we’ll explore how to use the Python 
shell to perform low-level data introspection and manipulation when such
 things are not so easily accomplished with Web application development.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ETEAK">11.7.1. Using the Python Shell in Django</h4>
<p class="docText">Even without the template (view) or view (controller), we can still test out our data model by adding some <tt>BlogPost</tt>
 entries. If your app is backed by an RDBMS, as most Django apps are, 
you would be adding rows to a table per blog entry. If you end up using a
 NoSQL database such as MongoDB or Google App Engine’s datastore, you would be adding objects, documents, or entities into the database, instead.</p>
<p class="docText">How do we do this? 
Django provides a Python application shell that you can use to 
instantiate your models and otherwise interact with your app. Python 
users will recognize the familiar interactive interpreter startup and 
prompt when using the <tt>shell</tt> command of the <tt>manage.py</tt> script:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>$ python2.5 ./manage.py shell
Python 2.5.1 (r251:54863, Feb  9 2009, 18:49:36)
[GCC 4.0.1 (Apple Inc. build 5465)] on darwin
Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
(InteractiveConsole)
&gt;&gt;&gt;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The difference between 
this Django shell and the standard Python interactive interpreter is 
that in addition to the latter, the shell is much more aware of your 
Django project’s environment. You can interact with your view functions 
and your data models because the shell automatically sets up environment
 variables, including your <tt>sys.path</tt>, 
that give it access to the modules and packages in both Django and your 
project that you would otherwise need to manually configure. In addition
 to the standard shell, there are a couple of alternative interactive 
interpreters that you can consider, some of which we cover in Chapter 1 of <span class="docEmphasis">Core Python Programming</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">Core Python Language Fundamentals</span>.</p>
<p class="docText">Rich shells such as IPython and <tt>bpython</tt>
 are actually preferred by Django because they provide extremely useful 
functionality on top of the vanilla interpreter. When you run the <tt>shell</tt>
 command, Django searches first for a rich shell, employing the first 
one it finds or reverting to the standard interpreter if none are 
available.</p>
<p class="docText">In the previous example, we used
 a Python 2.5 interpreter without a rich shell; hence, the reason the 
standard interpreter came up. Now when we execute <tt>manage.py</tt> <tt>shell</tt>, in which one (IPython) <span class="docEmphasis">is</span> available, it comes up, instead:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>$ ./manage.py shell
Python 2.7.1 (r271:86882M, Nov 30 2010, 09:39:13)
[GCC 4.0.1 (Apple Inc. build 5494)] on darwin
Type "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.

IPython 0.10.1 -- An enhanced Interactive Python.
?         -&gt; Introduction and overview of IPython's features.
%quickref -&gt; Quick reference.
help      -&gt; Python's own help system.
object?   -&gt; Details about 'object'. ?object also works, ?? prints
more.

In [1]:</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">You can also use the <tt>--plain</tt> option to force a vanilla interpreter:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>$ ./manage.py shell --plain
Python 2.7.1 (r271:86882M, Nov 30 2010, 09:39:13)
[GCC 4.0.1 (Apple Inc. build 5494)] on darwin
Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
(InteractiveConsole)
&gt;&gt;&gt;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Note that having a rich shell 
or not has nothing to do with the version of Python you have installed, 
as in the preceding example; it just so happens I have IPython available
 only for the version 2.7 installation on my computer but not for 
version 2.5.</p>
<p class="docText">If you want to install a rich shell, just use <tt>easy_install</tt> or <tt>pip</tt>,
 as explained earlier when we described the different methods for 
installing Django. Here’s what it looks like for Windows PC users to 
install IPython on their system:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>C:\WINDOWS\system32&gt;\python27\Scripts\easy_install ipython
Searching for ipython
Reading http://pypi.python.org/simple/ipython/
Reading http://ipython.scipy.org
Reading http://ipython.scipy.org/dist/0.10
Reading http://ipython.scipy.org/dist/0.9.1
    . . .
Installing ipengine-script.py script to c:\python27\Scripts
Installing ipengine.exe script to c:\python27\Scripts
Installed c:\python27\lib\site-packages\ipython-0.10.1-py2.7.egg
Processing dependencies for ipython
Finished processing dependencies for ipython</pre></div><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EAKAK">11.7.2. Experimenting with Our Data Model</h4>
<p class="docText">Now that we know how to 
start a Python shell, let’s play around with our application and its 
data model by starting IPython and giving a few Python or IPython 
commands:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedHeight">In [1]: from datetime import datetime
In [2]: from blog.models import BlogPost
In [3]: BlogPost.objects.all()  # no objects saved yet!
Out[3]: []
In [4]: bp = BlogPost(title='test cmd-line entry', body='''
  ....: yo, my 1st blog post...
  ....: it's even multilined!''',
  ....: timestamp=datetime.now())
In [5]: bp
Out[5]: &lt;BlogPost: BlogPost object&gt;
In [6]: bp.save()
In [7]: BlogPost.objects.count()
Out[7]: 1
In [8]: exec _i3  # repeat cmd #3; should have 1 object now
Out[8]: [&lt;BlogPost: BlogPost object&gt;]
In [9]: bp = BlogPost.objects.all()[0]
In [10]: print bp.title
test cmd-line entry
In [11]: print bp.body  # yes an extra \n in front, see above

yo, my 1st blog post...
it's even multilined!
In [12]: bp.timestamp.ctime()
Out[12]: 'Sat Dec 11 16:38:37 2010'

					  </pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The first couple of commands just bring in the objects we need. Step #3 queries the database for <tt>BlogPost</tt> objects, of which there are none, so in step #4, we add the first one to our database by instantiating a <tt>BlogPost</tt> object, passing in its attributes that were defined earlier (<tt>title</tt>, <tt>body</tt>, and <tt>timestamp</tt>). Once our object is created, we need to write it to the database (step #6) with the <tt>BlogPost.save()</tt> method.</p>
<p class="docText">When that’s done, we can confirm the object count in the database has gone from 0 to 1 by using <tt>BlogPost.objects.count()</tt> method (step #7). In step #8, we take advantage of the IPython command to repeat step #3 to get a list of all the <tt>BlogPost</tt> objects stored in the database—we could have just retyped <tt>BlogPost.objects.all()</tt>,
 but we wanted to demonstrate a rich shell feature. The last steps 
involve grabbing the first (and only) element of the list of all <tt>BlogPost</tt>
 objects (step #9) and dumping out all the data to show that we were 
able to successfully retrieve the data we just stored moments ago.</p>
<p class="docText">The preceding is just a 
sampling of what you can do with an interactive interpreter tied to your
 app. You can read more about the shell’s features at http://docs.djangoproject.com/en/dev/intro/tutorial01/#playing-with-the-api.
 These Python shells are great developer tools. In addition to the 
standard command-line tool you get bundled with Python, you’ll find them
 incorporated into integrated development environments (IDEs) as well as
 augmented with even more functionality in third-party developed 
interactive interpreters such as IPython and bpython.</p>
<p class="docText">Almost all users and many 
developers prefer a web-based create, read, update, delete (CRUD) tool 
instead, and this is true for every web app that’s developed. But do 
developers really want to create such an administration Web console for 
every single app they create? Seems like you’d always want to have one, 
and that’s where the Django admin app comes in.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
