<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>11.13. More About Views</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">11.13. More About Views</h3>
<p class="docText">The final most important thing that we need to discuss is a topic that no Django book should omit: <span class="docEmphasis">generic views</span>. So far, when you’ve needed a controller or logic for your app, you’ve rolled your own <span class="docEmphasis">custom view</span>. However, you know that Django likes to stick with DRY, hence the reason why you were exposed to shortcuts such as <tt>render_to_response()</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Generic views are so powerful 
yet so simple of an abstraction, that when you’re able to employ them, 
you won’t have to write a view at all. You’ll just link to them directly
 from your URLconf, pass in a few pieces of required data, and not even 
need to edit/create any code in <tt>views.py</tt>.
 We just need to give you enough background to lead you there. We’ll 
begin our journey by going back to a short discussion about CSRF without
 really talking about it. What do I mean by this?</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EPXAK">11.13.1. Semi-Generic Views</h4>
<p class="docText">Since CSRF is something for 
which you need to be vigilante in any application that posts back to 
your app, this renders passing the request context instance extremely 
repetitious. It’s also not very user-friendly to beginners. This is 
where we can start to play with a generic view without really using it 
as such. We’re going to tweak our custom view to use a generic view to 
do the heavy lifting. This is called a <span class="docEmphasis">semi-generic view</span>.</p>
<p class="docText">Bring up <tt>mysite/blog/views.py</tt> in your editor, and then replace this final line of <tt>archive()</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong">return</span> render_to_response('archive.html', {'posts': posts,
    'form': BlogPostForm()}, RequestContext(request))</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Add the new import that follows (and remove the one for <tt>render_to_ response()</tt>):</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> django.views.generic.simple <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> direct_to_template</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Modify the final line to match the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong">return</span> direct_to_template(request, 'archive.html',
    {'posts': posts, 'form': BlogPostForm()})</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Wait... what was that all 
about? Yes, Django does make your life easier by reducing the amount of 
code you need to write, but we only dropped the
 request context instance. Are there any other gains to be had here? Not
 yet. This was just seed-planting. Because we didn’t really use <tt>direct_to_ template()</tt> as a generic view in this example, we did convert our custom view to a semi-generic view now, because of its use.</p>
<p class="docText">Again, pure generic view usage means we call it directly from the URLconf and wouldn’t need any code here in <tt>view.py</tt>.
 Generic views are often-reused views that are fairly basic but that you
 still wouldn’t want to create or re-create each time you needed the 
same functionality. Examples include directing users to static pages, 
providing a generic output for objects, etc.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EA2AK">Really Using a Generic View</h5>
<p class="docText">Although we employed a 
generic view function in the previous subsection, we didn’t really use 
it as a pure generic view. Let’s do the real thing now. Go to your 
project URLconf (<tt>mysite/urls.py</tt>). Do you remember the 404 error we got when going to http://localhost:8000/ in the “Trying Out the Admin” subsection earlier in the chapter?</p>
<p class="docText">We explained that Django could only handle paths for which there is a matching regular expression. Well, <tt>'/'</tt> matches neither <tt>'/blog/'</tt> nor <tt>/admin/</tt>,
 so we forced users to visit only those links to get access to your app.
 This is a disappointment if you want to provide your users some 
convenience by letting them visit the top-level <tt>'/'</tt> path and then have your app automatically redirect to <tt>'/blog/'</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Here is the perfect opportunity to use the <tt>redirect_to()</tt> generic view in the proper environment. All you need to do is add a single line to your <tt>urlpatterns</tt>, as shown in the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>urlpatterns = patterns('',
    (r'^$', 'django.views.generic.simple.redirect_to',
        {'url': '/blog/'}),
    (r'^blog/', include('blog.urls')),
    (r'^admin/', include(admin.site.urls)),
)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Okay, maybe it’s two lines, 
but it’s all part of a single statement. Also, no import is necessary 
here as we’ve used a string instead of an object. Now when users visit <tt>'/'</tt>, they’ll be redirected to <tt>'/blog/'</tt>, which is exactly what you want. No modifications were needed in <tt>view.py</tt>,
 and all you did was call it from an URLconf file (project or app). 
That’s a generic view! (If you’re looking for something more 
substantial, we understand—you’ll have a more complex generic view 
exercise at the end of the chapter to get you fully up to speed.)</p>
<p class="docText">So far, we’ve seen <tt>direct_to_template()</tt> and <tt>redirect_to()</tt> generic views, but there are others that you’ll likely use fairly often. These include <tt>object_list()</tt> and <tt>object_detail()</tt> as well as time-oriented generic views such as <tt>archive_{day,week,month,year,today,index}()</tt>. And finally, there are CRUD generic views such as <tt>{create,update,delete}_object()</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Finally, we would be remiss if we didn’t inform that the trend is moving toward <span class="docEmphasis">class-based generic views</span>,
 a new feature introduced in Django 1.3. As powerful as generic views 
are, converting them to class-based generic views makes them even more 
so. (The reasons are similar to why exceptions switched from plain 
strings to classes back in Python 1.5.)</p>
<p class="docText">You can read more about plain ’ol generic views as well as class-based generic views from the official documentation at http://docs.djangoproject.com/en/dev/topics/generic-views/ and http://docs.djangoproject.com/en/dev/topics/class-based-views.</p>
<p class="docText">The remaining 
subsections aren’t as critical but they do contain useful information 
that you can come back to at a later time. If you want to move further 
ahead, either skip to the intermediate Django app or jump all the way to
 Chapter 12.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
