<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>11.14. *Look-and-Feel Improvements</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">11.14. *Look-and-Feel Improvements</h3>
<p class="docText">From this point, there are a 
couple of things you can do to improve the way your app works and to 
give your site a more consistent look-and-feel:</p>
<div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Create a Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) file</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Create a base template and use template inheritance</p></div></li></ol></div>
<p class="docText">The CSS is fairly 
straightforward, so we won’t go over it here, but let’s take a look at a
 really short example of template inheritance:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>&lt;!-- base.html --&gt;
Generic welcome to your web page [Login - Help - FAQ]
&lt;h1&gt;Blog Central&lt;/h1&gt;
{% block content %}
{% endblock %}
&copy; 2011 your company [About - Contact]
&lt;/body&gt;
&lt;/html&gt;</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">It’s not very fancy, but 
it’ll do. Put the common header material, such as corporate logo, 
sign-in/sign-out and other links, etc., at the top; at the bottom, 
you’ll have items such as a copyright notice, some links, etc. However, 
the detail to notice is the <tt>{%</tt> <tt>block</tt> <tt>...</tt> <tt>%}</tt> tag in the middle. This defines a named area that subtemplates will control.</p>
<p class="docText">To
 use this new base template, you must extend it and define the block 
that is dropped into the base template. For example, if we wanted to 
have our user-facing blog app page use this template, just add the 
appropriate boilerplate, and you’re good to go. To avoid confusion with <tt>archive.html</tt>, we’ll call it <tt>index.html</tt>, generically:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>&lt;!-- index.html --&gt;
{% extends "base.html" %}
{% block content %}
    {% for post in posts %}
        &lt;h2&gt;{{ post.title }}&lt;/h2&gt;
        &lt;p&gt;{{ post.timestamp }}&lt;/p&gt;
        &lt;p&gt;{{ post.body }}&lt;/p&gt;
        &lt;hr&gt;
    {% endfor %}
{% endblock %}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>{%</tt> <tt>extends</tt> <tt>...</tt> <tt>%}</tt> tag instructs Django to look for a template named <tt>base.html</tt>
 and plug the content of any named blocks in this template into the 
corresponding blocks in that template. If you do decide to try template 
inheritance, be sure to change your view to use <tt>index.html</tt> as the template file instead of the original <tt>archive.html</tt>.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
