<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>11.15. *Unit Testing</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">11.15. *Unit Testing</h3>
<p class="docText">Testing is something that we
 shouldn’t even need to remind developers to do. You should eat, live, 
and breathe testing for every app you write. Like so many other aspects 
of programming, Django offers testing in the form of extending the 
Python stock unit-testing module that comes with the version of Python 
you’re using. Django can also test documentation strings (or <span class="docEmphasis">docstrings</span> for short). Perhaps not a surprise, these are called <span class="docEmphasis">doctests</span>,
 and you can read about them in the Django documents page on testing, so
 we won’t cover them here. More important are unit tests.</p>
<p class="docText">Unit tests can be simple to create. Django attempts to motivate you by auto-generating a <tt>tests.py</tt> file for you when you create your application. Replace <tt>mysite/blog/tests.py</tt> with the contents of Example 11-1.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EGXAK">Example 11-1. The <tt>blog</tt> Application Unit-Testing Module (<tt>tests.py</tt>)</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre class="preFixedHeight">1    # tests.py
2    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> datetime <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> datetime
3    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> django.test <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> TestCase
4    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> django.test.client <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> Client
5    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> blog.models <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> BlogPost
6
7    <span class="docEmphStrong">class</span> BlogPostTest(TestCase):
8        <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> test_obj_create(self):
9            BlogPost.objects.create(title='raw title',
10               body='raw body', timestamp=datetime.now())
11           self.assertEqual(1, BlogPost.objects.count())
12           self.assertEqual('raw title',
13               BlogPost.objects.get(id=1).title)
14
15       <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> test_home(self):
16           response = self.client.get('/blog/')
17           self.failUnlessEqual(response.status_code, 200)
18
19       <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> test_slash(self):
20           response = self.client.get('/')
21           self.assertIn(response.status_code, (301, 302))
22
23       <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> test_empty_create(self):
24           response = self.client.get('/blog/create/')
25           self.assertIn(response.status_code, (301, 302))
26
27       <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> test_post_create(self):
28           response = self.client.post('/blog/create/', {
29               'title': 'post title',
30               'body': 'post body',
31           })
32           self.assertIn(response.status_code, (301, 302))
33           self.assertEqual(1, BlogPost.objects.count())
34           self.assertEqual('post title',
35               BlogPost.objects.get(id=1).title)

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EDZAK">Line-by-Line Explanation</h4>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ELZAK">Lines 1–5</h5>
<p class="docText">Here we’re importing <tt>datetime</tt> for post timestamps, the main test class, <tt>django.test.TestCase</tt>, the test Web client <tt>django.test.client.Client</tt>, and finally, our <tt>BlogPost</tt> class.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ER1AK">Lines 8–13</h5>
<p class="docText">There are no naming restrictions for your test methods other than they must begin with <tt>test_</tt>. The <tt>test_obj_create()</tt> method does nothing more than test to ensure that the object was created successfully and affirms the title. The <tt>assertEqual()</tt>
 method ensures that both arguments equate or it fails this test. Here, 
we assert both the object count as well as the data entered. This is a 
very basic test, and with a bit of imagination, we can probably make it 
more useful than it stands. You might also consider testing the <tt>ModelForm</tt>, too.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EF2AK">Lines 15–21</h5>
<p class="docText">The
 next pair of test methods checks the user interface—they make Web 
calls, as opposed to the first method, which just tests object creation.
 The <tt>test_home()</tt> method calls the main page for our app at <tt>'/blog/'</tt> and ensures an HTTP “error” code of 200 is received; <tt>test_slash()</tt> is practically the same, but confirms that our URLconf redirection that uses the <tt>redirect_to()</tt>
 generic view does work. The assertion here is slightly different 
because we’re expecting a redirect response code such as 301 or 302. 
We’re really expecting a 301 here, but don’t fail the test if it returns
 a 302 as a demonstration of the <tt>assertIn()</tt> test method as well as reusing this assertion for the final two test methods, both of which <span class="docEmphasis">should</span> result in 302 responses. In lines 16 and 20, you might be wondering where <tt>self.client</tt> came from. If you subclass from <tt>django.test.TestCase</tt>, you get an instance of a Django test client automatically for free by referring to it direct as <tt>self.client</tt>.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EU4AK">Lines 23–35</h5>
<p class="docText">These last two methods both test the view for <tt>'/blog/create/'</tt>, <tt>create_blogpost()</tt>. The first, <tt>test_empty_create()</tt>,
 tests for the situation in which someone erroneously makes a GET 
request without any data. Our code should ignore the request and 
redirect to <tt>'/blog/'</tt>. The second, <tt>test_post_create()</tt>, simulates a true user request for which real data is sent via POST, the entry created, and the user redirected to <tt>'/blog/'</tt>. We assert all three: 302 redirect, adding of the new post, and data validation.</p>
<p class="docText">Okay, let’s try it out by running the following command and observing the output:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>$ manage.py test
Creating test database 'default'...
.....................................................................
.....................................................................
..........
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Ran 288 tests in 7.061s

OK
Destroying test database 'default'...</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">By default, the system creates a separate in-memory database (called <tt>default</tt>)
 just for testing. This is so you don’t panic that you’re going to 
damage your production data. Each dot (.) means a passing test. 
Unsuccessful tests are denoted by “E” for error and “F” for failure. To learn more about testing in Django, check out the documentation at http://docs.djangoproject.com/en/dev/topics/testing.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EJABK">11.15.1. Blog Application Code Review</h4>
<p class="docText">Let’s take a look at all the final versions of our application code at the same time (plus <tt>__init__.py</tt> [empty] and <tt>tests.py</tt> [see Example 11-1]).
 The comments have been left out here, but you can download either these
 stripped versions or versions with more documentation on this book’s 
Web site.</p>
<p class="docText">Although not officially part of our blog application, the first file we look at in Example 11-2 is the project-level URLconf file, <tt>mysite/urls.py</tt>.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EIBBK">Example 11-2. The <tt>mysite</tt> Project URLconf (<tt>urls.py</tt>)</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>1    # urls.py
2    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> django.conf.urls.defaults <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> *
3    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> django.contrib <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> admin
4    admin.autodiscover()
5
6    urlpatterns = patterns('',
7        (r'^$', 'django.views.generic.simple.redirect_to',
8            {'url': '/blog/'}),
9        (r'^blog/', include('blog.urls')),
10       (r'^admin/', include(admin.site.urls)),
11   )</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EHCBK">Line-by-Line Explanation</h5>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0EPCBK">Lines 1–4</h5>
<p class="docText">The setup lines import the 
stuff necessary for the project URLconf plus the admin-enabling code. 
Not all apps will employ the admin, so the second and third lines can be
 omitted if you’re not using it.</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0E1CBK">Lines 6–11</h5>
<p class="docText">The <tt>urlpatterns</tt> designate actions and directives to either generic views or any of your project’s apps. The first pattern is for <tt>'/'</tt>, which redirects to the handler for <tt>'/blog/'</tt> by using the <tt>redirect_to()</tt> generic view; the second pattern, for <tt>'/blog/'</tt>, sends all requests to the blog app’s URLconf (coming up next); and the last one is for admin requests.</p>
<p class="docText">The next file we look at in Example 11-3 is the app’s URLconf, <tt>mysite/blog/urls.py</tt>.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EDFBK">Example 11-3. The <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>blog</tt></span> App’s URLconf (<tt>urls.py</tt>)</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<p class="docText">The <tt>blog</tt> app’s URLconf file. URLs should be processed here calling view functions (or <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>class</tt></span> methods).</p>
<pre>1    # urls.py
2    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> django.conf.urls.defaults <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> *
3
4    urlpatterns = patterns('blog.views',
5       (r'^$', 'archive'),
6       (r'^create/', 'create_blogpost'),
7    )</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EIGBK">Line-by-Line Explanation</h5>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0EQGBK">Lines 4–7</h5>
<p class="docText">The core of <tt>urls.py</tt> is the definition of the URL mappings (<tt>urlpatterns</tt>). When users visit <tt>'/blog/'</tt>, they are handled by the <tt>blog.views.archive()</tt>. Recall that the <tt>'/blog'</tt> is stripped off by the project URLconf, so by the time we get here, the URL path is only <tt>'/'</tt>. A call to <tt>'/blog/create/'</tt> should only come from POSTing the form and its data; this request is handled by the <tt>blog.views.create_blogpost()</tt> view function.</p>
<p class="docText">In Example 11-4, we take a look at the data model for the blog app, <tt>mysite/blog/models.py</tt>. It also contains the form class, as well.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EWHBK">Example 11-4. The <tt>blog</tt> App Data and Form Models File (<tt>models.py)</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<p class="docText">The data models live here, but the latter group can be split off into their own file.</p>
<pre>1    # models.py
2    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> django.db <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> models
3    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> django <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> forms
4
5    <span class="docEmphStrong">class</span> BlogPost(models.Model):
6        title = models.CharField(max_length=150)
7        body = models.TextField()
8        timestamp = models.DateTimeField()
9        <span class="docEmphStrong">class</span> Meta:
10           ordering = ('-timestamp',)
11
12   <span class="docEmphStrong">class</span> BlogPostForm(forms.ModelForm):
13       <span class="docEmphStrong">class</span> Meta:
14           model = BlogPost
15           exclude = ('timestamp',)</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EEJBK">Line-by-Line Explanation</h5>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0EMJBK">Lines 1–3</h5>
<p class="docText">We
 import the classes required to define models and forms. We include both
 classes together in this simple app. If you had more models and/or 
forms, you might want to split out the forms into a separate <tt>forms.py</tt> file.</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0EGMBK">Lines 5–10</h5>
<p class="docText">This is the definition of our <tt>BlogPost</tt>
 model. It includes its data attributes as well as requests that all 
database queries sort the objects in reverse order according to each 
row’s timestamp field (via the <tt>Meta</tt> inner class).</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0EWMBK">Lines 12–15</h5>
<p class="docText">Here, we create the <tt>BlogPostForm</tt> object, a form version of the data model. The <tt>Meta.model</tt> attribute specifies on which data model it should be based, and the <tt>Meta.exclude</tt>
 variable requests that this data field be absent from the automatically
 generated forms. It is expected that the developer fills in this field 
(if required) before the <tt>BlogPost</tt> instance is saved to the database.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>mysite/blog/admin.py</tt> file in Example 11-5
 is only used if you enable the admin for your application. This file 
contains the classes you’re registering for use in the admin as well as 
any specific admin classes.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EUNBK">Example 11-5. The <tt>blog</tt> Application Admin Configuration File (<tt>admin.py</tt>)</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<pre>1    # admin.py
2    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> django.contrib <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> admin
3    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> blog <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> models
4
5    <span class="docEmphStrong">class</span> BlogPostAdmin(admin.ModelAdmin):
6        list_display = ('title', 'timestamp')
7
8    admin.site.register(models.BlogPost, BlogPostAdmin)</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EYOBK">Line-by-Line Explanation</h5>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0EAPBK">Lines 5–8</h5>
<p class="docText">Purely for the optional Django admin, the <tt>list_display</tt> attribute of the <tt>BlogPostAdmin</tt>
 class gives the admin direction as to which fields to display in the 
admin console to help viewers differentiate each data record. There are 
many other attributes we didn’t get a chance to cover; however, we 
encourage you to read the documentation at http://docs.djangoproject.com/en/dev/ref/contrib/admin/#modeladmin-options.
 Without this designation, you’ll just see the generic object names for 
every row, making it nearly impossible to differentiate instances from 
one another. The last thing we do (on line 8) is to register both the 
data and admin models with the admin app.</p>
<p class="docText">Example 11-6 presents the core of our app, which is in <tt>mysite/blog/views.py</tt>.
 This is where all of our views go; it is the equivalent of the 
controller code for most Web apps. The ironic thing about Django, its 
adherence to DRY, and the power of generic views is that the goal is to 
have an empty views file. (However, there are those who feel that they 
hide <span class="docEmphasis">too</span> much, making the source code harder to read and understand.) Hopefully any custom or semi-generic views you <span class="docEmphasis">do</span>
 create in this file are short, easy-to-read, maximize code reuse, 
etc.—in other words, as Pythonic as possible. Creating good tests and 
documentation also goes without saying.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EKRBK">Example 11-6. The <tt>blog</tt> Views File <tt>(views.py)</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<p class="docText">All of your app’s logic lives in the <tt>views.py</tt> file, its components called via URLconf.</p>
<pre>1    # views.py
2    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> datetime <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> datetime
3    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> django.http <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> HttpResponseRedirect
4    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> django.views.generic.simple <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> direct_to_template
5    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> blog.models <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> BlogPost, BlogPostForm
6
7    <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> archive(request):
8        posts = BlogPost.objects.all()[:10]
9        <span class="docEmphStrong">return</span> direct_to_template(request, 'archive.html',
10           {'posts': posts, 'form': BlogPostForm()})
11
12   <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> create_blogpost(request):
13       <span class="docEmphStrong">if</span> request.method == 'POST':
14           form = BlogPostForm(request.POST)
15           <span class="docEmphStrong">if</span> form.is_valid():
16               post = form.save(commit=False)
17               post.timestamp=datetime.now()
18               post.save()
19       <span class="docEmphStrong">return</span> HttpResponseRedirect('/blog/')</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ENTBK">Line-by-Line Explanation</h5>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0EVTBK">Lines 1–5</h5>
<p class="docText">There
 are many imports here, so it’s time to share another best practice: 
organize your imports by order of proximity to your app. That means 
access all standard library modules (<tt>datetime</tt>) and packages first. Those are likely to be dependencies of your framework modules and packages—these are the second set (<tt>django.*</tt>). Finally, your app’s own imports come last (<tt>blog.models</tt>). Doing your imports in this order avoids the most obvious dependency issues.</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0EAWBK">Lines 7–11</h5>
<p class="docText">The <tt>blog.views.archive()</tt> function is the primary view of our app. It extracts the ten most recent <tt>BlogPost</tt>
 objects from the database, and then bundles that data as well as 
creates an input form for users. It then passes both as the context to 
give to the <tt>archive.html</tt> template. The shortcut function <tt>render_to_response()</tt> was replaced by the <tt>direct_to_template()</tt> generic view (turning <tt>archive()</tt> into a semi-generic view in the process).</p>
<p class="docText">Originally, <tt>render_to_response()</tt> not only took the template name and context, but it also passed the <tt>RequestContext</tt>
 object required for the CSRF verification and the resulting response is
 returned back to the client. When we converted to using <tt>direct_to_template()</tt>,
 we didn’t need to pass in the request context instance because all of 
this stuff was pushed down to the generic view to handle, leaving only 
core app matters for the developer to deal with, a shortcut to the 
(original) shortcut, if you will.</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0EBXBK">Lines 12–19</h5>
<p class="docText">The <tt>blog.views.create_blogpost()</tt> function is intimately tied to the form action in <tt>template/archive.html</tt> because the URLconf directs all POSTs to this view. If the request was indeed a POST, then the <tt>BlogPostForm</tt> object is created to extract the form fields filled in by the user. After successful validation on line 16, we call the <tt>form.save()</tt> method to return the instance of <tt>BlogPost</tt> that was created.</p>
<p class="docText">As mentioned earlier, the <tt>commit=False</tt> flag instructs <tt>save()</tt>
 to not store the instance in the database yet (because we need to fill 
in the timestamp). This requires us to explicitly call the instance’s <tt>post.save()</tt> method to actually persist it. If <tt>is_valid()</tt> comes back <tt>False</tt>,
 we skip saving the data; the same applies if the request was a GET, 
which is what happens when a user enters this URL directly into the 
address bar.</p>
<p class="docText">The last file we’ll look at the template file <tt>myblog/apps/templates/archive.html</tt>, which we present in Example 11-7.</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E4ZBK">Example 11-7. The <tt>blog</tt> App’s Main Page Template File (<tt>archive.html)</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box">
<p class="docText">The template file features HTML plus logic to programmatically control the output.</p>
<pre>1    &lt;!-- archive.html --&gt;
2    &lt;form action="/blog/create/" method=post&gt;{% csrf_token %}
3        &lt;table&gt;{{ form }}&lt;/table&gt;&lt;br&gt;
4        &lt;input type=submit&gt;
5    &lt;/form&gt;
6    &lt;hr&gt;
7
8    {% for post in posts %}
9        &lt;h2&gt;{{ post.title }}&lt;/h2&gt;
10       &lt;p&gt;{{ post.timestamp }}&lt;/p&gt;
11       &lt;p&gt;{{ post.body }}&lt;/p&gt;
12       &lt;hr&gt;
13   {% endfor %}</pre><br/>
</div><p></p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ES1BK">Line-by-Line Explanation</h5>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0E11BK">Lines 1–6</h5>
<p class="docText">The first half of our template represents the user input form. Upon submission, the server executes your <tt>create_blogpost()</tt> view function we discussed a moment ago to create a new <tt>BlogPost</tt> entry in the database. The form variable in line 2 comes from an instance of <tt>BlogPostForm</tt>,
 which is the form that is based on your data model (in a tabular 
format). As we mentioned earlier, you can choose from other options. We 
also explained that the <tt>csrf_token</tt> on line 1 is used to protect against CSRF—it is also the reason that you must provide the <tt>RequestContext</tt> in the <tt>archive()</tt> view function so that the template can use it here.</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0ES2BK">Lines 8–13</h5>
<p class="docText">The latter half of the template simply takes the set of (at most) ten (most recent) <tt>BlogPost</tt>
 objects and loops through them, emitting individual post details for 
the user. In between each (as well as just prior to this loop) are 
horizontal rules to visually segregate the data.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EW3BK">11.15.2. Blog App Summary</h4>
<p class="docText">Of course, we could continue 
adding features to our blog app ad nauseam (many people do), but 
hopefully we’ve given you enough of a taste of the power of Django. 
(Check the exercises at the end of the chapter for additional 
challenges.) In the course of building this skeletal blog app, you’ve 
seen a number of Django’s elegant, labor-saving features. These include 
the following:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">The built-in 
development server, which makes your development work more 
self-contained, and which automatically reloads your code if you edit 
it.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The 
pure-Python approach to data model creation, which saves you from having
 to write or maintain SQL code or XML description files.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The automatic admin application, which provides full-fledged content-editing features even for non-technical users.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The template system, which can be used to produce HTML, CSS, JavaScript, or any textual output format.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Template
 filters, which can alter the presentation of your data (such as dates) 
without interfering with your application’s business logic.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The
 URLconf system, which gives you great flexibility in URL design while 
keeping application-specific portions of URLs in the application, where 
they belong.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>ModelForm</tt> objects give you a simple way of creating form data based on your data model with little effort on your part.</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">Finally, we encourage you to 
stage your app on a real server connected to the Internet and stop using
 the development server. By getting off of localhost/127.0.0.1, you can 
really confirm that your app will work in a production environment.</p>
<p class="docText">If you 
enjoyed this example, you’ll find an extended version of it along with 
four other similar training apps of differing variety in <span class="docEmphasis">Python Web Development with Django</span>.
 Now that you’ve got your feet wet, let’s do a larger, more ambitious 
real-world project: a Django app that handles e-mail, talks to Twitter, 
performs OAuth, and is a launch point for something even bigger.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
