<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>11.19. Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">11.19. Exercises</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EQIBK">Web Frameworks</h4>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-1.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Review Terminology.</span> What do <span class="docEmphasis">CGI</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">WSGI</span> mean?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-2.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Review Terminology.</span> What is the main problem with pure CGI, and why isn’t it used more for production Web services today?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-3.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Review Terminology.</span> What problem(s) do(es) WSGI solve?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-4.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Web Frameworks.</span> What is the purpose of a Web framework?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-5.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Web Frameworks.</span> Web development using frameworks typically follows the model-view controller (MVC) pattern. Describe each of these components.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-6.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Web Frameworks.</span>
 Name some of Python’s full-stack Web frameworks. Create a simple “Hello
 World” application by using each of them. Write down any development 
and execution differences between each of them.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-7.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Web Frameworks.</span>
 Do some research on the various available Python templating systems. 
Create a grid or spreadsheet that compares and contrasts them. Be sure 
to have syntax entries for (at least) the directives to: a) display data
 variables, b) call functions or methods, c) embed pure Python code, d) 
perform loops, e) if-elseif-else conditionals, and f) template 
inheritance.</p></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E6LBK">Django</h4>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-8.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Background.</span> When and where was the Django framework created? What are some of the main goals of its existence?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-9.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Terminology.</span> What is the difference between a Django project and a Django app?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-10.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Terminology.</span> Instead of MVC, Django uses model-template-view (MTV). Compare and contrast MTV with MVC.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-11.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Configuration.</span> Where do Django developers create their database settings?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-12.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Configuration.</span> Django can run on top of:</p>
<div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">relational databases</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">non-relational databases</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">both a and b</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">neither, it runs on the power of ponies</p></div></li></ol></div></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-13.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Configuration.</span> Go to http://djangoproject.com
 then download and install the Django Web framework (and SQLite if you 
are not using a Windows-based PC, because it comes for free with Python 
2.5+ for Windows).</p>
<div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Execute ‘<tt>django-admin.py</tt> <tt>startproject</tt> <tt>helloworld</tt>’ to start your project, and then ‘<tt>cd helloworld; python./manage.py startapp hello</tt>’ to start your app.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Edit <tt>helloworld/hello/views.py</tt> to include this code:</p><div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> django.http <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> HttpResponse
<span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> index(request):
    <span class="docEmphStrong">return</span> HttpResponse('Hello world!')</pre></div></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">In <tt>helloworld/settings.py</tt>, add <tt>'hello',</tt> to the <tt>INSTALLED_APPS</tt> variable (in any position of the tuple).</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">In <tt>helloworld/urls.py</tt>, replace the commented-out line</p><div class="docText"><pre># (r'helloworld/', include('helloworld.foo.urls')),</pre></div><p class="docList">with this (uncommented) line:</p><div class="docText"><pre># (r'^$', 'hello.views.index'),</pre></div></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Execute ‘<tt>python</tt> <tt>./manage.py runserver</tt>’
 and visit http://localhost:8000 to confirm that your code works and 
“Hello world!” does show up on your browser. Change the output to 
something other than “Hello world!”.</p></div></li></ol></div></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-14.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Configuration.</span> What is a <span class="docEmphasis">URLconf</span>, and where would you typically find one?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-15.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Tutorial.</span> Do all four parts of the Django tutorial found starting at http://docs.djangoproject.com/en/dev/intro/tutorial01.
 Warning: do not merely copy the code you find there. I expect to see 
you modify the app to do something slightly different than what’s 
offered, and/or add new functionality that isn’t present.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-16.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Tools.</span> What is the Django admin app? How do you enable it? Why is the admin useful?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-17.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Tools.</span> Is there a way to test your app’s code without bringing up the admin or even a Web server?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-18.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Terminology.</span> What does <span class="docEmphasis">CSRF</span> mean, and why does Django contain security mechanisms to thwart such attempts?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-19.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Models.</span> Name the top five model types you think you’ll be using and what type of data would typically be used with those models.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-20.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Templates.</span>
 In Django templates, what is a tag? Furthermore, what is the difference
 between a block tag and a variable tag? How can you distinguish between
 the two types of tags?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-21.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Templates.</span> Describe how you would implement template inheritance by using Django.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-22.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Templates.</span> In Django templates, what is a filter?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-23.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Views.</span> What are generic views? Why would you want to use them? Are there any situations in which you <span class="docEmphasis">don’t</span> want to have a generic view?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-24.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Forms.</span> Describe forms in Django, how they work, where they live in code (from the data model to the HTML template).</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-25.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Forms.</span> Discuss model forms and what their benefits are.</p></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EQXBK">Django Blog App</h4>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-26.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Templates.</span> In the <tt>archive.html</tt> template of your <tt>BlogPost</tt>
 application, it loops through each post and displays them to the user. 
Add a test for the special case where no posts have been added yet and 
display a special message in such cases.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-27.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Models.</span>
 In our application, we’re still doing too much extra work for the 
timestamp. There is a way to instruct Django to automatically add the 
timestamp upon creation of our <tt>BlogPost</tt>
 object. Find out what that is and make the necessary changes to make 
that happen and remove the explicit setting of the timestamp in <tt>blog.views.create_blogpost()</tt> and <tt>blog.tests.BlogPostTest.test_obj_create()</tt>. Do we also need to change <tt>blog.tests.BlogPostTest.test_post_create()</tt> in a similar way? Hint: You can take a peek of how Google App Engine does it elsewhere in this chapter.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-28.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Generic views.</span> Deprecate your <tt>archive()</tt> view function and its use of <tt>render_to_response()</tt> and convert your app to use a generic view. You will just remove <tt>archive()</tt> completely from blog/views.py and also move <tt>blog/templates/archive.html</tt> into <tt>blog/templates/blogpost/blogpost_ list.html</tt>. Read up on the <tt>list_detail.object_list()</tt> generic view and call it directly from your app’s URLconf. You will need to create a dictionary with a ‘<tt>queryset</tt>’ as well as ‘<tt>extra_context</tt>’ to pass your automatically generated <tt>BlogPostForm()</tt> object plus all the blog entries to the template via the generic view.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-29.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Templates.</span> Earlier we introduced you to Django template filters (and gave an example using <tt>upper()</tt>). Take the archive.html (or <tt>blogpost_list.html</tt>) template for your <tt>BlogPost</tt>
 app and add another line to display the total number of blog posts in 
the database using a filter before showing the ten most recent ones.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-30.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Forms.</span> By having the form object created automatically using <tt>ModelForm</tt>,
 we’ve lost the ability to specify the rows and cols attributes of the 
body textarea (rows = 3, cols = 60), as we did with just the <tt>Form</tt> and specifying the HTML widget for <tt>forms.CharField</tt>. Instead, it defaulted to rows = 10 and cols = 40, as shown in Figure 11-20. How can we specify 3 rows and 60 cols? Hint: See the docs at http://docs.djangoproject.com/en/dev/topics/forms/modelforms/#overriding-the-default-field-types-or-widgets</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-31.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Templates.</span> Create a base template for your blog app, and modify all existing templates to use template inheritance.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-32.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Templates.</span>
 Read the Django documentation on using static files (HTML, CSS, JS, 
etc.) and improve the look of your blog app. If it’s hard for you to get
 started, try these minor settings until you can think of something more
 contemporary:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>&lt;style type="text/css"&gt;
body { color: #efd; background: #453; padding: 0 5em; margin: 0 }
h1 { padding: 2em 1em; background: #675 }
h2 { color: #bf8; border-top: 1px dotted #fff; margin-top: 2em }
p { margin: 1em 0 }
&lt;/style&gt;</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-33.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">CRUD.</span>
 Give users the ability to edit and delete posts. You can consider 
adding an additional timestamp field for time edited if you wish the 
existing timestamp to remain representing creation time. If not, then 
change the existing timestamp when a post has been edited or deleted.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-34.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Cursors and Pagination.</span>
 Showing the ten most recent posts is good, but letting users paginate 
through older posts is even better. Use cursors and add pagination to 
your app.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-35.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Caching.</span>
 In the Google App Engine blog, we employed the use of Memcache to cache
 objects so that we don’t have to go to the datastore again for similar 
requests. Do we need to do this with our Django app? Why or why not?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-36.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Users.</span> Support multiple blogs on your site. Each individual user should get a set of blog pages.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-37.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Communication.</span>
 Add another feature to your app such that whenever a new blog entry is 
made, both the admin of the Web site as well as the owner of the blog 
receive an e-mail message with the details.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-38.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Business Logic.</span>
 In addition to the previous exercise where an e-mail message is sent, 
take a page from the Twitter app, and require admin approval of a blog 
entry before it is actually posted to the blog itself.</p></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EG6BK">Django Twitter App</h4>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-39.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Templates.</span> The <tt>build_absolute_uri()</tt>
 method was used to eliminate hardcoded URLs outside the URL 
configuration files. But there are still some hardcoded URL paths in the
 HTML templates. Where are they? How can these hardcoded URLs be 
removed? Hint: Read up on http://docs.djangoproject.com/en/dev/ref/templates/builtins/#std:templatetag-url.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-40.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Templates.</span> Make the TweetApprover application pretty by adding a CSS file and referencing it from the HTML templates.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-41.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Users.</span>
 Right now, any user can post new tweets without logging in. Modify the 
app so that users can’t post new tweets without logging in and having 
the permission “add tweet” set for their user account.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-42.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Users.</span> After forcing users to log in to propose new tweets, pre-populate the <span class="docEmphStrong">Author email</span> field with the logged-in user’s e-mail address, if the user’s profile has one. Hint: Read http://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.2/topics/auth.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-43.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Caching.</span> Cache the list of tweets shown when the user visits <tt>/approve</tt>.
 Once a user has approved or rejected a tweet, she is sent back to that 
page again; when she arrives there, ensure that she sees a fresh, 
non-cached version of the page.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-44.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Logging and Reporting.</span> Create an audit trail for tweets by adding new <tt>Comments</tt> to a post whenever it changes state. For example, when a tweet is rejected, add a <tt>Comment</tt> to it indicating that it was rejected and at what time. Whenever the text is updated, add another <tt>Comment</tt>. Whenever it is published, add another <tt>Comment</tt> saying when it was published and who approved it.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-45.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">CRUD.</span>
 Add a third option on the tweet review page that lets the reviewer 
delete a submitted tweet, besides accepting or rejecting it. You can 
delete an object from the database by calling the <tt>delete()</tt> method on it, like so: <tt>reviewed_tweet.delete()</tt></p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>11-46.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Communication.</span>
 When an employee proposes a new tweet, an e-mail is sent to the 
manager. But the e-mail just says there is a tweet to approve. Make that
 e-mail friendlier by adding the text of the new tweet to it, as well as
 a link that the manager can click to go directly to the Web page for 
approving or rejecting that tweet. You can compare with how e-mails are 
sent in <tt>myproject/approver/views.py</tt>.</p></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
