<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>12.3. The Sandbox and the App Engine SDK</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">12.3. The Sandbox and the App Engine SDK</h3>
<p class="docText">It
 is a no-brainer that developers would not want other applications to be
 able to access their own applications’ source code nor their data, so 
it’s only fair that you respect other applications and the associated 
data, as well. There are certain restrictions from within the sandbox 
that cannot be circumvented. (From time to time, Google will lift such 
restrictions if and when it is safe to do so.) Verboten actions include 
(but are not limited to) the following:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">You cannot create a local disk file, but you <span class="docEmphasis">can</span> create a distributed one using the Files API.</p></li><li><p class="docList">You cannot open an inbound network socket connection.</p></li><li><p class="docList">You cannot fork new processes.</p></li><li><p class="docList">You cannot make (operating) system calls.</p></li><li><p class="docList">You cannot upload any non-Python source code.</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">Because of these 
limitations, the App Engine SDK comes with higher-level APIs to make up 
for any loss functionality due to the restrictions.</p>
<p class="docText">Furthermore, because 
the version of Python that App Engine executes (currently versions 2.5 
and 2.7) is a subset of the full distribution, you don’t have access to 
all of Python’s features, especially those which are compiled in C. Some
 of the C-compiled Python modules and packages are available. Version 
2.7 does support significantly more C libraries, however, including some
 of the more well-known external packages, such as NumPy, lxml, and PIL.
 In fact, while the version 2.5 support for C libraries is in the form 
of a “whitelist,” version 2.7 has made available so many more of these, 
that the list there is actually a “blacklist.”</p>
<p class="docText">The Python 2.5 allowed/whitelisted and the Python 2.7 disallowed/blacklisted C-libraries are outlined at http://code.google.com/appengine/kb/libraries.html
 (there is a similar list for Java classes). However, if you want to use
 any third-party Python packages, you’re welcome to bundle them with 
your source as long as they are pure Python (For instance, no 
executables, <tt>.so</tt> or <tt>.dll</tt> files, etc.) and don’t use modules/packages that are not in the whitelist.</p>
<p class="docText">Keep in mind that there is limit
 to the total number of files (currently 10,000) that you can upload, 
another limit on the total size of all files uploaded (currently 
150MB)—this includes application files or static assets such as HTML, 
CSS, JavaScript, etc.—as well as a per-file size limit (currently 32MB).
 To see the list of current size limitations, go to http://code.google.com/appengine/docs/python/runtime.html#Quotas_and_Limits
 as the team tries hard to raise limits wherever and whenever possible. 
Still, there are several workarounds that help ease the pain of these 
restrictions.</p>
<p class="docText">If your application serves media files that exceed the per-file size limit, you can store them in the App Engine Blobstore (see Table 12-1)
 where you can store a file that’s arbitrary in size, that is, there is 
no size limitation for each file (blob). If you’re concerned about the 
total number of <tt>.py</tt> files, you can store them in a Zip file and upload that, instead. Regardless of how many <tt>.py</tt>
 files you’ve archived, you only pay the penalty of a single Zip file. 
Of course that Zip file must also be below the per-file size limit, but 
at least you don’t have to worry as much about the <span class="docEmphasis">number</span> of files. You can read more about using Zip files in the article located at http://docs.djangoproject.com/en/dev/ref/settings (pay attention to the note at the top of the article).</p>
<p></p><table cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0" frame="hsides" rules="groups"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 12-1. Google App Engine Services and APIs (Some Experimental)</h5></caption><colgroup align="left" span="2"><col width="200"></col><col width="400"></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell bottomBorder thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Service/API</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell bottomBorder thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Description</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">App Identity</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Use this when your application contains code that needs to identify itself or other APIs which demand such information.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Appstats</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">An event-based framework that helps you to measure the performance of your application.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Backends</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">If
 the standard request/response or task queue deadlines are not long 
enough for your requirements, you can use Backends to App Engine code to
 run indefinitely.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Blobstore</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Using
 Blobstore, you can use applications to serve data objects (“blobs”) 
that are too large for the Datastore (e.g., media files).</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Capabilities</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Gives
 applications the ability to detect when the App Engine datastore or 
memcache are unavailable in order to provide graceful downtime service 
to users.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Channel</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">This is a service with which your application can push data directly to the browser; a.k.a. Reverse Ajax, browser push, Comet.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Cloud SQL</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Use a relational database (instead of the default scalable non-distributed datastore).</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Cloud Storage</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Read
 or write files directly to the Google Cloud Storage service by using 
the familiar Files API (see the description later in this table).</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Conversion</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Use this to convert between HTML, PDF, text, and image formats.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Cron</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Cron gives you the ability to schedule tasks to run at specific dates, times, or intervals.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Datastore</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">A distributed, scalable, non-relational persistent storage for your data.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Denial-of-Service</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Use this to set up filters to block IP addresses/families that issue Denial of Service (DoS) attacks on your application.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Download</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">In the event of a catastrophe, developers can download the code they uploaded to Google.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Files</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Create distributed (blobstore or Cloud Storage) files using the common Python file interface.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Search</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Perform searches for text, timestamps, etc. in your datastore entities.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Images</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Manipulate image data; for example, create thumbnails, crop, resize, and rotate images.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Logs</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Allows users to access application and request logs, and even purge at runtime for long-running requests.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Mail</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">This API gives your application the ability to send and/or receive e-mail</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">MapReduce</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Used to perform distributed computing over significantly large datasets. This API includes the map, shuffle, and reduce phases.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Matcher</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Highly scalable real-time matching infrastructure: register queries to match against an object stream.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Memcache</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Standard distributed in-memory data cache (like Memcached) between your application and persistent storage.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Namespaces (Multitenancy)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">With Namespaces, you can create multitenant applications by compartmentalizing your Google App Engine data.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">NDB (new database)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">New, experimental Python-App Engine higher-level datastore interface.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">OAuth</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Provide
 a secure way for third-parties to access data on a user’s behalf 
without requiring authorization (logins/passwords, etc.).</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">OpenID</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">A Federated authentication service with which users can login from Google Accounts <span class="docEmphasis">and</span> OpenID accounts.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Pipeline</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Manage multiple long-running tasks/workflows and collate their results.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Prospective Search</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Somewhat
 in contrast to the full-text search API that allows users to search 
existing data, Prospective Search allows users to query for data that 
has <span class="docEmphasis">not</span> 
been created yet: set up your queries, and when matching data is stored,
 the API is called (think of a combination of a database trigger plus a 
task queue task).</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Socket</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Allow users to create and communicate via outbound socket connections.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Task Queue</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Users can perform background tasks (concurrently if desired) away from user interaction.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">URLfetch</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Communicate with other applications online via HTTP/S requests/responses.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Users</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">App Engine’s authentication service manages the user sign-in process.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">WarmUp</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Loads applications on instances before traffic arrives to reduce request service time.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">XMPP</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Gives your application the ability to chat (send and/or receive instant messages) via Jabber/XMPP protocol.</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">File
 limitations aside, let’s go back to the execution restrictions (no 
sockets, files, processes, or system calls). Without these building 
blocks, it doesn’t sound like you can have a very useful application. 
Don’t despair; help is available!</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EZDCK">12.3.1. Services and APIs</h4>
<p class="docText">To help you get your work done,
 Google gives you an ever-increasing number of building blocks to work 
with that make up for those core restrictions. For example, <span class="docEmphasis">why</span>
 would you want to open a network socket? Do you want to communicate 
with other servers? In that case, use the URLfetch API. What about 
sending or receiving e-mail? The Email API was created just for that 
purpose. Similarly, use the XMPP (eXtensible Messaging and Presence 
Protocol, or simply: Jabber) API for sending or receiving instant 
messages (IMs). The stories are similar for accessing a network-based 
secondary cache (Memcache API), employing reverse AJAX or browser push 
(Channel API), accessing a database (Datastore API), etc. Table 12-1 lists all the services and APIs that are available to App Engine developers at the time of this writing.</p>
<p class="docText">Okay,
 sounds exciting, but enough talk already—let’s get started! The first 
thing you need to do is to select a framework with which to build your 
applications.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
