<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>12.9. Static Files</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">12.9. Static Files</h3>
<p class="docText">Web pages often include 
static elements that go along with any dynamic data. This includes 
images, CSS, text (XML, JSON, or other markup), and JavaScript files. 
Rather than requiring that the developer come up with handlers to serve 
that data, you can specify a static file directory in your <tt>app.yaml</tt> configuration to direct App Engine to return that data as is. What you need to do is to add a specific handler in the <tt>handlers</tt> section of your <tt>app.yaml</tt>. It will look something like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>handlers:
- url: /static
  static_dir: static

- url: .*
  script: main.py</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">We place our static handler first so that matches of <tt>/static</tt> path requests will be processed first. All other paths will be taken care of by the handlers in <tt>main.py</tt>. This means that you don’t need to execute application code in order to serve up static files.</p>
<p class="docText">In fact, why don’t you just find some random <tt>.js</tt>, <tt>.css</tt>, or whatever static content you have, let’s say it’s <tt>main.css</tt>, create a folder named “static” right at the top-level directory (where your <tt>app.yaml</tt> and <tt>main.py</tt> file are located), update your <tt>app.yaml</tt>
 as described above, start your development server, and then point a 
browser to http://localhost:8080/static/main.css. This will work in 
production in the same way it does in development. App Engine serves 
your static data without requiring assistance from your application’s 
handlers.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
