<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>12.10. Adding Users Service</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">12.10. Adding Users Service</h3>
<p class="docText">In Chapter 11,
 for our Django blog, we didn’t add any authentication (users, 
passwords, accounts, etc.), but we did use Django’s own authentication 
system in the TweetApprove application. Similarly, let’s do 
authentication in this blog by using Google Accounts. This sure beats 
giving <span class="docEmphasis">any</span> 
user who visits your page the ability to add new blog posts; if we did, 
it would then be a guestbook right? Having authentication here shouldn’t
 be a shocker. Let’s assume that you wanted to create the next industry 
blog, like TechCrunch, Engadget, etc. The blog needs to support multiple
 authors, and you want them to be the only ones who can post to the 
blog, not just any ’ol John or Jane.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EVCCK">12.10.1. Google Accounts Authentication</h4>
<p class="docText">When you create your App 
Engine application, the authentication that’s used by default is Google 
Accounts. However, if you don’t add any authentication mechanism, either
 in the configuration settings or in the actual application code, it’s 
the same as not having authentication at all: anyone can post to your 
blog. Let’s add in authentication checking by inserting a couple of 
lines at the very beginning of <tt>MainHandler.get()</tt> so that it looks like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedHeight">. . .
<span class="docEmphStrong"><span class="docEmphasis">from</span></span> <span class="docEmphasis">google.appengine.api <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> users</span>
. . .
<span class="docEmphStrong">class</span> MainHandler(webapp.RequestHandler):
    <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> get(self):
       user = users.get_current_user()
       <span class="docEmphasis"><span class="docEmphStrong">if</span> user:</span>
          <span class="docEmphasis">self.response.out.write('Hello %s' % user.nickname())</span>
       <span class="docEmphasis"><span class="docEmphStrong">else</span>:</span>
          <span class="docEmphasis">self.response.out.write('Hello World! [&lt;a href=%s&gt;sign</span>
<span class="docEmphasis">in&lt;/a&gt;]' % (</span>
                <span class="docEmphasis">users.create_login_url(self.request.uri)))</span>
       self.response.out.write('&lt;h1&gt;The Greatest Blog&lt;/h1&gt;')

       <span class="docEmphStrong"><span class="docEmphasis">if</span></span> <span class="docEmphasis">user:</span>
            <span class="docEmphasis">self.response.out.write('''</span>
                <span class="docEmphasis">&lt;form action="/post" method=post&gt;</span>
                <span class="docEmphasis">Title:</span>
                <span class="docEmphasis">&lt;br&gt;&lt;input type=text name=title&gt;</span>
                <span class="docEmphasis">&lt;br&gt;Body:</span>
                <span class="docEmphasis">&lt;br&gt;&lt;textarea name=body rows=3 cols=60&gt;&lt;/textarea&gt;</span>
                <span class="docEmphasis">&lt;br&gt;&lt;input type=submit value="Post"&gt;</span>
                <span class="docEmphasis">&lt;/form&gt;</span>
                <span class="docEmphasis">&lt;hr&gt;</span>
            <span class="docEmphasis">''')</span>

        posts = memcache.get(KEY)
        <span class="docEmphStrong">if not</span> posts:
            posts = BlogPost.all().order('-timestamp').fetch(10)
            memcache.add(KEY, posts)
        <span class="docEmphStrong">for</span> post <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> posts:
            self.response.out.write(
                '&lt;hr&gt;&lt;strong&gt;%s&lt;/strong&gt;&lt;br&gt;%s
                     &lt;blockquote&gt;%s&lt;/blockquote&gt;' % (
                       post.title, post.timestamp, post.body
            ))

					  </pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">If you don’t want to add specific code to ask users to login like we’ve just done, you can force it at the <tt>app.yaml</tt> configuration level. Just add a <tt>login:</tt> <tt>required</tt>
 directive; any URL that accesses that handler will force the user to 
login before she can access your application or its content. Here’s an 
example of how to use that directive to block out all access to our main
 handler without a valid Google accounts login:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>- url: .*
  script: main.py
  <span class="docEmphasis">login: required</span></pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Another alternative is <tt>login:</tt> <tt>admin</tt>
 which requires a logged-in administrator of the application to access 
this handler, such as for critical user, app, or data access or 
manipulation. Users who are not administrators will get an error page 
which states that administrator access is required. You can read more 
about these directives at http://code.google.com/appengine/docs/python/config/appconfig.html#Requiring_Login_or_Administrator_Status.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EMICK">12.10.2. Federated Authentication</h4>
<p class="docText">If you’re 
uncomfortable with either creating your own authentication or do not 
wish to require that all of your users have a Google Account, you will 
probably want federated login with OpenID. With OpenID, you can allow 
users to sign in to your application by using accounts they created at a
 variety of providers, including (but not limited to) Yahoo!, Flickr, 
WordPress, Blogger, LiveJournal, AOL, MyOpenID, MySpace, and even 
Google.</p>
<p class="docText">If you’re using federated login, you’ll need to make a minor adjustment to your call that creates login links by adding a <tt>federated_identity</tt> parameter such as <tt>users.create_login_url(federated_identity=URL)</tt>, where <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>URL</tt></span>
 is any of the OpenID vendors (gmail.com [Google], yahoo.com, 
myspace.com, aol.com, etc). Future support for federated authentication 
will be integrated with the new Google Identity Toolkit (GIT).</p>
<p class="docText">For more on users, the GIT, and OpenID, go to the following links:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">http://code.google.com/appengine/docs/python/users/overview.html</p></li><li><p class="docList">http://code.google.com/appengine/articles/openid.html</p></li><li><p class="docList">http://openid.net</p></li><li><p class="docList">http://code.google.com/apis/identitytoolkit/</p></li></ul>
</div>
</body>
</html>
