<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>12.12. Lightning Round (with Python Code)</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">12.12. Lightning Round (with Python Code)</h3>
<p class="docText">Given all the features and 
scope of the entire App Engine platform, it’s not a surprise that you 
can write an entire book on the subject. But as our goal is to give you a
 high-level introduction and then let you take the wheel, we’ll end it 
here. Before we leave, though, the “lightning round” that follows is 
meant to give you some quick code samples that you can use right away 
without necessarily integrating those features into our blog 
application. Of course, these will be featured in the chapter exercises 
coming up.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EFDCK">12.12.1. Sending E-Mail</h4>
<p class="docText">In our Twitter/Django application from Chapter 11, you saw how to use Django’s e-mail service. Sending e-mail in App Engine is just as easy. All you need to do is import the <tt>mail.send_mail()</tt> function and use it. Its basic usage is very straightforward: <tt>mail.send_mail(</tt><span class="docEmphasis"><tt>FROM</tt></span><tt>,</tt> <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>TO</tt></span><tt>,</tt> <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>SUBJECT</tt></span><tt>,</tt> <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>BODY</tt></span><tt>)</tt> where:</p>
<p></p><table cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0" frame="void" rules="none"><colgroup align="left" span="2"><col width="60"></col><col width="500"></col></colgroup><thead></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis"><tt>FROM</tt></span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">is a string representing the e-mail address of the sender (more on this field later).</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis"><tt>TO</tt></span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">is either a string or an iterable of strings representing the recipient(s).</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis"><tt>SUBJECT</tt></span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">is the string that is set as part of the <tt>Subject</tt>: line.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis"><tt>BODY</tt></span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">is a string representing the plaintext content of the message.</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">There are other message fields that you can pass to <tt>send_mail()</tt>; you can find out more about them at http://code.google.com/appengine/docs/python/mail/emailmessagefields.html.</p>
<p class="docText">To continue discouraging the sending of unsolicited e-mail, the <tt>From:</tt> address is restricted. It <span class="docEmphasis">must</span> be one of the following:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">The e-mail address of a registered administrator (developer) of the application</p></li><li><p class="docList">The current user, if they are logged in</p></li><li><p class="docList">Any valid receiving e-mail address for the application (of the form <tt>xxx@APP_ID.appspotmail.com</tt>)</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">Following is a snippet of code that includes the import and one possible call to <tt>send_mail()</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> google.appengine.api <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> mail
. . .
mail.send_mail(
    user <span class="docEmphStrong">and</span> user.email() <span class="docEmphStrong">or</span> 'admin@APP_ID.appspotmail.com', # from
    'corepython@yahoo.com', # to
    'Erratum for Core Python 3rd edition!'  # subject
    "Hi, I found a typo recently. It's...",  # body
)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The mail API also features 
additional functions to send e-mail only to the administrator(s) of the 
application, to validate e-mail addresses, etc., plus an <tt>EmailMessage</tt>
 class. You can also have attachments in outbound e-mail, but the 
attachment file types are limited to only the most popular formats that 
are recognized as not insecure, these include .doc, .pdf, .rss, .css, 
.xls, .ppt, .mp3/.mp4/.m4a, .gif, .jpg/.jpeg, .png, .tif/.tiff, 
.htm/.html, .txt, etc. You can find the latest group of valid attachment
 types at http://code.google.com/appengine/docs/python/mail/overview.html#Attachments.</p>
<p class="docText">Finally, inbound or 
outbound messages have a size limitation (at the time of this writing) 
of 10MB. You can read the latest about the quotas and limitations of the
 e-mail service at:</p>
<blockquote><p></p><p class="docList">http://code.google.com/appengine/docs/quotas.html#Mail</p><p></p><p></p><p class="docList">http://code.google.com/appengine/docs/python/mail/overview.html#Quotas_and_Limits</p><p></p></blockquote>
<p class="docText">More general information about sending e-mail at:</p>
<blockquote><p></p><p class="docList">http://code.google.com/appengine/docs/python/mail/overview.html#Sending_Mail_in_Python</p><p></p><p></p><p class="docList">http://code.google.com/appengine/docs/python/mail/overview.html#Sending_Mail</p><p></p><p></p><p class="docList">http://code.google.com/appengine/docs/python/mail/sendingmail.html</p><p></p></blockquote>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ELLCK">12.12.2. Receiving E-Mail</h4>
<p class="docText">What’s sending without 
receiving? Yes, your application can handle incoming e-mail, as well. 
It’s slightly more complicated than sending e-mail but it’s not that 
much additional work.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EVLCK">Setup</h5>
<p class="docText">In addition to writing code to handle inbound e-mail, you need to add a couple of things to your <tt>app.yaml</tt> configuration file, with the most important being <span class="docEmphasis">enabling</span> the service. By default, the receipt of inbound e-mail is disabled. To turn it on, you’ll need to enable it in the <tt>inbound_services</tt>: section of the <tt>app.yaml</tt> (or add one if that section doesn’t exist).</p>
<p class="docText">Also, earlier we mentioned 
that one of the valid addresses from which you can send email is a valid
 receiving e-mail address for the application, meaning of the form <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>xxx@APP_ID</tt></span><tt>.appspotmail.com</tt>.
 You can have one handler for all possible e-mail addresses or different
 handlers for specific ones. This is done by creating one or more 
additional handlers in your <tt>app.yaml</tt> file. To figure out how to create the handlers, we need to tell you that all inbound e-mail will be <tt>POST</tt>ed to a URL of this form: <tt>/_ah/mail/EMAIL_ADDRESS</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Here are the relevant sections of the <tt>app.yaml</tt> that we need to add:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>inbound_services:
- mail

handlers:
. . .
- url: /_ah/mail/.+
  script: handle_incoming_email.py
  login: admin
. . .</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The first two lines enable incoming e-mail. The <tt>inbound_services</tt>: section is also the place to enable receiving XMPP messages (more on this in Section 12.13),
 Warming Requests, and other future services that you can read about in 
the official documents page for application configuration and the <tt>app.yaml</tt> file at http://code.google.com/appengine/docs/python/config/appconfig.html#Inbound_Services.</p>
<p class="docText">The second set of lines comprise an inbound e-mail handler that goes in the <tt>handlers:</tt> section. The regular expression <tt>/_ah/mail/.+</tt> matches all e-mail addresses; however, there’s nothing wrong with creating separate handlers for different e-mail addresses:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>- url: /_ah/mail/sales@.+
  script: handle_sales_email.py
  login: admin
- url: /_ah/mail/support@.+
  script: handle_support_email.py
  login: admin
- url: /_ah/mail/.+
  script: handle_other_email.py
  login: admin</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">You can block malicious applications and users from accessing your e-mail handler by using the <tt>login:</tt> <tt>admin</tt> directive. When App Engine receives an e-mail message, it generates requests and <tt>POST</tt>s them to your application, resulting in a call to your handler as an “admin.”</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ENPCK">Handling Inbound E-Mail</h5>
<p class="docText">You can handle e-mail by using 
the default method, which involves writing your handler in much the same
 way you create a standard Web handler and have an instance of <tt>mail.InboundEmailMessage</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> google.appengine.api <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> mail
. . .
<span class="docEmphStrong">class</span> EmailHandler(webapp.RequestHandler):
    <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> post(self):
        . . .
        message = mail.InboundEmailMessage(self.request.body)
        . . .</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Of course, you would still have to install this handler when creating your <tt>WSGIApplication</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>application = webapp.WSGIApplication([
    . . .
    ('/_ah/email/+.', EmailHandler),
    . . .
], debug=True)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">An alternative is to use the predefined helper class, <tt>InboundMailHandler</tt>, found in <tt>google.appengine.ext.webapp.mail_handlers</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> google.appengine.ext.webapp <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> mail_handlers
. . .
<span class="docEmphStrong">class</span> EmailHandler(mail_handlers.InboundMailHandler):
    <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> receive(self, msg):
        . . .</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Instead
 of having to extract the e-mail message from the request, this is 
handled automatically, so all you need to do is implement a <tt>receive()</tt> method which is called with the message. You also get a shortcut <tt>mapping()</tt> class method that autogenerates the 2-tuple which directs mail to your handler. You would use it like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>application = webapp.WSGIApplication([
    . . .
    EmailHandler.mapping(),
    . . .
], debug=True)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Once you have the message, 
you’re welcome to check out the main body of the e-mail, whether it is 
in plain text or HTML (or both), and you can also access any attachments
 or other message fields, such as the sender, subject, etc. You can find
 more general information about receiving e-mail found at:</p>
<blockquote><p></p><p class="docList">http://code.google.com/appengine/docs/python/mail/overview.html#Receiving_Mail_in_Python</p><p></p><p></p><p class="docList">http://code.google.com/appengine/docs/python/mail/overview.html#Receiving_Mail</p><p></p><p></p><p class="docList">http://code.google.com/appengine/docs/python/mail/receivingmail.html</p><p></p></blockquote>
</div>
</body>
</html>
