<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>12.13. Sending Instant Messages by Using XMPP</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">12.13. Sending Instant Messages by Using XMPP</h3>
<p class="docText">Similar to sending e-mail, 
your application can also send instant messages (IMs) with App Engine’s 
XMPP API. XMPP stands for eXtensible Messaging and Presence Protocol, 
but it was originally called the <span class="docEmphasis">Jabber protocol</span>,
 named after its open-source community and created in the late 1990s. 
With App Engine’s XMPP API, in addition to sending, you can also receive
 an IM, check to see if a user is available to chat, or you can send a 
user a chat invitation. Your application cannot communicate with a user 
unless she has received and accepted an invitation from it.</p>
<p class="docText">Below is a snippet of 
pseudocode that sends a chat invitation to a user, assuming that you’ve 
correctly filled in a valid IM username (or Jabber ID) for <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>USER_JID</tt></span>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> google.appengine.api <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> xmpp
. . .
    xmpp.send_invite(<span class="docEmphasis">USER_JID</span>)
    self.response.out.write('invite sent')
. . .</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Here’s another piece of sample code that sends an IM (the <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>MESSAGE</tt></span> string) to a user once he has accepted your invitation. Again, replace <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>USER_JID</tt></span> with the user’s Jabber ID:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>. . .
<span class="docEmphStrong">if</span> xmpp.get_presence(<span class="docEmphasis">USER_JID</span>):
    xmpp.send_message(<span class="docEmphasis">USER_JID</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">MESSAGE</span>)
    self.response.out.write('IM sent')
. . .</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The third XMPP function is <tt>get_presence()</tt>, function which returns <tt>True</tt> if the user is online and available, and <tt>False</tt>
 if the user is away, not online, or she has not accepted your 
application’s invitation yet. You can read more about these three 
functions as well as the XMPP API at:</p>
<blockquote><p></p><p class="docList">http://code.google.com/appengine/docs/python/xmpp/overview.html</p><p></p><p></p><p class="docList">http://code.google.com/appengine/docs/python/xmpp/functions.html</p><p></p></blockquote>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EKICK">12.13.1. Receiving Instant Messages</h4>
<p class="docText">Receiving IMs is set up just like e-mail, that is, in the <tt>inbound_services:</tt> section of your <tt>app.yaml</tt> file:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>inbound_services:
- xmpp_message</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Also like receiving e-mail, messages that come to the system are <tt>POST</tt>ed by App Engine to your application. The URL path used is <tt>/_ah/xmpp/message/chat</tt>. Here is an example of how to receive chat messages in your application:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong">class</span> XMPPHandler(webapp.RequestHandler):
    <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> post(self):
        . . .
        msg_obj = xmpp.Message(self.request.POST)
        msg_obj.reply("Thanks for your msg: '%s'" % msg_obj.body)
        . . .</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Of course, we have to register our handler:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>application = webapp.WSGIApplication([
    . . .
    ('/_ah/xmpp/message/chat/', XMPPHandler),
    . . .
], debug=True)</pre></div><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
