<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>12.15. Task Queues (Unscheduled Tasks)</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">12.15. Task Queues (Unscheduled Tasks)</h3>
<p class="docText">Tasks
 in App Engine are used for additional work which might need to be done 
as part of your application but that is not required in generating the 
response that is sent back to the user. This ancillary work can include 
actions such as logging, creating or updating datastore entities, 
sending notifications, etc.</p>
<p class="docText">App Engine supports two different types of tasks. The first are called <span class="docEmphasis">Push Queues</span>,
 which are jobs that your application creates to be executed as quickly 
and concurrently as possible. They do not allow for external influence. 
The second type are <span class="docEmphasis">Pull Queues</span>,
 which are a bit more flexible. They’re created by your App Engine 
application, as well; however, they can be consumed or “leased” by your 
App Engine or an external application via a representational state 
transfer application programmers interface (REST API). We’ll spend most 
of the upcoming section discussing Push Queues, and then conclude with a
 brief word on Pull Queues.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ERJCK">12.15.1. Creating Tasks</h4>
<p class="docText">Tasks can be started by the 
handler of a user-facing request, or they can be created by another 
task. An example of the latter is when all the work managed by the first
 task was not able to be completed in a timely fashion (think of a 
30-second or 10-minute deadline), so the work the first task was created
 to do has not been completed yet.</p>
<p class="docText">Tasks are added to task queues. Queues are named and can have different execution rates, <span class="docEmphasis">replenishment</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">burstiness</span>
 rates, and retry parameters. Users get one default queue but must 
specify others if more are desired (more on this later). Adding a task 
to the default queue is straightforward and requires only one simple 
call once you’ve imported the taskqueue API:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> google.appengine.api <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> taskqueue
taskqueue.add()</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">All queue requests will be 
POSTed to URL, and thus a handler. If a custom URL is not created by the
 user, requests will go to a default URL based on the name of the queue:
 <tt>/_ah/queue/QUEUE_NAME</tt>. So for the default queue, that would be <tt>/_ah/queue/default</tt>. This means that you should provide a handler setting for it when creating your <tt>WSGIApplication</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> main():
    run_wsgi_app(webapp.WSGIApplication([
        . . .
        ('/_ah/queue/default', DoSomething),
        . . .
]))</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Of course, you need the code for the actual task, too; for example, the <tt>DoSomething</tt> handler we just defined:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong">class</span> DoSomething(webapp.RequestHandler):
    <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> post(self):
        # do the task here
        . . .
        logging.info('completed task')</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">We added a quick log entry at
 the end to confirm the task had actually executed. Obviously, you don’t
 have to log anything if you don’t want to, but it can also be a great 
way to confirm that the task did complete. In fact, you can even use the
 log entry as a placeholder if you haven’t completed the code to perform
 the actual task’s work. (Of course, if you <span class="docEmphasis">do</span> choose to log something, ensure that you have an <tt>import</tt> <tt>logging</tt> statement somewhere up above.)</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EKMCK">Configuring <tt>app.yaml</tt></h5>
<p class="docText">With regard to configuration, you <span class="docEmphasis">could</span> leave your <tt>app.yaml</tt> alone with a default handler for all URLs:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>handlers:
- url: .*
  script: main.py</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This setting will direct normal application URLs to <tt>main.py</tt> but the pattern also matches <tt>/_ah/queue/default</tt>,
 meaning task queue requests will be sent there, as well, which might be
 what you want. However, the problem with this setup is that anyone can 
go to your <tt>/_ah/queue/default</tt> URL externally, even if they were not created as a task.</p>
<p class="docText">The best practice is to lock down this URL to task-only requests by adding a <tt>login:</tt> <tt>admin</tt>
 directive as we did earlier when configuring your application to 
receive e-mail. You will have to split off this special URL from all the
 others, like this modified <tt>app.yaml</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>handlers:
- url: /_ah/queue/default
  script: main.py
  login: admin

- url: .*
  script: main.py</pre></div><br/>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E3NCK">Additional Task Creation and Configuration Options</h5>
<p class="docText">Earlier we showed you the simplest way of creating a task by using <tt>taskqueue.add()</tt>.
 Of course, there are plenty more options to let you create a task 
destined for a different (not default) queue, time delay till execution 
desired, the ability to pass in parameters to the task, etc. The list 
that follows shows a few of these options, of which a user can choose 
one or more:</p>
<div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>taskqueue.add(url='/task')</tt></p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>taskqueue.add(countdown=300)</tt></p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>taskqueue.add(url='/send_email',</tt> <tt>params={'groupID':</tt> <tt>1})</tt></p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>taskqueue.add(url='/send_email?groupID=1', method='GET')</tt></p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList"><tt>taskqueue.add(queue_name='send-newsletter')</tt></p></div></li></ol></div>
<p class="docText">In the first call, a specific 
URL is passed in. This is for times when you prefer to use a custom URL,
 as opposed to the default one. In the second case, a countdown 
parameter is given to delay execution of the task until at least a 
certain number of seconds have passed. The third call shows an example 
of both a custom URL as well as passing in task handler parameters. The 
fourth example is the same as the third, except that the user has asked 
for a <tt>GET</tt> request rather than the default <tt>POST</tt>. The final example we’re going to look at is when you’ve defined a custom task queue instead of using the default.</p>
<p class="docText">These are just a few of the parameters that <tt>taskqueue.add()</tt> supports. You can read about the rest at http://code.google.com/appengine/docs/python/taskqueue/functions.html.</p>
<p class="docText">So far, all of our previous 
examples have been using the default queue. You can create other queues,
 too; as of this writing, you can have up to ten additional queues for 
free applications and a hundred for those with billing enabled (subject 
to change, however). To do so, you’ll configure them in a file named <tt>queue.yaml</tt> in a format that looks like the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>queue:
- name: default
  rate: 1/s
  bucket_size: 10

- name: send-newsletter
  rate: 1/d</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The default is normally created on its own, but if you want to choose different parameters for it, you can specify those in <tt>queue.yaml</tt>, as we just did, overriding the default <tt>rate</tt> of 5/s and <tt>bucket_size</tt> of 5. (The <tt>rate</tt> is how fast tasks are processed, and the <tt>bucket_size</tt>
 controls how quickly a queue can process succeeding tasks.) The 
send-newsletter queue is for a once-a-day, opt-in e-mail newsletter. You
 can read more about all the configuration parameters for queues at http://code.google.com/appengine/docs/python/config/queue.html.</p>
<p class="docText">The final word on tasks is 
that there is another kind of queue that gives developers more 
flexibility in terms of how and when tasks are created as well as 
consumed and completed. The types of task queues discussed in this 
section are Push Queues, which means that your application generates 
tasks on demand, pushing the work to queues as necessary.</p>
<p class="docText">We mentioned that App 
Engine has an alternative task interface by which jobs can be created in
 Pull Queues. These queues can be accessed directly by App Engine 
(creating or consuming work) or accessed from external applications via a
 REST interface. This means that work can originate from an App Engine 
application and be executed or processed elsewhere, if desired. Because 
of this, there is a more flexible execution timeline. More information 
on pull queues is available in the documentation at http://code.google.com/appengine/docs/python/taskqueue/overviewpull.html.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EZSCK">Sending E-Mail as a Task</h5>
<p class="docText">In an earlier example, we 
presented an example of how to send e-mail from your application. If 
you’re only sending a single message, perhaps to the administrator of 
your application whenever someone makes a blog post entry, it’s not that
 big of a deal to also send the e-mail as part of the handling of that 
request. However, if you need to send e-mail to thousands of customers, 
it’s probably less of a good idea.</p>
<p class="docText">Instead, the work of sending 
all this e-mail is a great candidate for a task. Rather than sending the
 e-mail, the handler will create the task, pass in the parameters (such 
as all the e-mail addresses or a group ID of the group of users to 
receive the message), and then return the response back to the user 
while the task sends the e-mail on its own time (not that of the users).</p>
<p class="docText">Suppose that we have a Web 
template that lets a user configure an e-mail message and recipient 
group. When users submit the form to the <tt>/submit</tt> URL, it’s handled by the <tt>FormHandler</tt> class, for which part of it might look like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>class FormHandler(webapp.RequestHandler):
    def post(self): # should run at most 1/s
        groupID = self.request.get('group')
        taskqueue.add(params={'groupID': groupID})
        . . .</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>FormHandler.</tt><tt>post()</tt> method makes a call to <tt>taskqueue.add()</tt>,
 which adds a task on the default queue, passing in the ID of the group 
that will be receiving the e-mail newsletter. When the task is executed 
by App Engine, it issues a <tt>POST</tt> to <tt>/_ah/queue/default</tt> for which we need to define another handler class for the task.</p>
<p class="docText">Because we’re using the default queue here, we’ll take the <tt>app.yaml</tt> as defined in the previous subsection with the additional security lock of <tt>login:</tt> <tt>admin</tt>. Now our main handler (<tt>main.py</tt>),
 can specify the handlers for the form (in the previous example) as well
 as for the upcoming task handler we’re going to create:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> main():
    run_wsgi_app(webapp.WSGIApplication([
        . . .
        ('/submit', FormHandler),
        ('/_ah/queue/default', SendNewsletter),
        . . .
]))</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Now let’s define the task handler, <tt>SendNewsletter</tt>,
 which will receive an inbound request along with the group ID, as sent 
from form handler. We’ll then forward it to a generalized function to 
carry out the distribution of the newsletter e-mail messages. Here’s one
 way you can create the <tt>SendNewsletter</tt> class:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong">class</span> SendNewsletter(webapp.RequestHandler):
    <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> post(self): # should run at most 1/s
        groupID = self.request.get('group')
        send_group_email(groupID)
        . . .</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This, of course, presumes that you’ve created a nice <tt>send_group_email()</tt>
 function to handle the task of taking a group ID, pulling in all the 
member e-mail addresses (possibly extracting them from the datastore), 
constructing the message body (from the datastore, auto-generated, 
pulled from another server, etc.), and of course, making the actual call
 to <tt>mail. send_mail()</tt>. Here’s what some of that code might look like:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> datetime <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> date
<span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> google.appengine.api <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> mail
. . .

<span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> send_group_email(groupID):
    group_emails = . . . # get addresses for groupID members
    msg_body = . . . # get custom msg for groupID members
    mail.send_mail('noreply@APP_ID.appspotmail.com', group_emails,
        '%s Newsletter' % date.today().strftime("%B %Y"), msg_body)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Why did we create a separate <tt>send_group_email()</tt>
 function? Couldn’t we have just rolled these lines of code into our 
handler to avoid an additional function call? This is a valid argument; 
however, we feel that code reuse is an even nobler goal. A separate 
function gives you the option to use the same function elsewhere, 
perhaps a command-line tool, a special administrator screen/function, or
 even another application. If you roll this code into our handler here, 
you’d have to cut and paste it out or eventually split it up into two 
functions anyway, so we might as well do it now.</p>
<p class="docText">It’s clear that it’s not too 
difficult to create tasks to perform non-user-facing application work. 
Tasks are very popular with App Engine users; we invite you to give them
 a try. But before you do, we also recommend that you consider a 
convenience package if your needs are simpler than those of others: the <tt>deferred</tt> library.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EFYCK">The <tt>deferred</tt> Package</h5>
<p class="docText">As you read in the previous 
subsection, App Engine’s tasks queues are a great way to delegate 
additional work. This work is typically not user-facing, and typically, 
developers don’t want such activities to impact the time it takes to 
respond back to their users. However, although tasks offer the App 
Engine developer flexibility in terms of customizing the creation and 
execution of tasks, it still seems like a bit of work required to just 
run some simple tasks. This is where <tt>deferred</tt> comes in.</p>
<p class="docText">The <tt>deferred</tt> package 
is a convenience tool that hides much of the effort in setting up and 
executing tasks: you have to adjust your form handler to create tasks, 
you have to extract and provide the appropriate task parameters and 
execution guidelines, you have to create and configure separate task 
handlers, etc. Why can’t I just <span class="docEmphasis">delegate that to a task</span>? That’s pretty much <span class="docEmphasis">exactly</span> what <tt>deferred</tt> offers.</p>
<p class="docText">You’re only presented with a single function, <tt>deferred.defer()</tt>, that you’ll use to create a deferred task. It can be as simple as a logging call, such as the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> google.appengine.ext <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> deferred
deferred.defer(logging.info, "Called a deferred task")</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Other than configuring your application to use the <tt>deferred</tt>
 library, there’s nothing else for you to do. Deferred tasks run (by 
default) on the default queue, and as you read earlier, you don’t need 
to do anything special
 to set that up, unless you want to change the default characteristics 
of the default queue. You also don’t need to specify a handler in your 
application to handle the deferred task—the <tt>deferred</tt> library implements all of this. As you can see from the preceding short example, you only need to pass <tt>deferred.defer()</tt> a Python callable and any arguments and/or keyword arguments.</p>
<p class="docText">In addition, you can also pass
 in task arguments, too (such as the ones described in the last 
section), but you need to disguise them somewhat to prevent them from 
being mixed up with the arguments to your <tt>deferred</tt>
 callable. To do so, you need to prepend them with a single underscore, 
which precludes mistaking them for the parameters for your executable. 
For example, to make the same call as above, but delayed by (at least) 5
 seconds, you would use this, instead:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>deferred.defer(logging.info,
    "Called a delayed deferred task", _countdown=5)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">We can easily convert out e-mail distribution example to this equivalent code:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong">class</span> SendNewsletter(webapp.RequestHandler):
    <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> post(self):
        groupID = self.request.get('group')
        deferred.defer(send_group_email, groupID)
        . . .</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Deferred tasks can call functions, methods, and generally any object that is callable or that have <tt>__call__</tt> defined. From the documentation in the code, these are the callables that can be used as deferred tasks:</p>
<div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Functions defined in the top level of a module</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Classes defined in the top level of a module</p><div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Instances of those classes that implement <tt>__call__</tt></p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Instance methods of objects of those classes</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Class methods of those classes</p></div></li></ol></div></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Built-in functions</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Built-in methods</p></div></li></ol></div>
<p class="docText">However, the following are not permitted (also documented in the code):</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">Nested functions or closures</p></li><li><p class="docList">Nested classes or objects of them</p></li><li><p class="docList">Lambda functions</p></li><li><p class="docList">Static methods</p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">Furthermore,
 all the parameters of the callable used must be “pickleable,” meaning 
just your basic Python objects, such as constants, numbers, strings, 
sequences, and hashing types. For a full list, you can consult the 
official Python documentation at http://docs.python.org/release/2.5.4/lib/node317.html (Python 2.5) or http://docs.python.org/library/pickle.html#what-can-be-pickled-and-unpickled (latest Python version).</p>
<p class="docText">The only other restriction with our example is that <tt>send_group_email()</tt>
 needs to be in a different module and an import added to our main 
handler. The reason for this is because at the time you “defer” your 
task and it’s “serialized,” it records that your code belongs to the <tt>__main__</tt> module, but when the <tt>deferred</tt> package executes your callable after receiving it from the <tt>POST</tt> request that is created by the task, the <tt>deferred</tt> module is what is executing (hence it’s [also] <tt>__main__</tt>, which means it won’t be able to find your code). You’ll receive an error that looks like the following if your <tt>deferred</tt> function were called <tt>foo()</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "/usr/local/google_appengine/google/appengine/ext/deferred/
deferred.py", line 258, in post
    run(self.request.body)
  File "/usr/local/google_appengine/google/appengine/ext/deferred/
deferred.py", line 122, in run
    raise PermanentTaskFailure(e)
PermanentTaskFailure: 'module' object has no attribute 'foo'</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">However, by placing it outside of <tt>main.py</tt>
 (or whatever Python module contains your main handler), you will avoid 
this confusion and have your code be imported and execute properly. If 
you would like a quick refresher on <tt>__main__</tt>, read the chapter on modules in <span class="docEmphasis">Core Python</span>. To find more about <tt>deferred</tt>, check out the original article at http://code.google.com/appengine/articles/deferred.html.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
