<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>12.16. Profiling with Appstats</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">12.16. Profiling with Appstats</h3>
<p class="docText">Being able to profile how well your application performs is important in App Engine. To help you do that, you can use <span class="docEmphasis">Appstats</span>,
 which is a tool in the SDK with which users can optimize the 
performance of their applications. Beyond just a normal “code profiler,”
 Appstats traces the various API calls made by your application, 
measures the time it takes to complete roundtrips to back-end services 
via remote procedure calls (RPCs), and provides a web-based interface 
for you to observe your application’s behavior.</p>
<p class="docText">Configuring Appstats to record events is straightforward. You simply create an <tt>appengine_config.py</tt> file in the root directory of your application (or append to it if it already exists) by using the following function:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> webapp_add_wsgi_middleware(app):
    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> google.appengine.ext.appstats <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> recording
    app = recording.appstats_wsgi_middleware(app)
    <span class="docEmphStrong">return</span> app</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">There are additional features
 that you can install here, which you can read about in the 
documentation. Once you’ve installed this code, Appstats will begin to 
record events from your application’s activity. The recorder is fairly 
lightweight, so you should not experience any appreciable degradation in
 performance.</p>
<p class="docText">The final step is to
 set up the administrative interface through which you can access the 
metrics that Appstats records. You can you do this in one of three ways:</p>
<div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Add a standard handler in <tt>app.yaml</tt></p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Add a custom Admin Console page</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Enable the interface as a built-in</p></div></li></ol></div>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EFNCK">12.16.1. Adding a Standard Handler in <tt>app.yaml</tt></h4>
<p class="docText">To add a standard handler in <tt>app.yaml</tt> (in the <tt>handlers:</tt> section naturally), use the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>- url: /stats.*
  script: $PYTHON_LIB/google/appengine/ext/appstats/ui.py</pre></div><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E5NCK">12.16.2. Adding a Custom Admin Console page</h4>
<p class="docText">If you want to add the Appstats UI as a custom Admin Console page, you can do so in the <tt>admin_console:</tt> section of <tt>app.yaml</tt>, as shown here:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>admin_console:
 pages:
 - name: Appstats UI
   url: /stats</pre></div><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EVOCK">12.16.3. Enabling the Interface as a Built-In</h4>
<p class="docText">You can enable the Appstats UI as a built-in by turning it on in the <tt>builtins:</tt> section of <tt>app.yaml</tt>, as demonstrated here:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>builtins:
- appstats: on</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Enabling it this way configures the UI to default to the <tt>/_ah/stats</tt> path.</p>
<p class="docText">You can see all the magic that Appstats provides for you at the following links:</p>
<blockquote><p></p><p class="docList">http://code.google.com/appengine/docs/python/tools/appstats.html</p><p></p><p></p><p class="docList">http://googleappengine.blogspot.com/2010/03/easy-performance-profiling-with.html</p><p></p><p></p><p class="docList">http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bvp7CuBWVgA</p><p></p></blockquote>
</div>
</body>
</html>
