<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>12.17. The URLfetch Service</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">12.17. The URLfetch Service</h3>
<p class="docText">One restriction that 
you need to take into consideration when working with App Engine is that
 you cannot create network sockets. This can practically render most 
applications useless; however, the SDK does provide for higher-level 
functionality as a proxy. One of the main use cases of being able to 
create and use sockets is to communicate with other applications on the 
Internet. To this end, App Engine provides a <span class="docEmphasis">URLfetch</span> service whereby your application can make HTTP requests (<tt>GET</tt>, <tt>POST</tt>, <tt>HEAD</tt>, <tt>PUT</tt>, <tt>DELETE</tt>) to other servers online. Here’s a short example of how to use it:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> google.appengine.api <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> urlfetch
. . .
    res = urlfetch.fetch('http://google.com')
    <span class="docEmphStrong">if</span> res.status_code == 200:
        self.response.out.write(
            'First 100 bytes of google.com:&lt;p&gt;%s&lt;/p&gt;' %
res.content[:100])
. . .</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In addition to App Engine’s <tt>urlfetch</tt> module, you can also use the standard library <tt>urllib</tt>, <tt>urllib2</tt>, and <tt>httplib</tt>
 modules, modified to communicate through App Engine’s URL fetch service
 (which naturally runs on Google’s scalable infrastructure).</p>
<p class="docText">There are some caveats about 
which you should be aware, however, such as communicating to servers via
 HTTPS as well as request headers that cannot be modified or set. You 
can read more about these restrictions as well as find an overview of how to use the URLfetch service in the documentation at http://code.google.com/appengine/docs/python/urlfetch/overview.html.</p>
<p class="docText">Finally, because some 
payloads have a high latency, an asynchronous URLfetch service is also 
available. You also have the option of polling to see if the request has
 completed or provide a callback. You can read more about asynchronous 
URLfetch at http://code.google.com/appengine/docs/python/urlfetch/asynchronousrequests.html.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
