<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>12.18. Lightning Round (without Python Code)</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">12.18. Lightning Round (without Python Code)</h3>
<p class="docText">This is another “lightning 
round” section in which we will introduce features that are configured. 
This section does not feature source code.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EZLCK">12.18.1. Cron Service (Scheduled Tasks/Jobs)</h4>
<p class="docText">A <span class="docEmphasis">cronjob</span>
 is a task that is executed at scheduled times and originated on POSIX 
computers. App Engine provides a cron-type service for its users. There 
is actually no Python code involved, except for the handler that is 
executed at the appropriate time.</p>
<p class="docText">To use the cron service, you need to create a <tt>cron.yaml</tt> file that contains contents such as the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>cron:
- url: /task/roll_logs
  schedule: every day
- url: /task/weekly_report
  schedule: every friday 17:00</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">You can also specify <tt>description:</tt> and <tt>timezone:</tt>
 fields, as appropriate. The schedule format is fairly flexible. You can
 read more about cron jobs in App Engine from the documentation at http://code.google.com/appengine/docs/python/config/cron.html.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E4MCK">12.18.2. Warming Requests</h4>
<p class="docText">The goal of warming requests
 is to reduce the latency that users of your application experience when
 new instances need to be “spun up” to serve yet more users. Let’s 
assume that you’re doing a good job of serving your application from a single instance. But if it is suddenly <span class="docEmphasis">Slashdotted</span>
 or Tweeted, it can experience a sudden rush of traffic. When the 
running instance can no longer support this load, new instances must be 
brought online to serve all the requests.</p>
<p class="docText">Without the warming 
feature, the first user to access your application on the new instance 
would have to wait longer for a response than it would if he accessed 
the already-running instance. The additional delay is caused by the need
 to wait for the new instance to be loaded before it can service the 
user’s request. Now if we could just “warm up” the new instance by 
preloading your application <span class="docEmphasis">before</span> it gets any traffic, then users wouldn’t have to suffer this delay. That’s exactly what warming requests do.</p>
<p class="docText">Similar to other App Engine features, warming requests are not enabled by default. To turn them on, add a line in the <tt>inbound_services:</tt> section of your <tt>app.yaml</tt> file:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>inbound_services:
- warmup</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Furthermore, when a new instance comes online, App Engine will issue a <tt>GET</tt> request to <tt>/_ah/warmup</tt>.
 If you create a handler for this, you can preload any data in your 
application, as well. Just keep in mind that if your application isn’t 
getting any traffic and all, and there are no instances of it running, 
the very first request will still trigger a loading request for that 
unfortunate user (even if warming is enabled).</p>
<p class="docText">If you think about it, the 
reason is quite obvious: a warming request won’t do any good, and in 
fact, would actually add to the latency because the loading request must
 already happen. You don’t want to pay the penalty of issuing a warming 
request in addition to the loading request before your application can 
respond to this first user. Warming requests are really only useful if 
there are already servers handling traffic to your application so that 
App Engine can warm up new instances.</p>
<p class="docText">This feature is a configuration which also doesn’t require any Python code. You can read more about warming requests at:</p>
<blockquote><p></p><p class="docList">http://code.google.com/appengine/docs/adminconsole/instances.html#Warming_Requests</p><p></p><p></p><p class="docList">http://code.google.com/appengine/docs/python/config/appconfig.html#Inbound_Services</p><p></p></blockquote>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EKPCK">12.18.3. Denial-of-Service Protection</h4>
<p class="docText">App
 Engine offers a simplistic form of protection against systematic 
Denial-of-Service (DoS) abuse against your application. It requires you 
to create a <tt>dos.yaml</tt> file with a <tt>blacklist</tt>: section, as in this short example:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>blacklist:
- subnet: 89.212.115.11
  description: block DoS offender
- subnet: 72.14.194.1/15
  description: block offending subnet</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">You can blacklist individual IP addresses or subnets for both IPv4 and IPv6. Once you upload the <tt>dos.yaml</tt>
 file, requests coming from the specified addresses and subnets will be 
filtered from reaching your application code. You will not be charged 
for any resources incurred from blocking computers sending traffic from 
these blacklisted addresses and networks.</p>
<p class="docText">The official documentation for the DoS protect can be found at http://code.google.com/appengine/docs/python/config/dos.html.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
