<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>12.19. Vendor Lock-In</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">12.19. Vendor Lock-In</h3>
<p class="docText">The last discussion we’ll have before we let you take flight to the clouds is about <span class="docEmphasis">vendor lock-in</span>. Lock-in generally refers to systems that inherently make it <span class="docEmphasis">very difficult or impossible to migrate</span>
 data and/or logic to other similar or competitive systems. Throughout 
its short lifetime, App Engine has been consistently dogged by the 
reputation that it “forces users” to use Google’s API to access App 
Engine with no easy way to port applications away from the platform.</p>
<p class="docText">While Google does strongly 
recommend you use their APIs to take full advantage of the system, users
 must understand that there is a tradeoff. It seems to be fair that in 
exchange for being able to take advantage of Google’s scalable 
infrastructure (whose management is solely the company’s), that you 
should be using their APIs to write your code. Again, you can’t get 
something for nothing, right? And building such scalability is one of 
the most difficult and expensive things to do. However, Google does try 
to fight lock-in as much as it can while still allowing users to take 
advantage of App Engine.</p>
<p class="docText">For
 example, while App Engine does come with the webapp (or webapp2) 
framework, you’re free to use others that are open source and compatible
 with App Engine. Some of these include Django, web2py, Tipfy, Flask, or
 Bottle. With regard to the Datastore API, you can completely bypass it 
if you use the Django-non-rel system along with djangoappengine. These 
libraries allow you to run pure Django apps directly on top of App 
Engine, so you’re free to move your apps between App Engine and any 
traditional hosting that supports Django. Furthermore, this isn’t 
limited to Python as on the Java side; the App Engine team has tried 
hard to make its APIs as compliant with the Java Specification Request 
(JSR) standards as possible. If you know how to write a Java servlet, 
your knowledge is easily transferred to App Engine.</p>
<p class="docText">Finally, there are two 
open-source back-end systems that claim to be compatible with the App 
Engine client: AppScale and TyphoonAE. The latter is maintained as a 
more traditional open-source project, whereas the former is actively 
developed at the University of California, Santa Barbara. You can find 
out more about both projects at their respective home pages at http://appscale.cs.ucsb.edu and http://code.google.com/p/typhoonae.
 If you want full control of your application and don’t want to run it 
within a Google datacenter, you can host your own platform with either 
of these systems.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
