<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>12.21. Conclusion</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">12.21. Conclusion</h3>
<p class="docText">As we’ve seen from all the rich material in this chapter and Chapter 11,
 Django and Google App Engine are two of the most powerful and flexible 
Web frameworks in the Python community today. Add in all the others 
(TurboGears, Pyramid, web2py, web.py, etc.), which are quite formidable 
themselves, and you’ve got a great ecosphere of frameworks and an ample 
number of choices for anyone writing Web applications in Python. Even 
more important, all of the Python Web frameworks have a dedicated set of
 developers and devoted followers.</p>
<p class="docText">Programmers who are 
jacks-of-all-trades might even switch between frameworks from 
time-to-time, depending on whether they’re the right tool for the job. 
It’s good that the community has rallied around some of these larger, 
more well-known frameworks, because although the quote at the beginning 
of the chapter is a bit tongue-in-cheek, there is a grain of truth 
behind it, and the world would be much worse off if <span class="docEmphasis">everyone</span> had to write their own Web framework.</p>
<p class="docText">One final note: none of the
 examples in this chapter are available in Python 3 because neither 
framework supports it yet. Rest assured that when that time arrives, 
we’ll provide that source for you online as well as in future editions 
of this book.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
