<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>12.22. Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">12.22. Exercises</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E2PCK">Google App Engine</h4>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>12-1.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Background.</span> What does Python have to do with Google App Engine?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>12-2.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Background.</span> What makes Google App Engine different from other development environments?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>12-3.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Configuration.</span> What are some differences between Django and App Engine configuration files?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>12-4.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Configuration.</span> Name the places where Django applications perform URL-to-handler mapping. Do the same for App Engine applications.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>12-5.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Configuration.</span> How do you get Django applications to run (mostly) unmodified on Google App Engine?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>12-6.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Configuration.</span> For this exercise, go to http://code.google.com/appengine, and then download and install the latest Google App Engine SDK for your platform.</p>
<div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Use
 the Launcher application if on a Windows-based PC or Mac and create an 
application called “helloworld.” On other platforms, create the 
following pair of files, with the following content:</p><div class="docText"><pre>i. The first file is: app.yaml
application: helloworld
version: 1
runtime: python
api_version: 1

handlers:
  - url: .*
    script: main.py
ii. The second file is: main.py

<span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> google.appengine.ext <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> webapp
<span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> google.appengine.ext.webapp.util <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> run_wsgi_app
<span class="docEmphStrong">class</span> MainHandler(webapp.RequestHandler):
    <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> get(self):
        self.response.out.write('Hello world!')

application = webapp.WSGIApplication([
    ('/', MainHandler),
], debug=True)

<span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> main():
    run_wsgi_app(application)

<span class="docEmphStrong">if</span> __name__ == '__main__':
    main()</pre></div></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Start your application by using the Launcher or executing ‘<tt>dev_appserver.py</tt> <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>DIR</tt></span>’, where <span class="docEmphasis"><tt>DIR</tt></span> is the directory in which both <tt>app.yaml</tt> and <tt>main.py</tt>
 are located, and then visit http://localhost:8080 (or the appropriate 
port number) to confirm your code works and “Hello world!” does show up 
on your browser. Change the output to something other than “Hello 
world!”.</p></div></li></ol></div></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>12-7.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Tutorial.</span> Complete the entire <span class="docEmphasis">Getting Started</span> tutorial found at http://code.google.com/appengine/docs/python/gettingstarted.
 Warning: do not simply copy the code you find there. I expect to see 
you modify the application to do something slightly different than 
what’s offered, and/or add new functionality that isn’t present.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>12-8.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Communication.</span>
 E-mail is a critical application feature. In an earlier exercise, you 
added e-mail distribution when a new blog entry is made. Do the same 
with your App Engine blog application.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>12-9.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Images.</span> Allow users to submit one photo or picture per blog entry and create a suitably tasteful display of blog posts.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>12-10.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Cursors and Pagination.</span>
 Like the Django blog application, showing the ten most recent posts is 
good, but letting users paginate through older posts is even better. Use
 cursors and add pagination to your application.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>12-11.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Communication.</span>
 Allow users to communicate with your application by using IMs. Create a
 menu of commands to post blog entries, retrieve the most recent entries
 and any other feature that you think would be “cool.”</p></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E4WCK">Development with Django or App Engine</h4>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>12-12.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">User Cloud Data Management System.</span>
 Build a weather monitoring system. Allow multiple users in your system,
 using whichever form of authentication you prefer. Every user should 
have a set of locations (postal or ZIP code, airport code, [city, 
state], [city, country], etc.). The user should be presented a grid of 
all the locations they’re interested in, along with the current forecast
 and an extended 3–5 day forecast. There are various online weather APIs
 you can use.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>12-13.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Financial Management System.</span>
 Create a stock/equity portfolio management system. This includes normal
 stocks (on any exchange), mutual funds, exchange-traded funds (ETFs), 
American depositary receipts (ADRs), stock exchange indices, or anything
 that has a ticker symbol by which you can perform lookups. If you do 
not live in the United States, adopt your solution to the trading 
vehicles used in your country.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>12-14.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Sports Statistics Application.</span>
 You’re an avid participant in the global sport of bowling. Sure, it’s 
easy to make an application that manages your scores, gives you 
averages, etc., but you should do more than that. Show trending, 
moving-day averages, and also allow users to enter the number of open 
frames along with the scores. This way they can verify whether they 
really had a good game or whether they got lucky by hitting <span class="docEmphasis">Brooklyns</span>
 all evening long. Also, include a check box that can be selected to 
indicate whether a game is sanctioned or not, and allow links to video 
clips be tied to specific games. Live and breathe your sport—away from 
your bowling alley. Create a network server that allows you to access 
this data over the Internet when you’re out of town or from your mobile 
phone.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>12-15.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Course Logistics and Social Management System.</span>
 Implement a secondary or collegiate course management system. It should
 support users being able to login, have a chat room for live 
conversation, forums for offline Out-of-Band (OoB) communication, and a 
place to submit homework and get grades. Similarly for teachers, they 
should be able to add new and grade existing assignments, participate in
 chats and forums along with students, post course announcements, static
 files, and send messages to students. Choose either Django or Google 
App Engine to implement your solution, or better yet, use Django-non-rel
 to create a Django app that can run in a traditional hosted environment
 or by Google on App Engine.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>12-16.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Recipe Manager.</span>
 Develop an application to manage a virtual collection of cooking 
recipes. This is slightly different from managing, for instance, a music
 collection for which you have all your MP3 or other sound files 
locally. These food recipes only exist online. When users enter recipe 
URLs, your application should allow them to be placed in multiple 
categories (but the actual URL should only be saved once). Also, the 
user should be alerted when a link no longer works by e-mail, IM/XMPP, 
or even by SMS if you can find an appropriate e-mail-to-SMS gateway (see
 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_SMS_gateways)
 if you are not running your own SMS service. Create a mini-crawler so 
that when listing recipes, you’ll also display a thumbnail of an image 
found on the same page as the recipe URL (if one is available). You 
should also allow your users to browse by category/cuisine.</p></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
