<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>13.3. Microblogging with Twitter</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">13.3. Microblogging with Twitter</h3>
<p class="docText">In
 this section, we will explore the world of microblogging with the 
Twitter service. We’ll start with a brief introduction to social 
networking, describe where Twitter fits in, introduce the various 
interfaces available in Python, and finally, show you both a simple and 
an intermediate example.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EHXCK">13.3.1. Social Networking</h4>
<p class="docText">Social media has developed significantly in the past five-plus years. It started with a very simple concept, such as <span class="docEmphasis">Web logging</span>, or <span class="docEmphasis">blogging</span>
 for short. This type of service hosts user accounts on which you can 
post essays or some other form of written communication. Think of it as a
 public online journal or diary whereby people can report on current 
events, give some opinion or diatribe, or anything else you would like 
to communicate to others.</p>
<p class="docText">However, being online means 
that you are sharing your communications with entire world. Users could 
not target specific individuals or organizations, much less their 
friends or family. Thus came the social networks, with MySpace, 
Facebook, Twitter, and Google+ being the most well-known brand names. 
With these systems, users can connect with their friends, family, 
colleagues, and other people in their social circles. Although each of 
these services let users approach the same audience from the user’s 
perspective, they’re unique in their own way. Their methods of 
interaction differ; thus, they generally do not compete directly with 
each other. Let’s briefly describe each, and then dive deeper into 
Twitter.</p>
<p class="docText">MySpace is mostly for young
 people (junior high and high school level) with a focus on music; 
Facebook originally targeted college students but is now open to all. It
 is more of a general platform than MySpace, offering the ability to 
host applications on its network—this was widely seen as one of the 
features that brought it mainstream. Twitter is a <span class="docEmphasis">microblogging</span>
 service, through which users set a status, usually an opinion, thus the
 comparison to blogging. Google+ is the Internet giant’s recent foray 
into the field, attempting to provide features similar to the others, 
but it also includes new features to differentiate it from the others.</p>
<p class="docText">Of the common social media applications, the most basic is Twitter. You use Twitter to publish short status messages called <span class="docEmphasis">tweets</span>.
 Others can “follow” you; that is, they can subscribe to your tweets. By
 the same token, you can follow the tweets of other users you find 
interesting.</p>
<p class="docText">Twitter
 is referred to as a microblogging service because, unlike a standard 
blog that allows users to create posts of any length, tweets are limited
 to a maximum of 140 characters per update. The size restriction is due 
mainly to the fact that the service originally targeted the web <span class="docEmphasis">and</span>
 text messages on mobile phones via the Short Message Service (SMS), 
which themselves have a cap of 160 ASCII characters. Users benefit by 
not being flooded with too much to read, plus it forces posters to be 
expressive enough to capture their thoughts in 140 characters or less.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EJ1CK">13.3.2. Twitter and Python</h4>
<p class="docText">There are several Twitter API libraries for Python. They are posted on Twitter’s developer documentation at https://dev.twitter.com/docs/twitter-libraries#python.
 They are all similar and different in their own way, so we recommend 
that you try several to find one that suits your style. So that we don’t
 limit ourselves <span class="docEmphasis">too</span> much, we’ll use Twython and Tweepy in this chapter. You can find them at http://github.com/ryanmcgrath/twython and http://tweepy.github.com, respectively.</p>
<p class="docText">As with most Python packages, you can use either <tt>easy_install</tt> or <tt>pip</tt>
 to get either or both of these Twitter libraries on your system. If you
 want to play with the code more, the source trees for both are 
available on GitHub. Alternatively, you can just download the latest <tt>.tgz</tt> or <tt>.zip</tt> from GitHub and call the typical <tt>setup.py</tt> install command:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>$ sudo python setup.py install
Password:
running install
running bdist_egg
running egg_info
creating twython.egg-info
. . .
Finished processing dependencies for twython==1.4.4</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Libraries like Twython will need some additional help to be able to communicate with Twitter. It depends on <tt>httplib2</tt>, <tt>oauth2</tt>, and <tt>simplejson</tt>. (The last is the external version of the <tt>json</tt> library that is available in the standard library starting with version 2.6.)</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E52CK">Getting Started</h5>
<p class="docText">To get you going, here’s a quick example of how to use the Tweepy library to do a search on Twitter:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre># tweepy-example.py
<span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> tweepy
results = tweepy.api.search(q='twython3k')
<span class="docEmphStrong">for</span> tweet <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> results:
    <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> '    User: @%s' % tweet.from_user
    <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> '    Date: %s' % tweet.created_at
    <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> '    Tweet: %s' % tweet.text</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">If you execute this Python 2 
snippet—at the time of this writing, Tweepy is not available for Python 
3—with the exact query shown, you’ll notice that the search term was 
specifically chosen for its few results, meaning you’ll see just a 
couple of tweets (mostly from yours truly at this time) returned by 
Twitter regarding the Python 3 version of the Twython library:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>$ python twython-example.py
    User: @wescpy
    Date: Tue, 04 Oct 2011 21:09:41 +0000
    Tweet: Testing posting to Twitter using Twython3k (another story of
life on the bleeding edge)

    User: @wescpy
    Date: Tue, 04 Oct 2011 17:18:38 +0000
    Tweet: @ryanmcgrath cool... thx! i also have a &quot;real&quot;
twython3k bug i need to file... will do it officially on github. just
giving you a heads-up!

    User: @wescpy
    Date: Tue, 04 Oct 2011 08:01:09 +0000
    Tweet: @ryanmcgrath Hey ryan, good work on Twython thus far!
Can you pls drop twitter_endpoints.py into twython3k? It's out-of-
date. .. thx! :-)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The Tweepy library’s <tt>search()</tt>
 call retrieves the results in a list. The code iterates over the tweets
 and displays the various attributes of interest. Twython is a similar 
Python library to the Twitter API.</p>
<p class="docText">Twython is similar yet 
different from Tweepy. It’s available for both Python 2 and 3, but it 
also uses pure Python dictionaries instead of objects to hold resulting 
data. Contrast <tt>tweepy-example.py</tt> with this script, <tt>twython-example.py</tt>, which also happens to be compatible with Python 2 and 3:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre># twython-example.py
<span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> distutils.log <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> warn <span class="docEmphStrong">as</span> printf
<span class="docEmphStrong">try</span>:
    <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> twython
<span class="docEmphStrong">except</span> ImportError:
    <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> twython3k <span class="docEmphStrong">as</span> twython

TMPL = '''\
    User: @%(from_user)s
    Date: %(created_at)s
    Tweet: %(text)s
'''

twitter = twython.Twython()
data = twitter.searchTwitter(q='twython3k')
<span class="docEmphStrong">for</span> tweet <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> data['results']:
    printf(TMPL % tweet)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>distutils.log.warn()</tt> function serves as our proxy for the <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>print</tt></span>
 statement (in Python 2) and function (in Python 3). We also attempt 
imports of both (Python 2 and 3) Twython libraries, hoping that one will
 succeed.</p>
<p class="docText">In terms of output, yes, <tt>Twython.searchTwitter()</tt> results in a dictionary, and the object located at the <tt>results</tt>
 key is a list of dicts, each of which represent a resulting tweet. This
 lets us simplify the display because results are dictionaries—a simpler
 call indeed. (The penalty is paid in the string template where we need 
to expand the key variables within.)</p>
<p class="docText">The other change made here is 
that instead of pure single-lines of output, we put all the strings 
together into one larger string template, and then passed in the output 
dictionary to it. The reason for this is that in practice, it’s more 
likely that you would be using some sort of template (whether string or 
Web), anyway.</p>
<p class="docText">The output, as you would expect, is identical to that of the Tweepy version, so we won’t duplicate it here.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ESBDK">13.3.3. A Longer Combination API Example</h4>
<p class="docText">Those simple little snippets 
are great in terms of getting a quick introduction that you can use 
right away. However, in practice, you’re more likely to come across a 
scenario in which using or integrating with multiple, similar APIs might
 be necessary. Let’s go for a longer example that helps us practice 
this. We’ll write a compatibility library that supports a set of basic 
Twitter commands by using <span class="docEmphasis">both</span> Tweepy and Twython. This exercise will help you learn both libraries as well as familiarize you more with Twitter’s API.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E6BDK">Authentication</h5>
<p class="docText">To move forward with this exercise, you’ll need a Twitter account. Go to http://twitter.com and register if you haven’t already. <span class="docEmphasis">Authentication</span>
 comes in the form of a username and password. (More modern solutions 
also include biometric authentication via fingerprinting or 
retina-scanning.) These credentials serve the purpose of authenticating 
who you are. Data access is another matter.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EFFDK">Authorization</h5>
<p class="docText">Just because you’re
 authenticated doesn’t mean you have access to the data (yours or anyone
 else’s). You need to have the correct <span class="docEmphasis">authorization</span>
 for that. You need to be authorized to be able to access your data or 
that of others, or you must authorize a third party to access data on 
your behalf, such as allowing an external application to download your 
Twitter stream or to post a status update to your Twitter account.</p>
<p class="docText">To obtain your authorization credentials with Twitter, you need to create an application. You can accomplish this at http://dev.twitter.com. Once you have at least one application, click the one whose credentials you want to use. The URL will look similar to https://dev.twitter.com/apps/APP-ID/show. Here you’ll find four important pieces that you’ll need to access data on Twitter: your OAuth settings include your <span class="docEmphasis">consumer key</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">consumer secret</span>. It will also give you your <span class="docEmphasis">access token</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">access token secret</span>, giving you access to your Twitter data.</p>
<p class="docText">Grab those four valuable pieces of data and stick them somewhere safe—which means <span class="docEmphasis">not</span> your source code! In this example, I stored them as four global variables in a module called <tt>tweet_auth.py</tt>, which I will import from our eventual application. In practice, you’d likely either only distribute a bytecode-compiled <tt>.pyc</tt>
 (not plain text!) or have it available via a database or elsewhere on 
the network, probably encrypted. Now that we’re all set up, let me 
describe the application before showing you the code.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ENGDK">A Hybrid Twitter API Application</h5>
<p class="docText">This application performs
 four operations: first it runs a search on Twitter and prints out the 
results; next, it retrieves some details about the current user and 
prints them out; it then acquires the current user’s timeline of status 
messages and prints them out; and then finally it posts a tweet on 
behalf of the current user. All four of these operations are performed 
twice: once using the Tweepy library, and once using the Twython 
library. To carry this out, we’re going to support four Twitter API 
commands, as shown in Table 13-2.</p>
<p class="docText"></p><p></p><table cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0" frame="hsides" rules="groups"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 13-2. The Four Commands of the Hybrid Twitter API Application</h5></caption><colgroup align="left" span="2"><col width="200"></col><col width="400"></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell bottomBorder thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Command</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell bottomBorder thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Description</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>search</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Take
 a search query and perform a search on Twitter for the most recent 
tweets that match. This is an unauthenticated call (the only one in our 
application), meaning anyone can do it at any time.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>verify_credentials</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Ask Twitter for the current information on the authenticated user.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>user_timeline</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Get the most recent tweets from the authenticated user.</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>update_status</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Perform a status update from the authenticated user—yes, this will create a new tweet on your behalf.</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">Next, this application will 
support both Twython and Tweepy. Finally, it will run under both Python 2
 and 3. The code will consist of the supported commands, steps to 
initiate both libraries, and then contain code that supports each of the
 commands. Ready? Let’s take a look at <tt>twapi.py</tt> in Example 13-2:</p>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E5LDK">Example 13-2. Twitter API Combination Library Example (<tt>twapi.py</tt>)</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<p class="docText">A demonstration of interfacing with Twitter by using the Twython and Tweepy libraries.</p>
<pre class="preFixedHeight">1    #!/usr/bin/env python
2
3    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> distutils.log <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> warn <span class="docEmphStrong">as</span> printf
4    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> unittest <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> TestCase, main
5    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> tweet_auth <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> *
6
7    # set up supported APIs
8    CMDs = {
9        'twython': {
10           'search':               'searchTwitter',
11           'verify_credentials':   None,
12           'user_timeline':        'getUserTimeline',
13           'update_status':        None,
14       },
15       'tweepy': dict.fromkeys((
16           'search',
17           'verify_credentials',
18           'user_timeline',
19           'update_status',
20       )),
21   }
22   APIs = set(CMDs)
23
24   # remove unavailable APIs
25   remove = set()
26   <span class="docEmphStrong">for</span> api <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> APIs:
27       <span class="docEmphStrong">try</span>:
28           __import__(api)
29       <span class="docEmphStrong">except</span> ImportError:
30           <span class="docEmphStrong">try</span>:
31               __import__('%s3k' % api)
32           <span class="docEmphStrong">except</span> ImportError:
33               remove.add(api)
34
35   APIs.difference_update(remove)
36   <span class="docEmphStrong">if not</span> APIs:
37       <span class="docEmphStrong">raise</span> NotImplementedError(
38           'No Twitter API found; install one &amp; add to CMDs!')
39
40   <span class="docEmphStrong">class</span> Twitter(object):
41       'Twitter -- Use available APIs to talk to Twitter'
42       <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> __init__(self, api, auth=True):
43           <span class="docEmphStrong">if</span> api <span class="docEmphStrong">not in</span> APIs:
44               <span class="docEmphStrong">raise</span> NotImplementedError(
45                   '%r unsupported; try one of: %r' % (api, APIs))
46
47           self.api = api
48           <span class="docEmphStrong">if</span> api == 'twython':
49               <span class="docEmphStrong">try</span>:
50                   <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> twython
51               <span class="docEmphStrong">except</span> ImportError:
52                   <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> twython3k <span class="docEmphStrong">as</span> twython
53               <span class="docEmphStrong">if</span> auth:
54                   self.twitter = twython.Twython(
55                       twitter_token=consumer_key,
56                       twitter_secret=consumer_secret,
57                       oauth_token=access_token,
58                       oauth_token_secret=access_token_secret,
59                   )
60               <span class="docEmphStrong">else</span>:
61                   self.twitter = twython.Twython()
62           <span class="docEmphStrong">elif</span> api == 'tweepy':
63               <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> tweepy
64               <span class="docEmphStrong">if</span> auth:
65                   auth = tweepy.OAuthHandler(consumer_key,
66                       consumer_secret)
67                   auth.set_access_token(access_token,
68                       access_token_secret)
69                   self.twitter = tweepy.API(auth)
70               <span class="docEmphStrong">else</span>:
71                   self.twitter = tweepy.api
72
73       <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> _get_meth(self, cmd):
74           api = self.api
75           meth_name = CMDs[api][cmd]
76           <span class="docEmphStrong">if not</span> meth_name:
77               meth_name = cmd
78               <span class="docEmphStrong">if</span> api == 'twython' <span class="docEmphStrong">and</span> '_' <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> meth_name:
79                   cmds = cmd.split('_')
80                   meth_name = '%s%s' % (cmds[0], cmds[1].title())
81           <span class="docEmphStrong">return</span> getattr(self.twitter, meth_name)
82
83       <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> search(self, q):
84           api = self.api
85           <span class="docEmphStrong">if</span> api == 'twython':
86               res = self._get_meth('search')(q=q)['results']
87               <span class="docEmphStrong">return</span> (ResultsWrapper(tweet) <span class="docEmphStrong">for</span> tweet <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> res)
88           <span class="docEmphStrong">elif</span> api == 'tweepy':
89               <span class="docEmphStrong">return</span> (ResultsWrapper(tweet)
90                   <span class="docEmphStrong">for</span> tweet <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> self._get_meth('search')(q=q))
91
92       <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> verify_credentials(self):
93           <span class="docEmphStrong">return</span> ResultsWrapper(
94               self._get_meth('verify_credentials')())
95
96       <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> user_timeline(self):
97           <span class="docEmphStrong">return</span> (ResultsWrapper(tweet)
98               <span class="docEmphStrong">for</span> tweet <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> self._get_meth('user_timeline')())
99
100      <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> update_status(self, s):
101          <span class="docEmphStrong">return</span> ResultsWrapper(
102              self._get_meth('update_status')( status=s))
103
104  <span class="docEmphStrong">class</span> ResultsWrapper(object):
105      "ResultsWrapper -- makes foo.bar the same as foo['bar']"
106      <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> __init__(self, obj):
107          self.obj = obj
108
109      <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> __str__(self):
110          <span class="docEmphStrong">return</span> str(self.obj)
111
112      <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> __repr__(self):
113          <span class="docEmphStrong">return</span> repr(self.obj)
114
115      <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> __getattr__(self, attr):
116          <span class="docEmphStrong">if</span> hasattr(self.obj, attr):
117              <span class="docEmphStrong">return</span> getattr(self.obj, attr)
118          <span class="docEmphStrong">elif</span> hasattr(self.obj, '__contains__') <span class="docEmphStrong">and</span> attr <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> self.obj:
119              <span class="docEmphStrong">return</span> self.obj[attr]
120          <span class="docEmphStrong">else</span>:
121              <span class="docEmphStrong">raise</span> AttributeError(
122                  '%r has no attribute %r' % (self.obj, attr))
123
124      __getitem__ = __getattr__
125
126  <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> _demo_search():
127      <span class="docEmphStrong">for</span> api <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> APIs:
128          printf(api.upper())
129          t = Twitter(api, auth=False)
130          tweets = t.search('twython3k')
131          <span class="docEmphStrong">for</span> tweet <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> tweets:
132              printf('----' * 10)
133              printf('@%s' % tweet.from_user)
134              printf('Status: %s' % tweet.text)
135              printf('Posted at: %s' % tweet.created_at)
136          printf('----' * 10)
137
138  <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> _demo_ver_creds():
139      <span class="docEmphStrong">for</span> api <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> APIs:
140          t = Twitter(api)
141          res = t.verify_credentials()
142          status = ResultsWrapper(res.status)
143          printf('@%s' % res.screen_name)
144          printf('Status: %s' % status.text)
145          printf('Posted at: %s' % status.created_at)
146          printf('----' * 10)
147
148  <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> _demo_user_timeline():
149      <span class="docEmphStrong">for</span> api <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> APIs:
150          printf(api.upper())
151          t = Twitter(api)
152          tweets = t.user_timeline()
153          <span class="docEmphStrong">for</span> tweet <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> tweets:
154              printf('----' * 10)
155              printf('Status: %s' % tweet.text)
156              printf('Posted at: %s' % tweet.created_at)
157          printf('----' * 10)
158
159  <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> _demo_update_status():
160      <span class="docEmphStrong">for</span> api <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> APIs:
161          t = Twitter(api)
162          res = t.update_status(
163              'Test tweet posted to Twitter using %s' % api.title())
164          printf('Posted at: %s' % res.created_at)
165          printf('----' * 10)
166
167  # object wrapper unit tests
168  <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> _unit_dict_wrap():
169      d = {'foo': 'bar'}
170      wrapped = ResultsWrapper(d)
171      <span class="docEmphStrong">return</span> wrapped['foo'], wrapped.foo
172
173  <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> _unit_attr_wrap():
174      <span class="docEmphStrong">class</span> C(object):
175          foo = 'bar'
176      wrapped = ResultsWrapper(C)
177      <span class="docEmphStrong">return</span> wrapped['foo'], wrapped.foo
178
179  <span class="docEmphStrong">class</span> TestSequenceFunctions(TestCase):
180     <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> test_dict_wrap(self):
181         self.assertEqual(_unit_dict_wrap(), ('bar', 'bar'))
182
183     <span class="docEmphStrong">def</span> test_attr_wrap(self):
184         self.assertEqual(_unit_attr_wrap(), ('bar', 'bar'))
185
186  <span class="docEmphStrong">if</span> __name__ == '__main__':
187      printf('\n*** SEARCH')
188      _demo_search()
189      printf('\n*** VERIFY CREDENTIALS')
190      _demo_ver_creds()
191      printf('\n*** USER TIMELINE')
192      _demo_user_timeline()
193      printf('\n*** UPDATE STATUS')
194      _demo_update_status()
195      printf('\n*** RESULTS WRAPPER')
196      main()

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Before we take this script apart, let’s run it and see the output. Be sure to first create a <tt>tweet_auth.py</tt> file with these variables (and correct corresponding values for your Twitter application):</p>
<div class="docText"><pre># tweet_auth.py
consumer_key = 'SOME_CONSUMER_KEY'
consumer_secret = 'SOME_CONSUMER_SECRET'
access_token = 'SOME_ACCESS_TOKEN'
access_token_secret = 'SOME_ACCESS_TOKEN_SECRET'</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Now you’re ready to go. 
Naturally, the following output was produced during this one execution 
performed at the time of this writing. Yours will definitely differ from
 mine. Here’s what happened when we ran it (the “. . .” means we 
truncated the output to keep it shorter):</p>
<div class="docText"><pre class="preFixedHeight">$ twapi.py

*** SEARCH
TWYTHON
----------------------------------------
@ryanmcgrath
Status: #twython is now version 1.4.4; should fix some utf-8 decoding
issues, twython3k should be caught up, etc: http://t.co/s6fTVh0P /cc
@wescpy
Posted at: Thu, 06 Oct 2011 20:25:17 +0000
----------------------------------------
@wescpy
Status: Testing posting to Twitter using Twython3k (another story of
life on the bleeding edge)
Posted at: Tue, 04 Oct 2011 21:09:41 +0000
----------------------------------------
@wescpy
Status: @ryanmcgrath cool... thx! i also have a &quot;real&quot;
twython3k bug i need to file... will do it officially on github. just
giving you a heads-up!
Posted at: Tue, 04 Oct 2011 17:18:38 +0000
----------------------------------------
@wescpy
Status: @ryanmcgrath Hey ryan, good work on Twython thus far! Can you
pls drop twitter_endpoints.py into twython3k? It's out-of-date. ..
thx! :-)
Posted at: Tue, 04 Oct 2011 08:01:09 +0000
----------------------------------------
TWEEPY
----------------------------------------
@ryanmcgrath
Status: #twython is now version 1.4.4; should fix some utf-8 decoding
issues, twython3k should be caught up, etc: http://t.co/s6fTVh0P /cc
@wescpy
Posted at: 2011-10-06 20:25:17
. . .

----------------------------------------

*** VERIFY CREDENTIALS
@wescpy
Status: .@imusicmash That's great that you're enjoying corepython.com!
Note: there will be lots of cookies at #SVCC: yfrog.com/kh1azqznj
Posted at: Fri Oct 07 22:37:37 +0000 2011
----------------------------------------
@wescpy
Status: .@imusicmash That's great that you're enjoying corepython.com!
Note: there will be lots of cookies at #SVCC: yfrog.com/kh1azqznj
Posted at: 2011-10-07 22:37:37
----------------------------------------

*** USER TIMELINE
TWYTHON
----------------------------------------
Status: .@imusicmash That's great that you're enjoying corepython.com!
Note: there will be lots of cookies at #SVCC: yfrog.com/kh1azqznj
Posted at: Fri Oct 07 22:37:37 +0000 2011
----------------------------------------
Status: SFBayArea: free technical conference w/free
food+drinks+parking this wknd! I'm doing #Python &amp; @App_Engine http://
t.co/spvVjYUA
Posted at: Fri Oct 07 15:20:46 +0000 2011
----------------------------------------
Status: RT @GoogleCode @Google Cloud SQL: your database in the cloud
http://t.co/4wt2cjpH @app_engine #mysql
Posted at: Thu Oct 06 20:12:26 +0000 2011
----------------------------------------
. . .
Status: Watch this: http://t.co/pm2QCLtW Read this: http://t.co/
0m5TtLZP  Note the 2 paragraphs that start w/"No one wants to die"
Posted at: Thu Oct 06 00:36:27 +0000 2011
----------------------------------------
Status: I'm wondering: will future Apple products visually be designed
as well &amp; have as much impact on the market? What do you think?
Posted at: Thu Oct 06 00:02:16 +0000 2011
----------------------------------------
. . .
----------------------------------------
TWEEPY
----------------------------------------
Status: .@imusicmash That's great that you're enjoying corepython.com!
Note: there will be lots of cookies at #SVCC: yfrog.com/kh1azqznj
Posted at: 2011-10-07 22:37:37
. . .
----------------------------------------

*** UPDATE STATUS
Posted at: Sat Oct 08 05:18:51 +0000 2011
----------------------------------------
Posted at: 2011-10-08 05:18:51
----------------------------------------

*** RESULTS WRAPPER
..
---------------------------------------------------------------------
-
Ran 2 tests in 0.000s

OK
$

					  </pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">You can see that we run 
through all four functions, executing them with each library. Executing 
this script on Windows-based PCs has the same results if everything is 
installed correctly. Because our code is also compatible with Python 3, 
you should also achieve similar output; however, you should only see 
output from Twython because Tweepy has not been ported (at the time of 
this writing). Now let’s take a closer look at the source.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EYWDK">Line-by-Line Explanation</h5>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0EAXDK">Lines 1–5</h5>
<p class="docText">The set of imports includes a pair from the standard library (using <tt>distutils.log.warn()</tt> as a proxy for the <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>print</tt></span>
 statement or function, depending on whether you’re running in Python 2 
or 3, plus the basic attributes to run unit tests in Python) and our 
Twitter authorization credentials.</p>
<p class="docText">We also want to remind you that in general, the use of <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>from</tt></span> <tt>module</tt> <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>import</tt></span> <tt>*</tt>
 (line 5) is discouraged because standard library or third-party 
packages might use the same variable names as your modules, thus 
potentially being an issue. In this case, we have full control over <tt>tweet_auth.py</tt>
 and know about all (four) of its variables. Its sole purpose is to hide
 user credentials. In practice, such a file would only be installed in 
production as a byte-compiled (<tt>.pyc</tt>) or optimized (<tt>.pyo</tt>) file, which are not human-readable, or they will come from a database or otherwise be a network call away.</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0EAZDK">Lines 7–38</h5>
<p class="docText">The first real body of 
code does exactly one thing: it determines what Twitter client libraries
 are available for the Python interpreter that’s running your code. 
That’s really it.</p>
<p class="docText"><tt>CMDs</tt> is a dictionary that has one entry per supported library. In our case, we have Twython (<tt>twython</tt>) and Tweepy (<tt>tweepy</tt>). In one of the exercises at the end of the chapter, you’ll add support for a third library.</p>
<p class="docText">For each library, we provide
 the method names representing the corresponding Twitter API commands 
that should be called for the four functions mentioned earlier that we 
want to support. If the value is <tt>None</tt>, this means that the method name is an exact match; thus, any “real” (meaning <span class="docEmphasis">not</span> <tt>None</tt>) value represents an exception to the rule.</p>
<p class="docText">Tweepy makes things easy for us because its method names match the commands. Because of this, we use <tt>dict.fromkeys()</tt> to create a dictionary with all <tt>None</tt> values for its keys. Twython is trickier because it uses names that employ camel capitalization <span class="docEmphasis">and</span> there are exceptions to the rule. See lines 71–80 for a description of how the names are derived and methods chosen.</p>
<p class="docText">On line 22, we collate all 
supported APIs into a set. This data structure is the fastest membership
 check in the language. We will also loop over each of the APIs using 
this variable. So far, we’ve only created the possible APIs; now we need
 to see what is really available and remove those which are not.</p>
<p class="docText">The
 code on lines 25–33 attempts to import each of the libraries and 
removes those that cannot be found by collecting the non-existent APIs 
in another set called <tt>remove</tt>. After 
this loop is complete, we know what we don’t have and subtract them all 
(on line 35) from the overall set of APIs. If there are no reachable 
libraries, we raise a <tt>NotImplementedError</tt> on lines 36–38.</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0EB3DK">Lines 40–71</h5>
<p class="docText">The Twitter class is the primary object in this application. We define the initializer, which takes the <tt>api</tt> (in our case, either “twython” or “tweepy”), and an optional <tt>auth</tt> flag. This flag defaults to <tt>True</tt>
 because most of the time, we need (authenticated and) authorized access
 to a user’s data. (Search is the only function that does not require 
authentication.) We cache the chosen API into <tt>self.api</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">The remainder of this 
section (lines 48–71) instantiates the Twitter endpoint based on the 
chosen API and the authentication setting. The instance is then assigned
 to <tt>self.twitter</tt>. That object is our handle to executing Twitter API commands.</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0E13DK">Lines 73–81</h5>
<p class="docText">The <tt>_get_meth()</tt> 
method handles the magic in putting together the correct method name to 
call for each API. Note that we prepended the single underscore 
character (_) to the function name. This notation indicates that this 
routine should not be called by users. Instead, it is an internal method
 that should be called by one of the other methods in our class.</p>
<p class="docText">We could use <tt>self.api</tt>
 through this method, but a well-known best practice is to assign 
frequently-used instance attributes to a local variable for quick 
access. The use of <tt>self.api</tt> requires two 
lookups, whereas “api” needs only one. One extra lookup doesn’t cost 
much in terms of CPU time, but if this were in a type loop and/or 
executed with frequency, all that time does add up. This is pretty much 
the reason for the local assignment on line 74.</p>
<p class="docText">On the next line, the appropriate command from the requested API is looked up and assigned to <tt>meth_name</tt>. If it is <tt>None</tt>,
 the default action is that the method name is the same as the command 
name. For Tweepy, it’s easy; we already mentioned that its methods are 
named the exact same as the commands. The next set of lines handle 
special cases for which we have to derive the correct name.</p>
<p class="docText">As mentioned earlier, 
Twython uses camel capitalization for its “words” instead of being 
divided by an underscore (_). This means that we must break
 up each word on the underscore, capitalize the second word, then append
 it to the first word (lines 79–80). The final act is to use that name 
and retrieve the method object from the requested API; it is a 
first-class object and returned directly to the caller.</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0E56DK">Lines 83–102</h5>
<p class="docText">The four supported Twitter commands are realized in these four functions: <tt>search()</tt>, <tt>verify_credentials()</tt>, <tt>user_timeline()</tt>, <tt>update_status()</tt>. Aside from <tt>search()</tt>,
 the others are fairly simplistic and nearly identical between the pair 
of supported libraries. Let’s look at these first, and then wrap up with
 a closer look at <tt>search()</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">Verifying an authenticated user’s credentials is just one thing you can do with the <tt>verify_credentials</tt>
 command. It’s also the quickest way for you to programmatically access 
your most recent tweet. Your user information comes back and is wrapped 
by using the <tt>ResultsWrapper</tt> (more on 
this soon), and then returned back to the caller. You can find more 
information on using this command in the Twitter documentation at http://dev.twitter.com/docs/api/1/get/account/verify_credentials.</p>
<p class="docText">A user’s timeline is made up of his most recent tweets (and retweets). The <tt>user_timeline</tt> Twitter command by default returns the most recent 20, but you can request up to 200 by using the <tt>count</tt>
 parameter, which we don’t use in this example, but you’ll be adding it 
in another exercise at the end of the chapter. You can find more 
information on this function at http://dev.twitter.com/docs/api/1/get/statuses/user_timeline. Unlike <tt>verify_credentials()</tt>,
 we wrap each individual tweet returned rather than the entire result 
coming from Twitter and return a generator expression iterable of 
tweets.</p>
<p class="docText">Twitter’s most 
basic functionality comes in the form of users updating their statuses, 
a.k.a. tweeting. You can argue that without this functionality, there 
would be no Twitter. You can see the <tt>update_status()</tt> takes an additional parameter, <tt>s,</tt> which is the text of the tweet. The returned value is the tweet itself (also wrapped by <tt>ResultsWrapper</tt>), with the most important characteristic being the <tt>created_at</tt> field, which acknowledges that the tweet was indeed created and now flowing to the masses. You’ll see <tt>created_at</tt> in the following code, which demonstrates this functionality. You can find more information on using it at http://dev.twitter.com/docs/api/1/post/statuses/update.</p>
<p class="docText">Now back to search. The two
 APIs differ here, which is why there’s more code than normal. Twython 
tries to be honest and interpret the results from Twitter nearly 
verbatim, turning the JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) into a
 Python dictionary, a close cousin. This data structure contains various
 metadata as well as the “real goods” you’re looking for under the <tt>results</tt> key (which is why we need to do that lookup on line 86).</p>
<p class="docText">Tweepy, on the other hand, is more realistic and returns those search results directly in a list-like object—actually, <tt>ResultsSet</tt>
 is a subclass of list—because its developer knows that’s really what 
you want. This makes it more convenient and saves you from any further 
lookup. What about all that extra metadata? They’re just attributes of 
the returned <tt>ResultsSet</tt>.</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0ECDEK">Lines 104–124</h5>
<p class="docText">This next chunk of code is a 
general-purpose class that you can use anywhere, outside of this 
application. There is no relationship to the Twitter libraries or 
anything because it’s only used as a convenience for our users in that 
it provides a common interface to the objects returned from those 
libraries.</p>
<p class="docText">Have you ever been frustrated
 by objects that are either dictionary-like or object-like? What I mean 
is that with the first, you need to do the equivalent of a <tt>__getitem__()</tt> call in order to retrieve a value, i.e. <tt>foo['bar']</tt>, and with the second, you have to deal with objects that have an attribute interface, i.e., <tt>foo.bar</tt>? Wouldn’t it be great to be able to use either for all objects and not have to worry about it again? That’s exactly what the <tt>ResultsWrapper</tt> class does.</p>
<p class="docText">I just came up with this while
 writing, so it might not be perfect yet, but the idea is to take any 
Python object and wrap it up in an object that delegates the lookup (via
 <tt>__getitem__()</tt> or <tt>__getattr__()</tt>) to the wrapped object. (For a review on delegation, see the Object-Oriented Programming chapter of <span class="docEmphasis">Core Python Programming</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">Core Python Language Fundamentals</span>.)</p>
<p class="docText">In the initializer (lines 
106–107), we wrap the object. All its string representations come next 
(lines 109–113). Most of the magic happens in <tt>__getattr__()</tt>. When a request for an attribute comes in that’s not recognized, <tt>__getattr__()</tt>
 checks to see if that attribute exists in the wrapped object (lines 
116–117). If it’s not available there, perhaps it’s a dictionary-like 
object, so let’s check if it’s a “key” (lines 118–119). Naturally, 
before using the <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>in</tt></span> operator, we need to check whether the object supports that type of check or access—this is done by seeing if the object has a <tt>__contains__</tt> attribute first. If all else fails, just give the bad news to the user (lines 120–122).</p>
<p class="docText">The
 last line to look at (124) is for when a user tries to access an 
attribute in a dictionary-like way, by using the attribute name as a 
key. Because of this, we want the exact same behavior as <tt>__getattr__()</tt>. This way, no matter what type of object is wrapped, we’re able to pull out and return what the user wants.</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0EDGEK">Lines 126–165</h5>
<p class="docText">The purpose of the <tt>_demo_*()</tt> functions is to do exactly what they’re named: <tt>_demo_search()</tt> demonstrates searching for the term “twython3k” using all available APIs, and then displays the resulting tweets’ data; <tt>_demo_ver_creds()</tt> executes the <tt>verify_credentials</tt> command and displays the authenticated user’s most recent tweet; <tt>_demo_user_timeline()</tt> brings up the 20 most recent tweets, displaying each tweet’s text and timestamp. Finally, <tt>_demo_update_status()</tt> posts new tweets, describing the API that was used to do so.</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0E2GEK">Lines 167–184</h5>
<p class="docText">This section of code is dedicated to testing the <tt>ResultsWrapper</tt> class. The <tt>_unit_*_wrap()</tt>
 functions each test wrapping dictionaries (or dictionary-like objects) 
as well as objects with an attribute interface. Both forms of attribute 
access, whether by <tt>obj['foo']</tt> or <tt>obj.foo</tt> should result in the same result: “bar”. This validation is carried out by the <tt>unittest</tt> class, <tt>TestSequenceFunctions</tt> (lines 179–184).</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0ETHEK">Lines 186–196</h5>
<p class="docText">The lines of <tt>main()</tt> display which function is being tested and calls the specific <tt>_demo_*()</tt> functions, which display their own output. The final call, is to the <tt>unittest.main()</tt> function, which executes the unit tests.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EHIEK">13.3.4. Summary</h4>
<p class="docText">With the material in this 
section, we hope that you’ve received a solid introduction to 
interfacing with a couple of services currently available on the Web: 
Yahoo!’s stock quote server, and Twitter. It’s important to realize that
 Yahoo’s interface is completely URL-driven and unauthenticated, whereas
 Twitter provides a full REST API and OAuth authorization for secure 
data access. We were able to take advantage of the power of both by 
using Python code that was digestable and got the job done.</p>
<p class="docText">We just looked at a pair of Web services; there are plenty more out there. We will revisit both of these in Chapter 14, “Text Processing.”</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EDKEK">13.3.5. Additional Online Resources</h4>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ELKEK">Yahoo! Finance</h5>
<ul><li><p class="docList">http://gummy-stuff.org/Yahoo-data.htm</p></li><li><p class="docList">http://gummy-stuff.org/forex.htm</p></li></ul>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EDLEK">Twitter</h5>
<ul><li><p class="docList">http://dev.twitter.com/docs/twitter-libraries#python.</p></li><li><p class="docList">http://github.com/ryanmcgrath/twython</p></li><li><p class="docList">http://tweepy.github.com</p></li></ul>
</div>
</body>
</html>
