<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>13.4. Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">13.4. Exercises</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E12CK">Web Services</h4>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>13-1.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Web Services.</span>
 In your own words, describe what Web services are. Find some of these 
services online and describe how they work. What is their API and how do
 you access such data? Is authentication or authorization required?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>13-2.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">REST and Web Services.</span>
 Study how REST and XML or JSON are used in more contemporary Web 
services APIs and applications. Describe the additional functionality 
they afford you over older systems such as the Yahoo! quote server, 
which uses URL parameters.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>13-3.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">REST and Web Services.</span>
 Build an application framework by using Python’s support for REST and 
XML that will allow you to share and reuse this code when writing 
applications that use any of the newer Web services and APIs available 
today. Display your code by using APIs from Yahoo!, Google, eBay, and/or
 Amazon.</p></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
<p class="docText">Exercises 13-4 to 13-11 involve updating the Yahoo! stock quote example (<tt>stock.py</tt>) presented earlier in the chapter.</p>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>13-4.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Web Services.</span> Update <tt>stock.py</tt> to download other stock quote data, given the additional parameters listed in Table 13-1. You can just take <tt>stock.py</tt> as shown earlier in the chapter and add the new functionality.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>13-5.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">String Processing.</span>
 You’ve noticed that some of the fields that are returned contain 
quotes, cluttering the output. Remove the quotes. Is there another way 
to remove the quotes besides the solution you chose?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>13-6.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">String Processing.</span>
 Not all stock tickers are four letters in length. Similarly, not all 
stock prices (per share) are between ten dollars and $99.99. The same 
goes for the daily change in price and change percentage. Make the 
necessary changes to your script so that even if the output fields are 
strings of different lengths, the output is still formatted evenly, 
justified, and consistent for all stocks. Here’s an example:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>C:\py&gt;python stock.py

Prices quoted as of: Sat Oct 29 02:38:53 2011

TICKER   PRICE  CHANGE    %AGE
------   -----  ------    ----
YHOO     16.56   -0.07  -0.42%
GOOG    600.14   +1.47  +0.25%
T        29.74   +0.60  +2.06%
AMZN    217.32  +10.54  +5.10%
BAC       7.35   +0.30  +4.26%
BRK-B    79.96  +0.065  +0.08%</pre></div><br/></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>13-7.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Files.</span>
 Update the application to save the quote data to a file instead of 
displaying it to the screen. Extra Credit: You can change the script so 
that users can choose to display the quote data or save it to a file.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>13-8.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Web Services and the <tt>csv</tt> Module.</span> Convert <tt>stock.py</tt> from using a normal <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>for</tt></span> loop and parsing the data manually to using the <tt>csv</tt> module to parse the incoming data, like we did in the example code snippet.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>13-9.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Robustness.</span>
 Yahoo! tends to change the download hostname from time to time. It 
might be quote.yahoo.com one day then finance.yahoo.com the next. 
Today’s “hostname du jour” is download.finance.yahoo.com. Sometimes the 
names revert to older ones. Build robustness into your application(s) by
 maintaining a list of these hostnames and ping the Web servers at those
 hosts to see if they are good before fetching quotes. You can also 
periodically screenscrape any Yahoo! quote page and grab the hostname 
from the <span class="docEmphStrong">Download Data</span> link in the <span class="docEmphStrong">Toolbox</span> section at the bottom of the page.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>13-10.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Extending the API.</span> There are plenty more commands available in the Yahoo! quote server. To see a more comprehensive list, go to http://gummy-stuff.org/Yahoo-data.htm. Select several new data points and integrate them into your <tt>stock.py</tt> script.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>13-11.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Python 3.</span> Port <tt>stock.py</tt> to Python 3 and call it <tt>stock3.py</tt>. Extra Credit: Create a solution that runs on both versions 2.x and 3.x and describe any special technique(s) you used.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>13-12.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Foreign Exchange.</span> The Yahoo! quote server can also pull up foreign currency exchange rates. Take a peek at http://gummy-stuff.org/forex.htm and create a new <tt>forex.py</tt> script that performs these lookups.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>13-13.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Stock Charts.</span> Yahoo! also provides a way to autogenerate charts. Here are some example URLs to give you an idea of the service:</p>
<span class="docEmphStrong">Small chart:</span>
<p class="docText">1 day: http://chart.yahoo.com/t?s=GOOG</p>
<p class="docText">5 days: http://chart.yahoo.com/v?s=GOOG</p>
<p class="docText">1 year: http://chart.yahoo.com/c/bb/m/GOOG</p>
<p class="docText"><span class="docEmphStrong">Large chart:</span></p>
<p class="docText">1 day: http://chart.yahoo.com/b?s=GOOG</p>
<p class="docText">5 days: http://chart.yahoo.com/w?s=GOOG</p>
<p class="docText">3 months: http://chart.yahoo.com/c/3m/GOOG</p>
<p class="docText">6 months: http://chart.yahoo.com/c/6m/GOOG</p>
<p class="docText">1 year: http://chart.yahoo.com/c/1y/GOOG</p>
<p class="docText">2 years: http://chart.yahoo.com/c/2y/GOOG</p>
<p class="docText">5 years: http://chart.yahoo.com/c/5y/GOOG</p>
<p class="docText">Max: http://chart.yahoo.com/c/my/GOOG</p>
<p class="docText">Similar to our robustness Exercise 13-9,
 chart.yahoo.com, ichart.yahoo.com, and ichart.finance.yahoo.com are 
currently all interchangeable, so use them all to check for data. Create
 an application to allow users to generate graphs for their stock 
portfolio. Also offer the ability to launch a Web browser directly to a 
page showing the chart. Hint: See the <tt>webbrowser</tt> module.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>13-14.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Historical Data.</span>
 It appears that ichart.financial.yahoo.com also provides historical 
lookups. Use this example URL to find out how it works and create an 
application that performs historical stock price queries: http://chart.yahoo.com/table.csv?s=GOOG&amp;a=06&amp;b=12&amp;c=2006&amp;d=10&amp;e=2&amp;f=2007.</p></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E6GDK">Twitter</h4>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>13-15.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Twitter Service.</span> Describe the Twitter service in your own words. Define what tweets are, and point out some of its limitations.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>13-16.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Twitter Libraries.</span> Discuss the similarities and differences between Twython and Tweepy Python libraries.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>13-17.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Twitter Libraries.</span>
 Take a look at other Python libraries you know which among them you 
would use to access Twitter’s API. How do they compare with the ones we 
looked at in this chapter?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>13-18.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Twitter Libraries.</span>
 You don’t like either Twython and Tweepy Python libraries; write one of
 your own that communicates with Twitter in a safe and RESTful way. 
Start by going to https://dev.twitter.com/docs.</p></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
<p class="docText">The following exercises require that you augment the <tt>twapi.py</tt> example from this chapter.</p>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>13-19.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">User Queries.</span>
 Add functionality to query a user’s Twitter screen name and return her 
corresponding ID. Note that some user screen names are actually 
integers, so ensure that you allow users to enter them as potential 
screen names. Use that ID to fetch that user’s most recent tweet.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>13-20.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Retweeting.</span>
 Augment the search functionality by not only letting users query for 
tweets, but also give them the ability to retweet selected tweets. You 
can provide either a command-line, Web, or GUI interface to support this
 functionality.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>13-21.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Tweet Deletion.</span> Similar to Exercise 13-20,
 provide the user with a way to delete his own posts. Be aware that this
 just removes those tweets from Twitter. The contents of the tweets 
contents might already have been distributed elsewhere.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>13-22.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Follows.</span> Add support that lets you look up a user’s followers (IDs) as well as the IDs of users whom a user is following.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>13-23.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Twitter Libraries.</span> Add support for a different Python/Twitter client library to <tt>twapi.py</tt>. For example, you can try doing this exercise with python-twitter, found at http://code.google.com/p/python-twitter. Other libraries can be found at http://dev.twitter.com/docs/twitter-libraries#python.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>13-24.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Profile Editing.</span>
 Configure so that a user can update his profile and/or to upload a new 
profile picture. Extra Credit: Allow users to update their profile 
colors or background image.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>13-25.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Count.</span> The <tt>user_timeline()</tt> Twitter function also supports a <tt>count</tt>
 variable. By default, Twitter returns the most recent 20 tweets in a 
user’s timeline, but users can request up to 200. Add support for <tt>count</tt> and other optional parameters to <tt>twapi.py</tt>.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>13-26.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Direct Messages.</span>
 Support direct messages (DMs), sending them to a specific user, getting
 a list of DMs sent, retrieving a list of current DMs, and removing DMs.</p></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
<p class="docText">In our <tt>twapi.py</tt> 
example, we were able to examine and modify our Twitter stream because 
we had all the credentials necessary from Twitter for our application. 
However, it’s another matter when you want to write an application that 
tweets on your behalf or that of your registered users. In these cases, 
you’ll need to go through the entire OAuth flow in order to get the 
access token and secret so that your application can act upon the behalf
 of that user.</p>
<p class="docText">This last exercise will be time consuming because you have to learn all about OAuth. Start by reading these two documents: https://dev.twitter.com/docs/auth/oauth and https://dev.twitter.com/docs/auth/moving-from-basic-auth-to-oauth.</p>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>13-27.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Tweet Archive.</span>
 Create a Twitter archival service for yourself (or others). Since 
Twitter saves only up to the 200 most recent tweets, you start losing 
your history fairly quickly. Build a Twitter archival service that 
preserves a registered users’ tweets. If you search the Web for “twitter
 archive” or “twitter research tools,” you’ll come up with a slew of 
them. Hopefully with this exercise, you’ll be breaking ground for the 
next generation Twitter analysis tool!</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>13-28.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Shortlinking, Feed Polling.</span>
 Augment your blogging career. Create a periodic scanner (RSS or other) 
of your personal or work blog. When a new blogpost is made, autotweet a 
short link and the first <span class="docEmphasis">N</span> words from the blogpost title.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>13-29.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Other Web Services.</span> Read about Google’s Prediction API at http://code.google.com/apis/predict
 and try its “Hello World” tutorial. Once you’re up to speed, develop 
your own model that scans various Tweets (yours or tweets from the 
public timeline). Create and train a prediction model that determines 
whether the contents of a tweet are positive, negative, or neutral. Once
 trained, use your tool to determine the sentiments of new tweets by 
using the same query. To do this exercise, you’ll need to create a 
project at Google’s API console—http://code.google.com/apis/console—and
 enable both Google Prediction and Google Storage. If you don’t want to 
create a Google account, you’re welcome to use any similar API.</p></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
