<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>14.1. Comma-Separated Values</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">14.1. Comma-Separated Values</h3>
<p class="docText">In the first section of this 
chapter, we’ll look at comma-separated values (CSV). We begin with a 
quick introduction then move to a code sample of how to use Python to 
read and write CSV files. Finally we revisit an old friend.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EAADK">14.1.1. Introduction to Comma-Separated Values</h4>
<p class="docText">Using CSVs is a common way to 
move data into and out of spreadsheet applications in plain text, as 
opposed to a proprietary binary file format. In fact, CSV doesn’t even 
represent true structured data; the contents of CSV files are just rows 
of string values delimited by commas. There are some subtleties with CSV
 formats, but in general, they’re fairly minor. In many cases, you 
actually don’t need the power of a CSV-oriented module.</p>
<p class="docText">Sounds pretty easy to parse, doesn’t it? Offhand, I’d say just do a <tt>str.split(',')</tt>
 and call it a day. However, we can’t do that because individual field 
values might contain embedded commas, hence the need for CSV-parsing and
 generating a library like Python’s <tt>csv</tt> module.</p>
<p class="docText">Let’s look at a quick example 
of taking data, writing CSV out to a file, and then reading the same 
data back. We’ll also have individual fields that include commas, as 
well, just to make things a bit more difficult. Example 14-1 presents <tt>csvex.py</tt>,
 a script that takes 3-tuples and writes each corresponding record to 
disk as a CSV file. Then, it reads and parses the previously-written CSV
 data.</p>
<p class="docText"></p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E4ADK">Example 14-1. CSV Python 2 and Python 3-Compatible Example (<tt>csvex.py</tt>)</h5><p></p><div class="box">
<p class="docText">This simple script demonstrates writing out CSV data and reading it back in.</p>
<pre class="preFixedHeight">1    #!/usr/bin/env python
2
3    <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> csv
4    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> distutils.log <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> warn <span class="docEmphStrong">as</span> printf
5
6    DATA = (
7       (9, 'Web Clients and Servers', 'base64, urllib'),
8       (10, 'Web Programming: CGI &amp; WSGI', 'cgi, time, wsgiref'),
9       (13, 'Web Services', 'urllib, twython'),
10   )
11
12   printf('*** WRITING CSV DATA')
13   f = open('bookdata.csv', 'w')
14   writer = csv.writer(f)
15   <span class="docEmphStrong">for</span> record <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> DATA:
16        writer.writerow(record)
17   f.close()
18
19   printf('*** REVIEW OF SAVED DATA')
20   f = open('bookdata.csv', 'r')
21   reader = csv.reader(f)
22   <span class="docEmphStrong">for</span> chap, title, modpkgs <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> reader:
23       printf('Chapter %s: %r (featuring %s)' % (
24           chap, title, modpkgs))
25   f.close()

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
<p class="docText">Following is another 
example of writing scripts that are compatible with both Python 2 and 3.
 Regardless of which version you use, you get the following identical 
output:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>$ python csvex.py
*** WRITING CSV DATA
*** REVIEW OF SAVED DATA
Chapter 9: 'Web Clients and Servers' (featuring base64, urllib)
Chapter 10: 'Web Programming: CGI &amp; WSGI' (featuring cgi, time, wsgiref)
Chapter 13: 'Web Services' (featuring urllib, twython)</pre></div><br/>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EIEDK">Line-by-Line Explanation</h5>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0EQEDK">Lines 1–10</h5>
<p class="docText">We first import the <tt>csv</tt> module as well as <tt>distutils.log.warn()</tt> as a proxy for the <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>print</tt></span>
 statement or function. (It’s not really compatible except for a single 
string, but it gets the job done, provided you can work with its 
limitation.) Following the import statements is our data set. This is 
made up
 of 3-tuples that have columns representing chapter numbers, chapter 
titles, and modules and packages that are used in the code samples of 
their respective chapters.</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0EWHDK">Lines 12–17</h5>
<p class="docText">These six lines are fairly self-explanatory. <tt>csv.writer()</tt> is a function that takes an open file (or file-like) object and returns a writer object. The writer features a <tt>writerow()</tt>
 method, which you use to output lines or rows of comma-separated data 
to the open file. After it has done its job, the file is closed.</p>

<h5 class="docSection4Title" id="title-ID0EGIDK">Lines 19–25</h5>
<p class="docText">In this section, <tt>csv.reader()</tt> is the opposing function which returns an iterable object that you can use to read in and parse each row of CSV data. Like <tt>csv.writer()</tt>, <tt>csv.reader()</tt>
 also takes an open file handle and returns a reader object. When you 
iterate through each row of data, the CSVs are automatically parsed and 
returned to you (line 22). We display the output then close the file 
when all rows have been processed.</p>
<p class="docText">In addition to <tt>csv.reader()</tt> and <tt>csv.writer()</tt>, the <tt>csv</tt> module also features the <tt>csv.DictReader</tt> and <tt>csv.DictWriter</tt>
 classes which read CSV data into a dictionary (with given field names 
provided or the first row if not) and write dictionary fields to a CSV 
file.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EHJDK">14.1.2. Stock Portfolio Example Reprise</h4>
<p class="docText">Before moving on to another text
 processing format, take a look at another example. We’ll rewind a bit 
and re-examine the stock portfolio script, <tt>stock.py</tt>, from Chapter 13, “Web Services.” Rather than doing a <tt>str.split(',')</tt>, we’ll port that application so that it uses the <tt>csv</tt> module, instead.</p>
<p class="docText">Also, instead of showing you <span class="docEmphasis">all</span> of the code, most of which is identical to <tt>stock.py</tt>, we’re going to focus only on the differences, or <span class="docEmphasis">diffs</span>, as engineers abbreviate it. Below is a quick review of the entire (Python 2) <tt>stock.py</tt> script (feel free to flip back to Chapter 13 for the line-by-line explanation):</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>#!/usr/bin/env python

<span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> time <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> ctime
<span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> urllib2 <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> urlopen

TICKs = ('yhoo', 'dell', 'cost', 'adbe', 'intc')
URL = 'http://quote.yahoo.com/d/quotes.csv?s=%s&amp;f=sl1c1p2'

<span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> '\nPrices quoted as of: %s PDT\n' % ctime()
<span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> 'TICKER', 'PRICE', 'CHANGE', '%AGE'
<span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> '------', '-----', '------', '----'
u = urlopen(URL % ','.join(TICKs))

<span class="docEmphStrong">for</span> row <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> u:
    tick, price, chg, per = row.split(',')
    <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> tick, '%.2f' % float(price), chg, per,

u.close()</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The
 output of both the original version as well as our modified version 
will be similar. Here’s one example execution as a reminder:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Prices quoted as of: Sat Oct 29 02:06:24 2011 PDT

TICKER PRICE CHANGE %AGE
------ ----- ------ ----
"YHOO" 16.56 -0.07 "-0.42%"
"DELL" 16.31 -0.01 "-0.06%"
"COST" 84.93 -0.29 "-0.34%"
"ADBE" 29.02 +0.68 "+2.40%"
"INTC" 24.98 -0.15 "-0.60%"</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">All we’re going to do is to copy the code from <tt>stock.py</tt> into a new script named <tt>stockcsv.py</tt> and make the changes necessary to use <tt>csv</tt> instead. Let’s see what the differences are, focusing on the code that follows the call to <tt>urlopen()</tt>. As soon as we have this open file, we assign it to <tt>csv.reader()</tt>, as shown here:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>reader = csv.reader(u)
<span class="docEmphStrong">for</span> tick, price, chg, pct <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> reader:
    <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> tick.ljust(7), ('%.2f' % round(float(price), 2)).rjust(6), \
        chg.rjust(6), pct.rstrip().rjust(6)

u.close()</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>for</tt></span> loop is mostly still the same, except that now we do not read in an entire row and split it on the comma. Instead, the <tt>csv</tt>
 module parses the data naturally for us and lets users specify the 
target field names as loop variables. Note the output is close but isn’t
 an exact match. Can you tell the difference (other than the timestamp)?
 Take a look:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>Prices quoted as of: Sun Oct 30 23:19:04 2011 PDT

TICKER PRICE CHANGE %AGE
------ ----- ------ ----
YHOO 16.56 -0.07 -0.42%
DELL 16.31 -0.01 -0.06%
COST 84.93 -0.29 -0.34%
ADBE 29.02 +0.68 +2.40%
INTC 24.98 -0.15 -0.60%</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The difference is subtle. There appears to be quotes around some of the fields in the <tt>str.split()</tt> version but not in the <tt>csv</tt>-processed version. Why is this happening? Recall from Chapter 13
 that some values come back quoted and that there is an exercise at the 
end of that chapter for you to manually remove the extra quotes.</p>
<p class="docText">This isn’t an issue here as the <tt>csv</tt>
 module helps us process the CSV data, including finding and scrubbing 
the superfluous quotes that come from the Yahoo! server. Here’s a code 
snippet and output to confirm those extra quotes:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>&gt;&gt;&gt; <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> urllib2 <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> urlopen
&gt;&gt;&gt; URL = 'http://quote.yahoo.com/d/quotes.csv?s=goog&amp;f=sl1c1p2'
&gt;&gt;&gt; u = urlopen(URL, 'r')
&gt;&gt;&gt; line = u.read()
&gt;&gt;&gt; u.close()
&gt;&gt;&gt; line
'"GOOG",598.67,+12.36,"+2.11%"\r\n'</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The quotes are an extra hassle that developers don’t need to deal with; <tt>csv</tt> takes care of that for us, making the code a bit easier to read without the required extra string processing.</p>
<p class="docText">To improve on the data 
management, it would be even nicer if the data was structured in a more 
hierarchical fashion. For example, it would be good to have each row 
that comes back be part of a single object where the price, change, and 
percentage are attributes of that object. With a 4-value CSV row, 
there’s no indication which is the “primary key,” as it were, unless you
 use the first value or similar convention. This is where JSON might be a
 more appropriate tool for your applications.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
