<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>14.6. Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">14.6. Exercises</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EFLDK">CSV</h4>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>14-1.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">CSV.</span> What is the CSV format, and for what types of applications is it usually suited?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>14-2.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">CSV vs. <tt>str.split()</tt>.</span> Come up with some examples of data for which <tt>str.split(',')</tt> does not suffice, and where use of the <tt>csv</tt> module is really the only way to go.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>14-3.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">CSV vs. <tt>str.split()</tt>.</span> In Chapter 13, for Exercise 13-16, you were asked to make the output of <tt>stock.py</tt>
 more flexible, making all columns line up as much as possible, despite 
the varying length of stock ticker symbols, different stock prices and 
change in prices. Further update that modified script by switching from 
using <tt>str.split(',')</tt> to <tt>csv.reader()</tt>.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>14-4.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Alternative CSV Formats.</span> There are alternative delimiters used besides commas. For example, POSIX-compliant password files are colon (<tt>:</tt>) delimited, whereas e-mail addresses in Outlook are semi-colon (<tt>;</tt>) delimited. Create functions that can read or write documents using these alternative delimiters.</p></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EOODK">JSON</h4>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>14-5.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">JSON.</span> What are the differences in syntax between JSON format and Python dictionaries and lists?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>14-6.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">JSON Arrays.</span> The <tt>dict2json.py</tt> example only demonstrates converting from Python <tt>dict</tt>s to JSON objects. Create a sister script named <tt>lort2json.py</tt> to show moving from lists or tuples to JSON arrays.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>14-7.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Backward Compatibility.</span> Running Example 14-2, <tt>dict2json.py</tt>, using Python 2.5 and older fails:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>$ python2.5 dict2json.py
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "dict2json.py", line 12, in &lt;module&gt;
    from json import dumps
ImportError: No module named json</pre></div><br/>
<div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">What do you need to do to get this to run in older Python releases?</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Modify the code in <tt>dict2json.py</tt>
 that imports JSON functionality to work with older versions of Python 
(for example, versions 2.4 and 2.5) as well as version 2.6 and newer.</p></div></li></ol></div></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>14-8.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">JSON.</span> Add new code to your <tt>stock.py</tt> example from Chapter 13
 that retrieves stock quotes from Yahoo! Finance Service so that it 
returns a JSON string representing all of the stock data in a 
hierarchical data structure format, as opposed to just dumping the 
results on-screen.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>14-9.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">JSON and Types/Classes.</span> Write some script that encodes and decodes any type of Python object, such as numbers, classes, instances, etc.</p></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EOSDK">XML and XML-RPC</h4>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>14-10.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Web Programming.</span> Enhance the <tt>goognewsrss.py</tt> script to output formatted HTML representing anchors/links that can be piped directly to a flat <tt>.html</tt>
 file for browser rendering. The links should be correct/valid and ready
 for users to click and launch the corresponding Web pages.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>14-11.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Robustness.</span> In <tt>xmlrpcsrvr.py</tt>, add support for the <tt>&gt;</tt>, <tt>&gt;=</tt>, <tt>&lt;</tt>, <tt>&lt;=</tt>, <tt>==</tt>, <tt>!=</tt> operations as well as true and floor division.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>14-12.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Twitter.</span> In <tt>xmlrpcclnt.py</tt>, we did not test the <tt>SpecialServices.</tt> <tt>tweet()</tt> method. Add this functionality to your script.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>14-13.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis"><tt>CGIXMLRPCRequestHandler</tt>.</span> By default, <tt>SimpleXMLRPCServer</tt> uses the <tt>SimpleXMLRPCRequestHandler</tt> handler class. What’s the difference between this handler and <tt>CGIXMLRPCRequestHandler</tt>? Create a new server that uses the <tt>CGIXMLRPCRequestHandler</tt>, instead.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>14-14.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis"><tt>DocXMLRPCServer</tt>.</span> Investigate self-documenting XML-RPC servers, and then answer the following:</p>
<div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">What are the differences between the <tt>SimpleXMLRPCServer</tt> and <tt>DocXMLRPCServer</tt> objects? Beyond that, what are the lower-level differences (over the network)?</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Convert both your standard XML-RPC client and server to be self-documenting.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Also convert your CGI version from the previous problem to using the <tt>DocCGIXMLRPCRequestHandler</tt> class.</p></div></li></ol></div></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>14-15.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">XML-RPC Multicalls.</span> In <tt>xmlrpcclnt.py</tt>,
 we make individual requests to the server. Clients making multiple 
calls to the server will experience a performance improvement by being 
able to make a <span class="docEmphasis">multicall</span>, meaning multiple RPC calls with one service request to the server. Investigate the <tt>register_</tt> <tt>multicall_functions()</tt> function, and then add this functionality to your server. Finally, modify your client to use multicall.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>14-16.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">XML and XML-RPC.</span>
 How is any of the XML-RPC material covered in this chapter related to 
XML at all? The material in the last section was quite different from 
the rest of the chapter; how does it tie together?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>14-17.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">JSON-RPC vs. XML-RPC.</span> What is JSON-RPC and how does it relate to XML-RPC?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>14-18.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">JSON-RPC.</span> Port both your XML-RPC client and server code to their equivalent <tt>jsonrpcsrvr.py</tt> and <tt>jsonrpcclnt.py</tt>.</p></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
