<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>15.3. Exercises</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">15.3. Exercises</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EZTDK">Java, Python, Jython</h4>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>15-1.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Jython.</span> What is the difference between Jython and CPython?</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>15-2.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Java and Python.</span>
 Take an existing Java application and port it to Python. Write down 
your experience in a journal. When complete, give an executive summary 
of what has to be accomplished, what some of the important steps are, 
and what common operations you have to perform to make it happen.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>15-3.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Java and Python.</span> Study the Jython source code. Describe how some of Python standard types are implemented in Java.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>15-4.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Java and Python.</span>
 Extend Python by writing an extension in Java. What are the necessary 
steps? Demonstrate your working solution by showing how it works with 
the Jython interactive interpreter.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>15-5.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Jython and Databases.</span> Find an interesting exercise in Chapter 6,
 “Database Programming,” and port it to Jython. One of the best things 
about Jython is that starting in version 2.1, it comes with a JDBC 
database module called <tt>zxJDBC</tt> that is nearly Python DB-API 2.0-compliant.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>15-6.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Python and Jython.</span> Find a Python module not available in Jython (yet) and port it. Consider submitting it as a patch to the Jython distribution.</p></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EEXDK">Google+</h4>
<p></p><table border="0" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="16"><tbody><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>15-7.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Number of Results.</span> In <tt>plus_top_posts.py</tt>,
 we limited the number of results displayed to the “top 5” while clearly
 the code supports plenty more. Add another menu option that lets users 
choose how many results to return (up to a reasonable number).</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>15-8.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Timeline.</span> In <tt>top_posts()</tt>, there is a <tt>ndays</tt>
 variable which defaults the script to retrieving the most popular posts
 within the past seven days. Broaden the scope by supporting a variable 
timeline (any number of days).</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>15-9.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Object-Oriented Programming and Global Variables.</span> In <tt>plus_ top_posts.py</tt>, we put all the core functionality into the <tt>PlusService</tt> class. All of the user-facing code (<tt>raw_input()</tt>s and <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>print</tt></span> statements) are in functions outside of the class.</p>
<div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">This forced us to make <tt>service</tt> a global variable. Why are those bad again?</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Refactor the code so that <tt>service</tt>
 is no longer used as a global variable access from those external 
functions. You can consider the following: integrate external functions 
as methods of <tt>PlusService</tt> (including <tt>_main()</tt>), pass it around as a local variable, etc.</p></div></li></ol></div></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>15-10.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Python 3.</span> The Google APIs Client Library for Python isn’t available in Python 3 yet, but in anticipation, port <tt>plus_top_ posts.py</tt>
 to an equivalent in Python 3 or create a hybrid that runs under both 
Python 2 or 3. You’ll be able to test it once Python 3 availability 
occurs, but it’s good to practice anyway.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>15-11.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Progress “Bar.”</span>
 While the “Searching for...” message is helpful so that users can see 
and prepare to wait momentarily while their results are being collated, 
it’s more informative to get clues as this is happening. To do this, add
 an import of the <tt>sys</tt> module to <tt>plus_top_posts.py</tt>. Then, in <tt>PlusService. get_posts()</tt>, add a call that writes out a single dot or period to the screen—right after a new <tt>PlusPost</tt> object is appended to the results set.</p>
We recommend that you use <tt>stderr</tt> instead of <tt>stdout</tt>
 because the former is unbuffered and will flush immediately to the 
screen. When you execute another search, you’ll get a better idea of the
 intermediate work required to pull together the results before you see 
them.</td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>15-12.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Google+.</span> Users can respond to posts by making comments. In <tt>plus_top_posts.py</tt>, we only list the posts. Augment its functionality to also show the comments for each post. You can find out more at https://developers.google.com/+/api/latest/comments.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>15-13.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Authorization.</span> None of the searches performed in <tt>plus_top_ posts.py</tt>
 were authorized, meaning that the application can only search public 
data. Add support for OAuth2 to gain access to user and private data. 
You can learn more at https://developers.google.com/+/api/oauth and http://code.google.com/p/google-api-python-client/wiki/OAuth2Client.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>15-14.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Accuracy.</span> In the search code, our <tt>plus_top_posts.py</tt> script, specifically the <tt>get_posts()</tt>
 method, we filter out irrelevant content. We do this by ensuring that 
the search term appears in the title of the post. This is somewhat of a 
blunt measure because the title is only part of an overall message. 
Improve the accuracy of our filtering by also checking if the <span class="docEmphasis">content</span>
 contains the search term as well, and if either one is a match for any 
particular post, we should save it. To see how to get the content, take a
 look at the initializer for <tt>PlusPost</tt> objects. Try to minimize duplication of code where possible. Extra Credit: Also check attachment content for the search term.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>15-15.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Time vs. Relevance.</span> The default Google+ search order is by the most recent posts first. In the call to <tt>self.service.activities().search()</tt>, there is an implied <tt>orderBy='recent'</tt> parameter. More on <tt>orderBy</tt> can be found in the developer documentation at https://developers.google.com/+/api/latest/activities/search.</p>
<div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="a"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">This ordering can be altered from the most recent to the most relevant posts by changing that parameter to <tt>'best'</tt>, instead. Make this change.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">How does this affect the code in the <tt>get_posts()</tt> method, which returns once we’ve reached a post older than our threshold?</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">What should be done to address this (if anything)? If so, make that change.</p></div></li></ol></div></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>15-16.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">People Search.</span> Add support for people search via the Google+ API by creating a function called <tt>find_people()</tt>. The current activity search uses the <tt>self.service.activities().search()</tt> method. You will use the equivalent for user search, that is, <tt>self.service.people().search()</tt>. For more information, go to http://developers.google.com/+/api/latest/people/search.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>15-17.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Attachments.</span> Our <tt>plus_top_posts.py</tt>
 script does not do anything about attachments, which are sometimes the 
key reason behind posts. In the sample output executing this script 
showing the top five Python-related posts (at the time of this writing),
 at least one post featured a link to the relevant Web page, and at 
least another featured a picture. Add support for attachments to your 
version of this script.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>15-18.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Command-line Arguments.</span> The version of <tt>plus_top_posts.py</tt>
 featured in this chapter is a command-line menu-driven program. However
 in reality, you might prefer a non-interactive interface, especially 
for scripting, cron jobs, etc. Augment the application by integrating a 
command-line argument parsing interface (and equivalent functionality). 
We recommend that you use <tt>argparse</tt>,<sup class="docFootnote">[1]</sup> but <tt>optparse</tt><sup class="docFootnote">[2]</sup> or even the old <tt>getopt</tt> module will suffice.</p></td></tr><tr valign="top"><td align="right" class="docText" width="50"><b>15-19.</b></td><td class="docText"><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Web Programming.</span> The <tt>plus_top_posts.py</tt>
 script works fine as a command-line tool, however you might not always 
be in front of a terminal and possibly in a place where online access 
might be the only option. Develop a completely separate Web application 
version of this tool. Use any tools at your disposal.</p></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
