<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>C.2. What Has Changed?</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">C.2. What Has Changed?</h3>
<p class="docText">The changes in Python 3 are
 not mind-boggling—it’s not as if you’ll no longer recognize Python. The
 remainder of this appendix provides an overview of some of the major 
changes:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>print</tt></span> becomes <tt>print()</tt>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Strings are cast into Unicode by default.</p></li><li><p class="docList">There is a single class type.</p></li><li><p class="docList">The syntax for exceptions has been updated.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Integers have been updated.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Iterables are used everywhere.</p></li></ul>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EKOEK">C.2.1. <tt>print</tt> Becomes <tt>print()</tt></h4>
<p class="docText">The switch to <tt>print()</tt>
 is the change that breaks the greatest amount of existing Python code. 
Why is Python changing from a statement to a built-in function (BIF)? 
Having <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>print</tt></span>
 as a statement is limiting in many regards, as detailed by Guido in his
 “Python Regrets” talk, in which he outlined what he feels are 
shortcomings of the language. In addition, having <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>print</tt></span> as a statement limits improvements to it. However, when <tt>print()</tt> is available as a function, new keyword parameters can be added, certain standard behaviors can be overridden with keyword parameters, and <tt>print()</tt> can be replaced if desired, just like any other BIF. Here are before-and-after examples:</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ESREK">Python 2.x</h5>
<div class="docText"><pre>&gt;&gt;&gt; i = 1
&gt;&gt;&gt; <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> 'Python' 'is', 'number', i
Pythonis number 1</pre></div><br/>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EGSEK">Python <span class="docEmphasis">3.x</span></h5>
<div class="docText"><pre>&gt;&gt;&gt; i = 1
&gt;&gt;&gt; print('Python' 'is', 'number', i)
Pythonis number 1</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The omission of a comma between <tt>'Python'</tt> and <tt>'is'</tt>
 is deliberate; it was done to show you that direct string literal 
concatenation has not changed. You can see more examples in the “What’s 
New in Python 3.0” document (refer to the references section at the end 
of this appendix). You can find additional information about this change
 in PEP 3105.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EATEK">C.2.2. Strings: Unicode by Default</h4>
<p class="docText">The next “gotcha” that current
 Python users face is that strings are now Unicode by default. This 
change couldn’t have come soon enough. Not a day goes by that countless 
Python developers don’t run into a problem when dealing with Unicode and
 regular ASCII strings that looks something like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>UnicodeEncodeError: 'ascii' codec can't encode character
u'\xae' in position 0: ordinal not in range(128)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">These types of errors will 
no longer be an everyday occurrence in 3.x. For more information on 
using Unicode in Python, see the Unicode HOWTO document (refer to the 
References section at the end of this appendix for the Web address). 
With the model adopted by the new version of Python, users shouldn’t 
even use the terms Unicode and ASCII/non-Unicode strings anymore. The 
“What’s New in Python 3.0” document sums up this new model pretty 
explicitly.</p>
<p class="docText">Python 3 uses the concepts of <span class="docEmphasis">text</span> and (binary) <span class="docEmphasis">data</span>
 instead of Unicode strings and 8-bit strings. All text is Unicode; 
however, encoded Unicode is represented as binary data. The type used to
 hold text is <tt>str</tt>, and the type used to hold data is <tt>bytes</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">With regard to syntax, because Unicode is now the default, the leading <tt>u</tt> or <tt>U</tt> is deprecated. Similarly, the new <tt>bytes</tt> objects require a leading <tt>b</tt> or <tt>B</tt> for <span class="docEmphasis">its</span> literals (more information can be found in PEP 3112).</p>
<p class="docText">Table C-1
 compares the various string types, showing how they will change from 
version 2.x to 3.x. The table also includes a mention of the new mutable
 <tt>bytearray</tt> type.</p>
<p></p><table cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0" frame="hsides" rules="groups"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table C-1. Strings in Python 2 and 3</h5></caption><colgroup align="left" span="3"><col width="150"></col><col width="150"></col><col width="150"></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell bottomBorder thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Python 2</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell bottomBorder thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Python 3</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell bottomBorder thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Mutable?</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>str</tt> (<tt>""</tt>)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>bytes</tt> (<tt>b""</tt>)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">no</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>unicode</tt> (<tt>u""</tt>)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>str</tt> (<tt>""</tt>)</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">no</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">N/A</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>bytearray</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">yes</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ESZEK">C.2.3. Single Class Type</h4>
<p class="docText">Prior to Python 2.2, 
Python’s objects didn’t behave like classes in other languages: classes 
were “class” objects and instances were “instance” objects. This is in 
stark contrast to what people perceive as normal: classes are types and 
instances are objects of such types. Because of this “flaw,” you could 
not subclass data types and modify them. In Python 2.2, the core 
development team came up with <span class="docEmphasis">new-style classes</span>,
 which act more like what people expect. Furthermore, this change meant 
that regular Python types could be subclassed—a change described in 
Guido’s “Unifying Types and Classes in Python 2.2” essay. Python 3 
supports only new-style classes.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EA1EK">C.2.4. Updated Syntax for Exceptions</h4>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EI1EK">Exception Handling</h5>
<p class="docText">In the past, the syntax to catch an exception and the exception argument/instance had the following form:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong">except</span> ValueError, e:</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">To catch multiple exceptions with the same handler, the following syntax was used:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong">except</span> (ValueError, TypeError), e:</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The required parentheses confused some users, who often attempted to write invalid code looking like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong">except</span> ValueError, TypeError, e:</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The (new) <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>as</tt></span>
 keyword is intended to ensure that you do not become confused by the 
comma in the original syntax; however, the parentheses are still 
required when you’re trying to catch more than one type of exception 
using the same handler. Here are two equivalent examples of the new 
syntax that demonstrate this change:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong">except</span> ValueError <span class="docEmphStrong">as</span> e:

<span class="docEmphStrong">except</span> (ValueError, TypeError) <span class="docEmphStrong">as</span> e:</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The remaining version 2.x 
releases beginning with 2.6 accept both forms when creating exception 
handlers, thereby facilitating the porting process. You can find more 
information about this change in PEP 3110.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EQ5EK">Raising Exceptions</h5>
<p class="docText">The most popular syntax for raising exceptions in Python 2.x is as follows:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong">raise</span> ValueError, e</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">To truly emphasize that you are creating an instance of an exception, the only syntax supported in Python 3.x is the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong">raise</span> ValueError(e)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This syntax really 
isn’t new at all. It was introduced over a decade ago in Python 1.5 
(yes, you read that correctly) when exceptions changed from strings to 
classes, and we’re sure you’ll agree that the syntax for class 
instantiation looks a lot more like the latter than the former.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EU6EK">C.2.5. Updates to Integers</h4>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E36EK">Single Integer Type</h5>
<p class="docText">Python’s two different integer types, <tt>int</tt> and <tt>long</tt>, began their unification in Python 2.2. That change is now almost complete, with the new <tt>int</tt> behaving like a <tt>long</tt>. As a consequence, <tt>OverflowError</tt> exceptions no longer occur when you exceed the native integer size, and the trailing <tt>L</tt> has been dropped. This change is outlined in PEP 237. <tt>long</tt> still exists in Python 2.x but has disappeared in Python 3.0.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EKCFK">Changes to Division</h5>
<p class="docText">The current division operator (<tt>/</tt>)
 doesn’t give the expected answer for those users who are new to 
programming, so it has been changed to do so. If this change has brought
 any controversy, it is simply that programmers are used to the floor 
division functionality. To see how the confusion arises, try to convince
 a programming newbie that 1 divided by 2 is 0 (<tt>1 /</tt> <tt>2</tt> <tt>==</tt> <tt>0</tt>).
 The simplest way to describe this change is with examples. Following 
are some excerpted from “Keeping Up with Python: The 2.2 Release,” found
 in the July 2002 issue of <span class="docEmphasis">Linux Journal</span>. You can also find out more about this update in PEP 238.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EEDFK">Classic Division</h5>
<p class="docText">The default Python 2.x division operation works this way: given two integer operands, <tt>/</tt> performs integer floor division (truncates the fraction as in the earlier example). If there is at least one <tt>float</tt> involved, true division occurs:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>&gt;&gt;&gt; 1 / 2          # floor
0
&gt;&gt;&gt; 1.0 / 2.0      # true
0.5</pre></div><br/>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E2DFK">True Division</h5>
<p class="docText">In Python 3.x, given any two numeric operands, <tt>/</tt> will always return a float:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>&gt;&gt;&gt; 1 / 2          # true
0.5
&gt;&gt;&gt; 1.0 / 2.0      # true
0.5</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">To try true division starting in Python 2.2, you can either import <tt>division</tt> from <tt>__future__</tt> or use the <tt>-Qnew</tt> switch.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EVJFK">Floor Division</h5>
<p class="docText">The double-slash division operator (<tt>//</tt>) was added in Python 2.2 to always perform floor division, regardless of operand type, and to begin the transition process:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>&gt;&gt;&gt; 1 // 2         # floor
0
&gt;&gt;&gt; 1.0 // 2.0     # floor
0.0</pre></div><br/>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EKKFK">Binary and Octal Literals</h5>
<p class="docText">The minor integer literal 
changes were added in Python 2.6+ to make literal nondecimal 
(hexadecimal, octal, and new binary) formats consistent. Hex 
representation stayed the same, with its leading <tt>0x</tt> or <tt>0X</tt> (where the octal had formerly led with a single <tt>0</tt>). This format proved confusing to some users, so it has been changed to <tt>0o</tt> for consistency. Instead of <tt>0177</tt>, you must now use <tt>0o177</tt>. Finally, the new binary literal lets you provide the bits of an integer value, prefixed with a leading <tt>0b</tt>, as in <tt>0b0110</tt>. Python 3 does not accept <tt>0177</tt>. You can find more information on integer literals updates in PEP 3127.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EJLFK">C.2.6. Iterables Everywhere</h4>
<p class="docText">Another theme inherent to 
version 3.x is memory conservation. Using iterators is much more 
efficient than maintaining entire lists in memory, especially when the 
target action on the objects in question is iteration. There’s no need 
to waste memory when it’s not necessary. Thus, in Python 3, code that 
returned lists in earlier versions of the language no longer does so.</p>
<p class="docText">For example, the functions <tt>map()</tt>, <tt>filter()</tt>, <tt>range()</tt>, and <tt>zip()</tt>, plus the dictionary methods <tt>keys()</tt>, <tt>items()</tt>, and <tt>values()</tt>,
 all return some sort of iterator. Yes, this syntax can be more 
inconvenient if you want to glance at your data, but it’s better in 
terms of resource consumption. The changes are mostly under the hood—if 
you only use the functions’ return values to iterate over, you won’t 
notice a thing.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
