<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>C.3. Migration Tools</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">C.3. Migration Tools</h3>
<p class="docText">As
 you have seen, most of the Python 3.x changes do not represent some 
wild mutation of the familiar Python syntax. Instead, the changes are 
just enough to break the old code base. Of course, the changes affect 
users, so a good transition plan is clearly needed—and most good plans 
come with good tools or aids to smooth the way. Such tools include (but 
are not limited to) the following: the <tt>2to3</tt> code converter, the latest Python 2.x release (at least 2.6), and the external (non-standard library) <tt>3to2</tt> tool and <tt>six</tt> library. We’ll cover the first two here and let you investigate the latter pair on your own.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ESREK">C.3.1. The <tt>2to3</tt> Tool</h4>
<p class="docText">The <tt>2to3</tt> tool will
 take Python 2.x code and attempt to generate a working equivalent in 
Python 3.x. Here are some of the actions it performs:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">Converts a <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>print</tt></span> statement to a <tt>print()</tt> function</p></li><li><p class="docList">Removes the <tt>L</tt> long suffix</p></li><li><p class="docList">Replaces <tt>&lt;&gt;</tt> with <tt>!=</tt></p></li><li><p class="docList">Changes single backquoted strings (<tt>'...'</tt>) to <tt>repr(...)</tt></p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">This tool does a lot of 
the manual labor—but not everything; the rest is up to you. You can read
 more about porting suggestions and the <tt>2to3</tt> tool in the “What’s New in Python 3.0” document as well as at the tool’s Web page (http://docs.python.org/3.0/library/2to3.html). In Appendix D, “Python 3 Migration with 2.6+,” we’ll also briefly mention a companion tool named <tt>3to2</tt>.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EWTEK">C.3.2. Python 2.6+</h4>
<p class="docText">Because of the compatibility 
issue, the releases of Python that lead up to 3.0 play a much more 
significant role in the transition. Of particular note is Python 2.6, 
the first and most pivotal of such releases. For users, it represents 
the first time that they can start coding against the version 3.x family
 of releases, because many 3.x features have been backported to version 
2.x.</p>
<p class="docText">Whenever possible, the 
final version 2.x releases (2.6 and newer) incorporate new features and 
syntax from version 3.x, while remaining compatible with existing code 
by not removing older features or syntax. Such features are described in
 the “What’s New in Python 2.x” document for all such releases. We 
detail some of these migration features in Appendix D.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
