<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>D.1. Python 3: The Next Generation</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">D.1. Python 3: The Next Generation</h3>
<p class="docText">Python is currently 
undergoing its most significant transformation since it was first 
released back in the winter of 1991. Python 3 is backward incompatible 
with all older versions, so porting will be a more significant issue 
than in the past.</p>
<p class="docText">Unlike other end-of-life 
efforts, however, Python 2.x will not disappear anytime soon. In fact, 
the remainder of the version 2.x series will be developed in parallel 
with 3.x, thereby ensuring a smooth transition from the current to next 
generation. Python 2.6 is the first of these final version 2.x releases.</p>
<p class="docText">This document reinforces material covered Appendix C, “Python 3: The Evolution of a Programming Language,” but goes into more detail when appropriate.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E4SEK">D.1.1. Hybrid 2.6+ as Transition Tool</h4>
<p class="docText">Python 2.6 and remaining 2.x 
releases are hybrid interpreters. This means that they can run a 
considerable amount of version 1.x code, all version 2.x software, and 
can even run a limited amount of 3.x (code that is native version 3.x 
but made available in 2.6+). Some will argue that Python releases dating
 back to version 2.2 have already been mixed interpreters because they 
support creation of both classic classes as well as new-style classes, 
but that is as far as they go.</p>
<p class="docText">The version 2.6 release 
is the first version with specific version 3.x features backported to 
it. The most significant of these features are summarized here:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList">Integers</p><dl><dd><p class="docList">- Single integer type</p></dd><dd><p class="docList">- New binary and modified octal literals</p></dd><dd><p class="docList">- Classic or true division</p></dd><dd><p class="docList">- The <tt>-Q</tt> division switch</p></dd></dl></li><li><p class="docList">Built-in functions</p><dl><dd><p class="docList">- <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>print</tt></span> or <tt>print()</tt></p></dd><dd><p class="docList">- <tt>reduce()</tt></p></dd><dd><p class="docList">- Other updates</p></dd></dl></li><li><p class="docList">Object-oriented programming</p><dl><dd><p class="docList">- Two different class objects</p></dd></dl></li><li><p class="docList">Strings</p><dl><dd><p class="docList">- <tt>bytes</tt> literals</p></dd><dd><p class="docList">- <tt>bytes</tt> type</p></dd></dl></li><li><p class="docList">Exceptions</p><dl><dd><p class="docList">- Handling exceptions</p></dd><dd><p class="docList">- Raising exceptions</p></dd></dl></li><li><p class="docList">Other transition tools and tips</p><dl><dd><p class="docList">- Warnings: the <tt>-3</tt> switch</p></dd><dd><p class="docList">- <tt>2to3</tt> tool</p></dd></dl></li></ul>
<p class="docText">This appendix does not 
discuss other new version 2.x features that are stand-alone, meaning 
they do not have any consequences for porting applications to version 
3.x. Thus, without further ado, let’s jump right in.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
