<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>D.2. Integers</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">D.2. Integers</h3>
<p class="docText">Python integers face 
several changes in version 3.x and beyond, relating to their types, 
literals, and the integer division operation. We describe each of these 
changes next, highlighting the role that version 2.6 and newer versions 
play in terms of migration.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EWTEK">D.2.1. Single Integer Type</h4>
<p class="docText">Previous versions of Python featured two integer types, <tt>int</tt> and <tt>long</tt>. The original <tt>int</tt>s were limited in size to the architecture of the platform on which the code ran (i.e., 32-bit, 64-bit), whereas <tt>long</tt>s
 were unlimited in size except in terms of how much virtual memory the 
operating system provided. The process of unifying these two types into a
 single <tt>int</tt> type began in Python 2.2 and will be complete in version 3.0.<sup class="docFootnote">[1]</sup> The new single <tt>int</tt> type will be unlimited in size, and the previous <tt>L</tt> or <tt>l</tt> designation for <tt>long</tt>s is removed. You can read more about this change in PEP 237.</p><blockquote><p class="docFootnote"><sup><a name="app04fn01">[1]</a></sup> The <tt>bool</tt> type also might be considered part of this equation, because <tt>bool</tt>s behave like <tt>0</tt> and <tt>1</tt> in numerical situations rather than having their natural values of <tt>False</tt> and <tt>True</tt>, respectively.</p></blockquote>
<p class="docText">As of version 2.6, there is little trace of <tt>long</tt> integers, save for the support of the trailing <tt>L</tt>. It is included for backward-compatibility purposes, to support all code that uses <tt>long</tt>s. Nevertheless, users should be actively purging <tt>long</tt> integers from their existing code and should no longer use <tt>long</tt>s in any new code written against Python 2.6+.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ETVEK">D.2.2. New Binary and Modified Octal Literals</h4>
<p class="docText">Python
 3 features a minor revision to the alternative base format for 
integers. It has basically streamlined the syntax to make it consistent 
with the existing hexadecimal format, prefixed with a leading <tt>0x</tt> (or <tt>0X</tt> for capital letters)—for example, <tt>0x80</tt>, <tt>0xffff</tt>, <tt>0xDEADBEEF</tt>.</p>
<p class="docText">A new binary literal lets you provide the bits to an integer number, prefixed with a leading <tt>0b</tt> (e.g., <tt>0b0110</tt>). The original octal representation began with a single <tt>0</tt>, but this format proved confusing to some users, so it has been changed to <tt>0o</tt> to bring it in line with hexadecimal and binary literals, as just described. In other words, <tt>0177</tt> is no longer allowed; you must use <tt>0o177</tt>, instead. Here are some examples:</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EPYEK">Python 2.x</h5>
<div class="docText"><pre>&gt;&gt;&gt; 0177
127</pre></div><br/>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E6YEK">Python 3 (including 2.6+)</h5>
<div class="docText"><pre>&gt;&gt;&gt; 0o177
127
&gt;&gt;&gt; 0b0110
6</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Both the new binary and
 modified octal literal formats have been backported to version 2.6 to 
help with migration. In fact, version 2.6 and newer, in their role as 
transition tools, accept <span class="docEmphasis">both</span> octal formats, whereas no version 3.x release accepts the old <tt>0177</tt> format. You can find more information on the updates to integer literals in PEP 3127.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EXZEK">D.2.3. Classic or True Division</h4>
<p class="docText">A change that has been a long time coming, yet remains controversial to many, is the change to the division operator (<tt>/</tt>). The traditional division operation works in the following way: given two integer operands, <tt>/</tt> performs integer floor division. If there is at least one <tt>float</tt> involved, true division occurs:</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EI1EK">Python 2.x: Classic Division</h5>
<div class="docText"><pre>&gt;&gt;&gt; 1 / 2          # floor
0
&gt;&gt;&gt; 1.0 / 2.0      # true
0.5
&gt;&gt;&gt; 1.0 / 2        # true (2 is internally coerced to float)
0.5</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In Python 3, the <tt>/</tt> operator will always return a float, regardless of operand type.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EV3EK">Python 3.x: True Division</h5>
<div class="docText"><pre>&gt;&gt;&gt; 1 / 2          # true
0.5
&gt;&gt;&gt; 1.0 / 2        # true
0.5</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The double-slash division operator (<tt>//</tt>)
 was added as a proxy in Python 2.2 to always perform floor division, 
regardless of the operand type and to begin the transition process.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EK4EK">Python 2.2+ and 3.x: Floor Division</h5>
<div class="docText"><pre>&gt;&gt;&gt; 1 // 2         # floor
0
&gt;&gt;&gt; 1.0 // 2       # floor
0.0</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Using <tt>//</tt> will 
be the only way to obtain floor division functionality in version 3.x. 
To try true division in Python 2.2+, you can add the line <tt>from __future__</tt> <tt>import</tt> <tt>division</tt> to your code, or use the <tt>-Q</tt> command-line option (discussed next).</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EH5EK">Python 2.2+: Division Command-Line Option</h5>
<p class="docText">If you do not wish to import <tt>division</tt> from <tt>__future__</tt> module in your code, but you want true division to always prevail, you can use the <tt>-Qnew</tt> switch. There are also other options for using <tt>-Q</tt>, as summarized in Table D-1.</p>
<p></p><table cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0" frame="hsides" rules="groups"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table D-1. Division Operation <tt>-Q</tt> Command-Line Options</h5></caption><colgroup align="left" span="2"><col width="100"></col><col width="400"></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell bottomBorder thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Option</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell bottomBorder thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Description</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>old</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Always perform classic division</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>new</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Always perform true division</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>warn</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Warn against <tt>int</tt>/<tt>int</tt> and <tt>long</tt>/<tt>long</tt> operations</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>warnall</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Warn against all use of <tt>/</tt></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/>
<p class="docText">For example, the <tt>-Qwarnall</tt> option is used in the <tt>Tools/scripts/fixdiv.py</tt> script found in the Python source distribution.</p>
<p class="docText">As you might have guessed by 
now, all of the transition efforts have already been implemented in 
Python 2.2, and no specific additional functionality as far as this 
command-line has been added to versions 2.6 or 2.7 with respect to 
Python 3 migration. Table D-2 summarizes the division operators and their functionality in the various Python releases.</p>
<p></p><table cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0" frame="hsides" rules="groups"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table D-2. Python Default Division Operator Functionality by Release</h5></caption><colgroup align="left" span="4"><col width="150"></col><col width="150"></col><col width="150"></col><col width="150"></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell bottomBorder thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">Operator</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell bottomBorder thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">2.1-</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell bottomBorder thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">2.2+</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell bottomBorder thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="top">3.x<sup class="docFootnote">[a]</sup></th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>/</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Classic</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Classic</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">True</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>//</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Not applicable</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Floor</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Floor</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><blockquote><p class="docFootnote"><sup><a name="app04table02tn01">[a]</a></sup> The “3.x” column also applies to Python 2.2+ with <tt>-Qnew</tt> or the <tt>__future__.division</tt> import.</p></blockquote>
<p class="docText">You can read more about the 
change to the division operator in PEP 238 as well as in an article 
titled “Keeping Up with Python: The 2.2 Release” that I wrote for <span class="docEmphasis">Linux Journal</span> in July 2002.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
