<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>D.3. Built-In Functions</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">D.3. Built-In Functions</h3>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EEVEK">D.3.1. The <tt>print</tt> Statement or <tt>print()</tt> Function</h4>
<p class="docText">It’s no secret that one of the most common causes of breakage between Python 2.x and 3.x applications is the change in the <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>print</tt></span> statement, which becomes a built-in function (BIF) in version 3.x. This change allows <tt>print()</tt> to be more flexible, upgradeable, and swappable, if desired.</p>
<p class="docText">Python 2.6 and newer support either the <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>print</tt></span> statement or the <tt>print()</tt> BIF. The default is the former usage, as it should be in a version 2.x language. To discard the <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>print</tt></span> statement and go with only the function in a “Python 3 mode” application, you would simply import <tt>print_function</tt> from <tt>__future__</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>&gt;&gt;&gt; <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> 'foo', 'bar'
foo bar
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> __future__ <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> print_function
&gt;&gt;&gt; <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span>
&lt;built-in function print&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; print('foo', 'bar')
foo bar
&gt;&gt;&gt; print('foo', 'bar', sep='-')
foo-bar</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The preceding example demonstrates the power of <tt>print()</tt> as a function. Using the <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>print</tt></span> statement, we display the strings <tt>foo</tt> and <tt>bar</tt> to the user, but we cannot change the default delimiter or separator between strings, which is a space. In contrast, <tt>print()</tt> makes this functionality available in its call as the argument <tt>sep</tt>, which replaces the default—and allows <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>print</tt></span> to evolve and progress.</p>
<p class="docText">Note that this is a one-way import, meaning that there is no way to revert <tt>print()</tt> to a statement. Even issuing a <tt>"del</tt> <tt>print_function"</tt> will not have any effect. This major change is detailed in PEP 3105.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ERZEK">D.3.2. <tt>reduce()</tt> Moved to <tt>functools</tt> Module</h4>
<p class="docText">In Python 3.x, the <tt>reduce()</tt> function has been demoted (much to the chagrin of many Python functional programmers) from being a BIF to <tt>functools</tt> module function, beginning in version 2.6.</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>&gt;&gt;&gt; <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> operator <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> add
&gt;&gt;&gt; reduce(add, range(5))
10
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> functools
&gt;&gt;&gt; functools.reduce(add, range(5))
10</pre></div><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EW1EK">D.3.3. Other Updates</h4>
<p class="docText">One key theme in Python 3.x is
 the migration to greater use of iterators, especially for BIF and 
methods that have historically returned lists. Still other iterators are
 changing because of the updates to integers. The following are the most
 high-profile BIFs, changed in Python 3.x:</p>
<ul><li><p class="docList"><tt>range()</tt></p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>zip()</tt></p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>map()</tt></p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>filter()</tt></p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>hex()</tt></p></li><li><p class="docList"><tt>oct()</tt></p></li></ul>
<p class="docText">Starting in Python 2.6, programmers can access the new and updated functions by importing the <tt>future_builtins</tt> module. Here is an example that demonstrates both the old and new <tt>oct()</tt> and <tt>zip()</tt> functions:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>&gt;&gt;&gt; oct(87)
'0127'
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; zip(range(4), 'abcd')
[(0, 'a'), (1, 'b'), (2, 'c'), (3, 'd')]
&gt;&gt;&gt; dict(zip(range(4), 'abcd'))
{0: 'a', 1: 'b', 2: 'c', 3: 'd'}
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> future_builtins
&gt;&gt;&gt; future_builtins.oct(87)
'0o127'
&gt;&gt;&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; future_builtins.zip(range(4), 'abcd')
&lt;itertools.izip object at 0x374080&gt;
&gt;&gt;&gt; dict(future_builtins.zip(range(4), 'abcd'))
{0: 'a', 1: 'b', 2: 'c', 3: 'd'}</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">If you want to use only the
 Python 3.x versions of these functions in your current Python 2.x 
environment, you can override the old ones by importing all the new 
functions into your namespace. The following example demonstrates this 
process with <tt>oct()</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>&gt;&gt;&gt; <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> future_builtins <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> *
&gt;&gt;&gt; oct(87)
'0o127'</pre></div><br/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
