<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>D.5. Strings</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">D.5. Strings</h3>
<p class="docText">One especially notable 
change in Python 3.x is that the default string type is changing. Python
 2.x supports both ASCII and Unicode strings, with ASCII being the 
default. This support is swapped in Python 3: Unicode becomes the 
default, and ASCII strings are now called <tt>bytes</tt>. The <tt>bytes</tt>
 data structure contains byte values and really shouldn’t be considered a
 string (anymore) as much as it is an immutable byte array that contains
 data.</p>
<p class="docText">Current string literals will now require a leading <tt>b</tt> or <tt>B</tt> in Python 3.x, and current Unicode string literals will drop their leading <tt>u</tt> or <tt>U</tt>. The type and BIF names will change from <tt>str</tt> to <tt>bytes</tt> and from <tt>unicode</tt> to <tt>str</tt>. In addition, there is a new mutable “string” type called <tt>bytearray</tt> that, like <tt>bytes</tt>, is also a byte array, only mutable.</p>
<p class="docText">You can find out more about 
using Unicode strings in the HOWTO and learn about the changes coming to
 string types in PEP 3137. Refer to Table C-1 for a chart on the various
 string types in both Python 2 and Python 3.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EAYEK">D.5.1. <tt>bytes</tt> Literals</h4>
<p class="docText">To smooth the way for using <tt>bytes</tt> objects in Python 3.x, you can optionally prepend a regular ASCII/binary string in Python 2.6 with a leading <tt>b</tt> or <tt>B</tt>, thereby creating <tt>bytes</tt> literals (<tt>b''</tt> or <tt>B''</tt>) as synonyms for <tt>str</tt> literals (<tt>''</tt>). The leading indicator has no bearing on any <tt>str</tt>
 object itself or any of the object’s operations (it is purely 
decorative), but it does prepare you for situations in Python 3 for 
which you need to create such a literal. You can find out more about <tt>bytes</tt> literals in PEP 3112.</p>

<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EBZEK"><tt>bytes</tt> is <tt>str</tt></h5>
<p class="docText">It should not require much of a stretch of the imagination to recognize that if <tt>bytes</tt> literals are supported, then <tt>bytes</tt> objects themselves need to exist in Python 2.6+. Indeed, the <tt>bytes</tt> type is synonymous with <tt>str</tt>, as demonstrated in the following:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>&gt;&gt;&gt; bytes <span class="docEmphStrong">is</span> str
True</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Thus, you can use <tt>bytes</tt> or <tt>bytes()</tt> in Python 2.6+ wherever you use <tt>str</tt> or <tt>str()</tt>. Further information on <tt>bytes</tt> objects can be found in PEP 358.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
