<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>D.6. Exceptions</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">D.6. Exceptions</h3>
<p class="docText">Python 2.6 and newer version 
2.x releases have several features that you can use to port exception 
handling and raise exceptions in Python 3.x.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E1XEK">D.6.1. Handling Exceptions (Using <tt>as</tt>)</h4>
<p class="docText">The syntax in Python 3 for catching and handling a single exception looks like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong">except</span> ValueError <span class="docEmphStrong">as</span> e:</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>e</tt> variable 
contains the instance of the exception that provides the reason why the 
error was thrown. It is optional, as is the entire <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>as</tt></span> <tt>e</tt> phrase. Thus, this change really applies only to those users who save this value.</p>
<p class="docText">The equivalent Python 2 syntax uses a comma instead of the <tt>as</tt> keyword:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong">except</span> ValueError, e:</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This change was made in Python 
3.x because of the confusion that occurs when programmers attempt to 
handle more than one exception with the same handler.</p>
<p class="docText">To catch multiple exceptions with the same handler, beginners often write this (invalid) code:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong">except</span> ValueError, TypeError, e:</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">In fact, if you are trying to catch more than one exception, you need to use a tuple that contains the exceptions:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong">except</span> (ValueError, TypeError), e:</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>as</tt></span>
 keyword in Python 3.x (and version 2.6+) is intended to ensure that the
 comma in the original syntax is no longer a source of confusion. 
However, the parentheses are still required when you are trying to catch
 more than one type of exception using the same handler:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong">except</span> (ValueError, TypeError) <span class="docEmphStrong">as</span> e:</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">For porting efforts, Python 2.6 and newer accept either the comma or <tt>as</tt> when defining exception handlers that save the instance. In contrast; only the idiom with <tt>as</tt> is permitted in Python 3. You can find more information about this change in PEP 3110.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EV3EK">D.6.2. Raising Exceptions</h4>
<p class="docText">The change in raising 
exceptions found in Python 3.x really isn’t a change at all; in fact, it
 doesn’t even have anything to do with the transition efforts associated
 with Python 2.6. The Python 3 syntax for raising exceptions (providing 
the optional reason for the exception) looks like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong">raise</span> ValueError('Invalid value')</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Long-time Python users 
have probably been using the following idiom (although both approaches 
are supported in all version 2.x releases):</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong">raise</span> ValueError, 'Invalid value'</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">To emphasize that raising exceptions is equivalent to instantiating an exception class <span class="docEmphasis">and</span>
 to provide some additional flexibility, Python 3 supports only the 
first idiom. The good news is that you don’t have to wait until you 
adopt version 2.6 to start using this technique—as we mentioned in Appendix C, this syntax has actually been valid since the Python 1.x days.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
