<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>D.7. Other Transition Tools and Tips</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">D.7. Other Transition Tools and Tips</h3>
<p class="docText">In addition to Python 2.6, 
developers have access to an array of tools that can make the transition
 to Python 3.x go more smoothly—in particular, the <tt>-3</tt> switch (which provides obsolescence warnings) and the <tt>2to3</tt> tool (you can read more about it at http://docs.python.org/3.0/library/2to3.html). However, the most important tool that you can “write” is a good transition plan. In fact, there’s no substitute for planning.</p>
<p class="docText">Clearly, the Python 3.x 
changes do not represent some wild mutation of the familiar Python 
syntax. Instead, the variations are just enough to break the
 old code base. Of course, the changes will affect users, so a good 
transition plan is essential. Most good plans come with tools or aids to
 help you out in this regard. The porting recommendations in the “What’s
 New in Python 3.0” document specifically state that good testing of 
code is critical, in addition to the use of key tools. Without mincing 
words, here is <span class="docEmphasis">exactly</span> what is suggested at http://docs.python.org/3.0/whatsnew/3.0.html#porting-to-python-3-0:</p>
<div style="font-weight:bold"><ol class="docList" type="1"><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">(Prerequisite) Start with excellent test coverage.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Port
 to Python 2.6. This should involve no more work than the average port 
from Python 2.x to Python 2.(x+1). Ensure that all your tests pass.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">(Still using 2.6) Turn on the <tt>-3</tt>
 command-line switch. It enables warnings about features that have been 
removed (or changed) in Python 3.0. Run your test suite again, and fix 
any code that generates warnings. Ensure that all your tests still pass.</p></div></li><li><div style="font-weight:normal"><p class="docList">Run the <tt>2to3</tt>
 source-to-source translator over your source code tree. Run the result 
of the translation under Python 3.0. Manually fix any remaining issues, 
and continue fixing problems until all tests pass again.</p></div></li></ol></div>
<p class="docText">Another alternative to consider is the <tt>3to2</tt> tool. As you can guess from its name, it does the opposite of <tt>2to3</tt>:
 it takes Python 3 code and attempts to deliver a working Python 2 
equivalent. This library is maintained by an external developer and 
isn’t part of the standard library; however, it’s an interesting 
alternative because it encourages people to code in Python 3 as their 
main development tool, and that can’t be a bad thing. You can learn more
 about <tt>3to2</tt> at http://pypi.python.org/pypi/3to2.</p>
<p class="docText">The third alternative is to not 
port at all; instead, write code that runs on both 2.x and 3.x (with no 
changes to the source) to begin with. Is this possible?</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
