<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>D.8. Writing Code That is Compatible in Both Versions 2.x and 3.x</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent">
<h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">D.8. Writing Code That is Compatible in Both Versions 2.x and 3.x</h3>
<p class="docText">While we’re in the crossroads 
transitioning from Python 2 to 3, you might wonder whether it is 
possible to write code that runs without modification in both Python 2 
and 3. It seems like a reasonable request, but how would you get 
started? What breaks the most Python 2 code when executed by a version 
3.x interpreter?</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EKZEK">D.8.1. <tt>print</tt> vs. <tt>print()</tt></h4>
<p class="docText">If you think like me, you’d say that the answer to the preceding question is the <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>print</tt></span>
 statement. That’s as good a place to start as any, so let’s give it a 
shot. The tricky part is that in version 2.x, it’s a statement, thus a 
keyword or reserved word, whereas in version 3.x, it’s just a BIF. In 
other words, because language syntax is involved, you cannot use <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>if</tt></span> statements, and no, Python still doesn’t have <tt>#ifdef</tt> macros!</p>
<p class="docText">Let’s try just putting parentheses around the arguments to <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>print</tt></span>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>&gt;&gt;&gt; print('Hello World!')
Hello World!</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">Cool! That works in both Python 2 and Python 3! Are we done? Sorry, not quite.</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>&gt;&gt;&gt; <span class="docEmphStrong">print</span>(10, 20) # Python 2
(10, 20)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">You’re not going to be as 
lucky this time because the former is a tuple, whereas in Python 3, 
you’re passing in multiple arguments to <tt>print()</tt>:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>&gt;&gt;&gt; print(10, 20) # Python 3
10 20</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">If you think a bit more, perhaps we can check if <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>print</tt></span> is a keyword. You might recall that there is a <tt>keyword</tt> module that contains a list of keywords. Because <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>print</tt></span> won’t be a keyword in version 3.x, you might think that it can be as simple as this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>&gt;&gt;&gt; <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> keyword
&gt;&gt;&gt; 'print' <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> keyword.kwlist
False</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">As a smart programmer, you’d probably try it in version 2.x, expecting a <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>True</tt></span> for a response. Although you would be correct, you’d still fail for a different reason:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>&gt;&gt;&gt; <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> keyword
&gt;&gt;&gt; <span class="docEmphStrong">if</span> 'print' <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> keyword.kwlist:
...   <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> __future__ <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> print_function
...
  File "&lt;stdin&gt;", line 2
SyntaxError: from __future__ imports must occur at the beginning of
the file</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">One workable solution requires that you use a function that has similar capabilities as <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>print</tt></span>. One of them is <tt>sys.stdout.write()</tt>; another solution is <tt>distutils.log.warn()</tt>. For whatever reason, we decided to use the latter in many of this book’s chapters. I suppose <tt>sys.stderr.write()</tt> will also work, if unbuffered output is your thing.</p>
<p class="docText">The “Hello World!” example would then look like this:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre># Python 2.x
<span class="docEmphStrong">print</span> 'Hello World!'
# Python 3.x
print('Hello World!')</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The following line would work in both versions:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre># Python 2.x &amp; 3.x compatible
<span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> distutils.log <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> warn <span class="docEmphStrong">as</span> printf
printf('Hello World!')</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">That reminds me of why we didn’t use <tt>sys.stdout.write()</tt>; we would need to add a NEWLINE character at the end of the string to match the behavior:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre># Python 2.x &amp; 3.x compatible
<span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> sys
sys.stdout.write('Hello World!\n')</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">The one real problem isn’t this little minor annoyance, but that these functions are no true proxy for <span class="docEmphStrong"><tt>print</tt></span> or <tt>print()</tt>
 for that matter; they only work when you’ve come up with a single 
string representing your output. Anything more complex requires more 
effort on your part.</p>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EEDFK">D.8.2. Import Your Way to a Solution</h4>
<p class="docText">In other situations, life is a 
bit easier, and you can just import the correct solution. In the code 
that follows, we want to import the <tt>urlopen()</tt> function. In Python 2, it resides in <tt>urllib</tt> and <tt>urllib2</tt> (we’ll use the latter), and in Python 3, it’s been integrated into <tt>urllib.request</tt>. Your solution, which works for both versions 2.x and 3.x, is neat and simple in this case:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong">try</span>:
    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> urllib2 <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> urlopen
<span class="docEmphStrong">except</span> ImportError:
    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> urllib.request <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> urlopen</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">For memory conservation, perhaps you’re interested in the iterator (Python 3) version of a well-known built-in such as <tt>zip()</tt>. In Python 2, the iterator version is <tt>itertools.izip()</tt>. This function is renamed to and replaces <tt>zip()</tt> in Python 3. In other words, <tt>itertools.izip()</tt> replaces <tt>zip()</tt> and takes on its name. If you insist on this iterator version, your import statement is also fairly straightforward:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong">try</span>:
    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> itertools <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> izip <span class="docEmphStrong">as</span> zip
<span class="docEmphStrong">except</span> ImportError:
    <span class="docEmphStrong">pass</span></pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">One example, which isn’t as elegant looking, is the <tt>StringIO</tt> class. In Python 2, the pure Python version is in the <tt>StringIO</tt> module, meaning you access it via <tt>StringIO.StringIO</tt>. There is also a C version for speed, and that’s located at <tt>cStringIO.StringIO</tt>. Depending on your Python installation, you might prefer <tt>cStringIO</tt> first and fallback to <tt>StringIO</tt> if <tt>cStringIO</tt> is not available.</p>
<p class="docText">In Python 3, Unicode is the 
default string type, but if you’re doing any kind of networking, it’s 
likely that you’ll have to manipulate ASCII/bytes strings instead, so 
instead of <tt>StringIO</tt>, you’d want <tt>io.BytesIO</tt>. To get what you want, the import is slightly uglier:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre><span class="docEmphStrong">try</span>:
    <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> io <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> BytesIO <span class="docEmphStrong">as</span> StringIO
<span class="docEmphStrong">except</span> ImportError:
    <span class="docEmphStrong">try</span>:
        <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> cStringIO <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> StringIO
    <span class="docEmphStrong">except</span> ImportError:
        <span class="docEmphStrong">from</span> StringIO <span class="docEmphStrong">import</span> StringIO</pre></div><br/>

<h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EUIFK">D.8.3. Putting It All Together</h4>
<p class="docText">If you’re lucky, these are all 
the changes you need to make, and the rest of your code is simpler than 
the setup at the beginning. If you install the imports of <tt>distutils.log.warn()</tt> [as <tt>printf()</tt>], <tt>url*.urlopen()</tt>, <tt>*.StringIO</tt>, and a normal import of <tt>xml.etree.ElementTree</tt>
 (2.5 and newer), you can write a very short parser to display the top 
headline stories from the Google News service with just these roughly 
eight lines of code:</p>
<div class="docText"><pre>g = urlopen('http://news.google.com/news?topic=h&amp;output=rss')
f = StringIO(g.read())
g.close()
tree = xml.etree.ElementTree.parse(f)
f.close()
<span class="docEmphStrong">for</span> elmt <span class="docEmphStrong">in</span> tree.getiterator():
    <span class="docEmphStrong">if</span> elmt.tag == 'title' <span class="docEmphStrong">and not</span> \
            elmt.text.startswith('Top Stories'):
        printf('- %s' % elmt.text)</pre></div><br/>
<p class="docText">This script runs exactly 
the same under version 2.x and 3.x with no changes to the code 
whatsoever. Of course, if you’re using version 2.4 and older, you’ll 
need to download <tt>ElementTree</tt> separately.</p>
<p class="docText">The code snippets in this subsection come from Chapter 14, “Text Processing,” so take a look at the <tt>goognewsrss.py</tt> file to see the full version in action.</p>
<p class="docText">Some 
will feel that these changes really start to mess up the elegance of 
your Python source. After all, readability counts! If you prefer to keep
 your code cleaner yet still write code that runs in both versions 2.x 
and 3.x without changes, take a look at the <tt>six</tt> package.</p>
<p class="docText"><tt>six</tt> is a compatibility library who’s primary role is to provide an interface to keep <span class="docEmphasis">your</span>
 application code the same while hiding the complexities described in 
this appendix subsection from the developer. To find out more about <tt>six</tt>, go to http://packages.python.org/six.</p>
<p class="docText">Whether you use a library like <tt>six</tt>
 or choose to roll your own, we hoped to show in this short narrative 
that it is possible to write code that runs in both versions 2.x and 
3.x. The bottom line is that you might need to sacrifice some of the 
elegance and simplicity of Python, trading it off for true 2-to-3 
portability. I’m sure we’ll be revisiting this issue for the next few 
years until the whole world has completed the transition to the next 
generation.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
