<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Maven versus Ant</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div id="page">
  <div class="epub__section" title="Maven versus Ant">
    <div class="epub__titlepage">
      <div>
        <div>
          <h1><a id="ch01lvl1sec09"/>Maven versus Ant</h1>
        </div>
      </div>
    </div>
    <p>Before the emergence of Maven, Ant <a id="id23"/>was the most widely used build tool across Java projects. Ant emerged from the concept of creating files in C/C++ programming to a platform-independent build tool. Ant used XML files to define the build process and its corresponding dependencies.</p>
    <p>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>Another Neat Tool</strong></span> (<span class="epub__strong"><strong>Ant</strong></span>) was conceived by James Duncan Davidson while preparing Sun's reference JSP/Servlet engine, Apache Tomcat. The <a id="id24"/>following is a simple sample of an Ant build file<a id="id25"/> (http://ant.apache.org/manual/using.html):</p>
    <div class="epub__informalexample">
      <pre class="epub__programlisting">&lt;project name="MyProject" default="dist" basedir="."&gt;
    &lt;description&gt;
        simple example build file
    &lt;/description&gt;
  &lt;!-- set global properties for this build --&gt;
  &lt;property name="src" location="src"/&gt;
  &lt;property name="build" location="build"/&gt;
  &lt;property name="dist"  location="dist"/&gt;

  &lt;target name="init"&gt;
    &lt;!-- Create the time stamp --&gt;
    &lt;tstamp/&gt;
    &lt;!-- Create the build directory structure used by compile --&gt;
    &lt;mkdir dir="${build}"/&gt;
  &lt;/target&gt;

  &lt;target name="compile" depends="init"
        description="compile the source " &gt;
    &lt;!-- Compile the java code from ${src} into ${build} --&gt;
    &lt;javac srcdir="${src}" destdir="${build}"/&gt;
  &lt;/target&gt;

  &lt;target name="dist" depends="compile"
        description="generate the distribution" &gt;
    &lt;!-- Create the distribution directory --&gt;
    &lt;mkdir dir="${dist}/lib"/&gt;

&lt;!-- Put everything in ${build} into the MyProject-${DSTAMP}.jar file --&gt;
    &lt;jar jarfile="${dist}/lib/MyProject-${DSTAMP}.jar" basedir="${build}"/&gt;
  &lt;/target&gt;

  &lt;target name="clean"
        description="clean up" &gt;
    &lt;!-- Delete the ${build} and ${dist} directory trees --&gt;
    &lt;delete dir="${build}"/&gt;
    &lt;delete dir="${dist}"/&gt;
  &lt;/target&gt;
&lt;/project&gt;</pre>
    </div>
    <div class="epub__note" title="Note" style="">
      <div class="epub__inner">
        <h3><a id="tip02"/>Tip</h3>
        <p>
<span class="epub__strong"><strong>Downloading the sample code</strong></span>
</p>
        <p>You can download the sample code files for all Packt books you have purchased from your account at http://www.packtpub.com. If you purchased this book elsewhere, you can visit http://www.packtpub.com/support and register to have the files e-mailed directly to you.</p>
      </div>
    </div>
    <p>This example shows how to build a simple JAR file. Note how all the details corresponding to source files, class files, and JAR files have to be specified. Even the sequence of steps must be specified. This results in a complex build file and often a lot of duplicated XML.</p>
    <p>Let's look at the simplest Maven build file, the <code class="epub__literal">pom</code> file, which will be discussed in more detail in Chapter 3, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Creating and Importing Projects</em></span>.</p>
    <p>A simple <code class="epub__literal">pom</code> file will look as shown in the following code snippet:</p>
    <div class="epub__informalexample">
      <pre class="epub__programlisting">&lt;project&gt;
    &lt;modelVersion&gt;4.0.0&lt;/modelVersion&gt;
    &lt;groupId&gt;com.packt.mvneclipse&lt;/groupId&gt;
    &lt;artifactId&gt;mvneclipse&lt;/artifactId&gt;
    &lt;version&gt;1.2&lt;/version&gt;
&lt;/project&gt;</pre>
    </div>
    <p>This is all we need to build and package as a JAR from a Java project. Some of the differences between Ant and Maven in the preceding examples are as follows:</p>
    <div class="epub__itemizedlist">
      <ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
        <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Convention over configuration</strong></span>: Ant <a id="id26"/>requires a developer to configure everything right from the source code's location to the storage of a JAR file. Maven, on the other hand, follows conventions, has a well-defined project structure, and knows where to reference source, resource files, and place the output.</li>
        <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Lifecycle</strong></span>: Ant does not have a lifecycle<a id="id27"/> and requires defining goals and their dependencies. Also, in Ant, the sequence of tasks needs to be specified. Maven has defined a lifecycle that consists of build phases and goals; hence, no configuration is required.</li>
      </ul>
    </div>
    <p>Apart from the preceding differences that can be cited from the preceding simple example, Maven is superior to Ant in the following aspects:</p>
    <div class="epub__itemizedlist">
      <ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
        <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Higher level of reusability</strong></span>: The <a id="id28"/>build logic can be reused with Maven across different projects in Maven.</li>
        <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Less maintenance</strong></span>: With a <a id="id29"/>standardized structure and the reusability option, it requires less effort towards maintenance.</li>
        <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Dependency management</strong></span>: One <a id="id30"/>of the most superior aspects of Maven over Ant is its ability to manage the corresponding dependencies. Though, lately, Ant in combination with Apache Ivy does ease dependency management; however, Maven has other aspects that outdo this combo offering.</li>
        <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Automatic downloads</strong></span>: Maven <a id="id31"/>downloads the dependencies automatically; however, Ant lacks this. While Ant can use Ivy to replicate this behavior, it requires additional behavior.</li>
        <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Repository management</strong></span>: Maven repositories are arbitrary and accessible<a id="id32"/> locations that are designed to store the artifacts that Maven builds. They manage repositories as local versus remote (will be discussed in detail in the<span class="epub__emphasis"><em> Repository</em></span> section of Chapter 3, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Creating and Importing Projects</em></span>). Ant does not have this <a id="id33"/>aspect built.</li>
      </ul>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>


</body>
</html>
