<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Introduction</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div id="page">
  <div class="epub__chapter" title="Chapter 6. Creating a Multimodule Project">
    <div class="epub__section" title="Introduction">
      <div class="epub__titlepage">
        <div>
          <div>
            <h1><a id="ch06lvl1sec44"/>Introduction</h1>
          </div>
        </div>
      </div>
      <p>Software architecture states modularity as the degree to which a system's components may be separated and recombined. In software engineering, modularity refers to the extent to which a software/application can be divided into multiple modules to achieve the business goal. Modularity enhances manageability and reusability. The growing days has seen software getting more complex, and modularity is the need of the hour.</p>
      <p>Multimodule projects<a id="id345"/> consist of many modules that adapt to modularity. A multimodule project is identified by a parent/master POM referencing one or more <code class="epub__literal">.sub</code> modules.</p>
      <p>A multimodule project constitutes of the following:</p>
      <div class="epub__itemizedlist">
        <ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Parent project POM</strong></span>: This <a id="id346"/>glues and references all the other <a id="id347"/>modules of a project</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc"><span class="epub__strong"><strong>Modules</strong></span>: This includes <a id="id348"/>submodules that serve different functions of<a id="id349"/> the application and constitute the application</li>
        </ul>
      </div>
      <p>Parent POM<a id="id350"/> is where you can put common <a id="id351"/>dependencies in a single place and let other modules inherit it, that is, POM inheritance in modules. Usually, universal dependencies such as JUnit or log4j are the candidates of POM inheritance.</p>
      <p>The mechanism by which Maven handles multimodule projects is referred to as <span class="epub__strong"><strong>reactor</strong></span>. The reactor of Maven's core <a id="id352"/>has the following functions:</p>
      <div class="epub__itemizedlist">
        <ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc">Collects all the modules to build</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc">Sorts the projects (modules) into the current build order</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc">Builds the sorted projects in order</li>
        </ul>
      </div>
      <p>The modules of the project are enclosed inside the <code class="epub__literal">&lt;modules&gt; &lt;/modules&gt;</code> tag by specifying each module with the <code class="epub__literal">&lt;module&gt; &lt;/module&gt;</code> tag. Similarly, the parents are enclosed inside the <code class="epub__literal">&lt;parent&gt; &lt;/parent&gt;</code> tag by specifying Maven coordinates.</p>
      <p>Now, for illustration, we will take the <code class="epub__literal">MyDistance</code> application from Chapter 5, <span class="epub__emphasis"><em>Spicing Up a Maven Project</em></span>, and develop it as a multimodule project. The modules of the project would be as follows:</p>
      <div class="epub__itemizedlist">
        <ul class="epub__itemizedlist">
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc"><code class="epub__literal">Distance-main</code>: This is the <a id="id353"/>parent project, also known as parent POM, that glues and references different modules of the project, that is, <code class="epub__literal">distance-core</code> and <code class="epub__literal">distance-webapp</code></li>
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc"><code class="epub__literal">distance-core</code>: This <a id="id354"/>module provides a simple distance conversion utility class</li>
          <li class="epub__listitem" style="list-style-type: disc"><code class="epub__literal">distance-webapp</code>: This<a id="id355"/> is a web interface in which you can input the units that depend on the <code class="epub__literal">distance-core</code> module to perform a conversion and respond to the results</li>
        </ul>
      </div>
      <p>In the subsequent sections, we will get into the details of the preceding modules.</p>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>


</body>
</html>
