<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>Chapter 1. History and Standards</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h2 class="docChapterTitle" id="title-ID0E6GAE">Chapter 1. History and Standards</h2><p class="docText">Linux
 is a member of the UNIX family of operating systems. In computing 
terms, UNIX has a long history. The first part of this chapter provides a
 brief outline of that history. We begin with a description of the 
origins of the UNIX system and the C programming language, and then 
consider the two key currents that led to the Linux system as it exists 
today: the GNU project and the development of the Linux kernel.</p><p class="docText">One
 of the notable features of the UNIX system is that its development was 
not controlled by a single vendor or organization. Rather, many groups, 
both commercial and noncommercial, contributed to its evolution. This 
history resulted in many innovative features being added to UNIX, but 
also had the negative consequence that UNIX implementations diverged 
over time, so that writing applications that worked on all UNIX 
implementations became increasingly difficult. This led to a drive for 
standardization of UNIX implementations, which we discuss in the second 
part of this chapter.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Two
 definitions of the term UNIX are in common use. One of these denotes 
operating systems that have passed the official conformance tests for 
the Single UNIX Specification and thus are officially granted the right 
to be branded as “UNIX” by The Open Group (the holders of the UNIX 
trademark). At the time of writing, none of the free UNIX 
implementations (e.g., Linux and FreeBSD) has obtained this branding.</p><p class="docText">The
 other common meaning attached to the term UNIX denotes those systems 
that look and behave like classical UNIX systems (i.e., the original 
Bell Laboratories UNIX and its later principal offshoots, System V and 
BSD). By this definition, Linux is generally considered to be a UNIX 
system (as are the modern BSDs). Although we give close attention to the
 Single UNIX Specification in this book, we’ll follow this second 
definition of UNIX, so that we’ll often say things such as “Linux, like 
other UNIX implementations. . . .”</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
