<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>1.1. A Brief History of UNIX and C</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">1.1. A Brief History of UNIX and C</h3><p class="docText">The
 first UNIX implementation was developed in 1969 (the same year that 
Linus Torvalds was born) by Ken Thompson at Bell Laboratories, a 
division of the telephone corporation, AT&amp;T. It was written in 
assembler for a Digital PDP-7 minicomputer. The name UNIX was a pun on 
MULTICS (<span class="docEmphasis">Multiplexed Information and Computing Service</span>),
 the name of an earlier operating system project in which AT&amp;T 
collaborated with Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and 
General Electric. (AT&amp;T had by this time withdrawn from the project 
in frustration at its initial failure to develop an economically useful 
system.) Thompson drew several ideas for his new operating system from 
MULTICS, including a tree-structured file system, a separate program for
 interpreting commands (the shell), and the notion of files as 
unstructured streams of bytes.</p><p class="docText" style="display: block;">In
 1970, UNIX was rewritten in assembly language for a newly acquired 
Digital PDP-11 minicomputer, then a new and powerful machine. Vestiges 
of this PDP-11 heritage can be found in various names still used on most
 UNIX implementations, including Linux.</p><p class="docText">A
 short time later, Dennis Ritchie, one of Thompson’s colleagues at Bell 
Laboratories and an early collaborator on UNIX, designed and implemented
 the C programming language. This was an evolutionary process; C 
followed an earlier interpreted language, B. B was initially implemented
 by Thompson and drew many of its ideas from a still earlier programming
 language named BCPL. By 1973, C had matured to a point where the UNIX 
kernel could be almost entirely rewritten in the new language. UNIX thus
 became one of the earliest operating systems to be written in a 
high-level language, a fact that made subsequent porting to other 
hardware architectures possible.</p><p class="docText">The
 genesis of C explains why it, and its descendant C++, have come to be 
used so widely as system programming languages today. Previous widely 
used languages were designed with other purposes in mind: FORTRAN for 
mathematical tasks performed by engineers and scientists; COBOL for 
commercial systems processing streams of record-oriented data. C filled a
 hitherto empty niche, and unlike FORTRAN and COBOL (which were designed
 by large committees), the design of C arose from the ideas and needs of
 a few individuals working toward a single goal: developing a high-level
 language for implementing the UNIX kernel and associated software. Like
 the UNIX operating system itself, C was designed by professional 
programmers for their own use. The resulting language was small, 
efficient, powerful, terse, modular, pragmatic, and coherent in its 
design.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EJJAE">1.1.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ENJAE">1.1.1.1. UNIX First through Sixth editions</h5><p class="docText">Between 1969 and 1979, UNIX went through a number of releases, known as <span class="docEmphasis">editions</span>.
 Essentially, these releases were snapshots of the evolving development 
version at AT&amp;T. [Salus, 1994] notes the following dates for the 
first six editions of UNIX:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">First
 Edition, November 1971: By this time, UNIX was running on the PDP-11 
and already had a FORTRAN compiler and versions of many programs still 
used today, including <span class="docEmphasis">ar</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">cat</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">chmod</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">chown</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">cp</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">dc</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">ed</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">find</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">ln</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">ls</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">mail</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">mkdir</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">mv</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">rm</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">sh</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">su</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">who</span>.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Second Edition, June 1972: By this time, UNIX was installed on ten machines within AT&amp;T.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Third Edition, February 1973: This edition included a C compiler and the first implementation of pipes.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Fourth Edition, November 1973: This was the first version to be almost totally written in C.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Fifth Edition, June 1974: By this time, UNIX was installed on more than 50 systems.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Sixth Edition, May 1975: This was the first edition to be widely used outside AT&amp;T.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Over
 the period of these releases, the use and reputation of UNIX began to 
spread, first within AT&amp;T, and then beyond. An important 
contribution to this growing awareness was the publication of a paper on
 UNIX in the widely read journal <span class="docEmphasis">Communications of the ACM</span> ([Ritchie &amp; Thompson, 1974]).</p><p class="docText">At
 this time, AT&amp;T held a government-sanctioned monopoly on the US 
telephone system. The terms of AT&amp;T’s agreement with the US 
government prevented it from selling software, which meant that it could
 not sell UNIX as a product. Instead, beginning in 1974 with Fifth 
Edition, and especially with Sixth Edition, AT&amp;T licensed UNIX for 
use in universities for a nominal distribution fee. The university 
distributions included documentation and the kernel source code (about 
10,000 lines at the time).</p><p class="docText">AT&amp;T’s
 release of UNIX into universities greatly contributed to the popularity
 and use of the operating system, and by 1977, UNIX was running at some 
500 sites, including 125 universities in the United States and several 
other countries. UNIX offered universities an interactive multiuser 
operating system that was cheap yet powerful, at a time when commercial 
operating systems were very expensive. It also gave university computer 
science departments the source code of a real operating system, which 
they could modify and offer to their students to learn from and 
experiment with. Some of these students, armed with UNIX knowledge, 
became UNIX evangelists. Others went on to found or join the multitude 
of startup companies selling inexpensive computer workstations running 
the easily ported UNIX operating system.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EULAE">1.1.1.2. The birth of BSD and System V</h5><p class="docText">January
 1979 saw the release of Seventh Edition UNIX, which improved the 
reliability of the system and provided an enhanced file system. This 
release also contained a number of new tools, including <span class="docEmphasis">awk</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">make</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">sed</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">tar</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">uucp</span>,
 the Bourne shell, and a FORTRAN 77 compiler. The release of Seventh 
Edition is also significant because, from this point, UNIX diverged into
 two important variants: BSD and System V, whose origins we now briefly 
describe.</p><p class="docText">Thompson
 spent the 1975/1976 academic year as a visiting professor at the 
University of California at Berkeley, the university from which he had 
graduated. There, he worked with several graduate students, adding many 
new features to UNIX. (One of these students, Bill Joy, subsequently 
went on to cofound Sun Microsystems, an early entry in the UNIX 
workstation market.) Over time, many new tools and features were 
developed at Berkeley, including the <span class="docEmphasis">C shell</span>, the <span class="docEmphasis">vi</span> editor, an improved file system (the <span class="docEmphasis">Berkeley Fast File System</span>), <span class="docEmphasis">sendmail</span>, a Pascal compiler, and virtual memory management on the new Digital VAX architecture.</p><p class="docText">Under
 the name Berkeley Software Distribution (BSD), this version of UNIX, 
including its source code, came to be widely distributed. The first full
 distribution was 3BSD in December 1979. (Earlier releases from 
Berkeley–BSD and 2BSD–were distributions of new tools produced at 
Berkeley, rather than complete UNIX distributions.)</p><p class="docText">In 1983, the <span class="docEmphasis">Computer Systems Research Group</span>
 at the University of California at Berkeley released 4.2BSD. This 
release was significant because it contained a complete TCP/IP 
implementation, including the sockets application programming interface 
(API) and a variety of networking tools. 4.2BSD and its predecessor 
4.1BSD became widely distributed within universities around the world. 
They also formed the basis for SunOS (first released in 1983), the UNIX 
variant sold by Sun. Other significant BSD releases were 4.3BSD, in 
1986, and the final release, 4.4BSD, in 1993.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The
 very first ports of the UNIX system to hardware other than the PDP-11 
occurred during 1977 and 1978, when Dennis Ritchie and Steve Johnson 
ported it to the Interdata 8/32 and Richard Miller at the University of 
Wollongong in Australia simultaneously ported it to the Interdata 7/32. 
The Berkeley Digital VAX port was based on an earlier (1978) port by 
John Reiser and Tom London. Known as 32V, this port was essentially the 
same as Seventh Edition for the PDP-11, except for the larger address 
space and wider data types.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">In
 the meantime, US antitrust legislation forced the breakup of AT&amp;T 
(legal maneuvers began in the mid-1970s, and the breakup became 
effective in 1982), with the consequence that, since it no longer held a
 monopoly on the telephone system, the company was permitted to market 
UNIX. This resulted in the release of System III (three) in 1981. System
 III was produced by AT&amp;T’s UNIX Support Group (USG), which employed
 many hundreds of developers to enhance UNIX and develop UNIX 
applications (notably, document preparation packages and software 
development tools). The first release of System V (five) followed in 
1983, and a series of releases led to the definitive System V Release 4 
(SVR4) in 1989, by which time System V had incorporated many features 
from BSD, including networking facilities. System V was licensed to a 
variety of commercial vendors, who used it as the basis of their UNIX 
implementations.</p><p class="docText">Thus,
 in addition to the various BSD distributions spreading through 
academia, by the late 1980s, UNIX was available in a range of commercial
 implementations on various hardware. These implementations included 
Sun’s SunOS and later Solaris, Digital’s Ultrix and OSF/1 (nowadays, 
after a series of renamings and acquisitions, HP Tru64 UNIX), IBM’s AIX,
 Hewlett-Packard’s (HP’s) HP-UX, NeXT’s NeXTStep, A/UX for the Apple 
Macintosh, and Microsoft and SCO’s XENIX for the Intel x86-32 
architecture. (Throughout this book, the Linux implementation for x86-32
 is referred to as Linux/x86-32.) This situation was in sharp contrast 
to the typical proprietary hardware/operating system scenarios of the 
time, where each vendor produced one, or at most a few, proprietary 
computer chip architectures, on which they sold their own proprietary 
operating system(s). The proprietary nature of most vendor systems meant
 that purchasers were locked into one vendor. Switching to another 
proprietary operating system and hardware platform could become very 
expensive because of the need to port existing applications and retrain 
staff. This factor, coupled with the appearance of cheap single-user 
UNIX workstations from a variety of vendors, made the portable UNIX 
system increasingly attractive from a commercial perspective.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
