<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>1.2. A Brief History of Linux</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">1.2. A Brief History of Linux</h3><p class="docText">The term <span class="docEmphasis">Linux</span>
 is commonly used to refer to the entire UNIX-like operating system of 
which the Linux kernel forms a part. However, this is something of a 
misnomer, since many of the key components contained within a typical 
commercial Linux distribution actually originate from a project that 
predates the inception of Linux by several years.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EEKAE">1.2.1. The GNU Project</h4><p class="docText">In
 1984, Richard Stallman, an exceptionally talented programmer who had 
been working at MIT, set to work on creating a “free” UNIX 
implementation. Stallman’s outlook was a moral one, and <span class="docEmphasis">free</span> was defined in a legal sense, rather than a financial sense (see http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-sw.html).
 Nevertheless, the legal freedom that Stallman described carried with it
 the implicit consequence that software such as operating systems would 
be available at no or very low cost.</p><p class="docText">Stallman
 militated against the legal restrictions placed on proprietary 
operating systems by computer vendors. These restrictions meant that 
purchasers of computer software in general could not see the source code
 of the software they were buying, and they certainly could not copy, 
change, or redistribute it. He pointed out that such a framework 
encouraged programmers to compete with each other and hoard their work, 
rather than to cooperate and share it.</p><p class="docText">In
 response, Stallman started the GNU project (a recursively defined 
acronym for “GNU’s not UNIX”) to develop an entire, freely available, 
UNIX-like system, consisting of a kernel and all associated software 
packages, and encouraged others to join him. In 1985, Stallman founded 
the Free Software Foundation (FSF), a nonprofit organization to support 
the GNU project as well as the development of free software in general.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">When
 the GNU project was started, BSD was not free in the sense that 
Stallman meant. Use of BSD still required a license from AT&amp;T, and 
users could not freely modify and redistribute the AT&amp;T code that 
formed part of BSD.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">One of the important results of the GNU project was the development of the GNU <span class="docEmphasis">General Public License</span>
 (GPL), the legal embodiment of Stallman’s notion of free software. Much
 of the software in a Linux distribution, including the kernel, is 
licensed under the GPL or one of a number of similar licenses. Software 
licensed under the GPL must be made available in source code form, and 
must be freely redistributable under the terms of the GPL. Modifications
 to GPL-licensed software are freely permitted, but any distribution of 
such modified software must also be under the terms of the GPL. If the 
modified software is distributed in executable form, the author must 
also allow any recipients the option of obtaining the modified source 
for no more than the cost of distribution. The first version of the GPL 
was released in 1989. The current version of the license, version 3, was
 released in 2007. Version 2 of the license, released in 1991, remains 
in wide use, and is the license used for the Linux kernel. (Discussions 
of various free software licenses can be found in [St. Laurent, 2004] 
and [Rosen, 2005].)</p><p class="docText">The
 GNU project did not initially produce a working UNIX kernel, but did 
produce a wide range of other programs. Since these programs were 
designed to run on a UNIX-like operating system, they could be, and 
were, used on existing UNIX implementations and, in some cases, even 
ported to other operating systems. Among the more well-known programs 
produced by the GNU project are the <span class="docEmphasis">Emacs</span> text editor, <span class="docEmphasis">GCC</span>
 (originally the GNU C compiler, but now renamed the GNU compiler 
collection, comprising compilers for C, C++, and other languages), the <span class="docEmphasis">bash</span> shell, and <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> (the GNU C library).</p><p class="docText">By
 the early 1990s, the GNU project had produced a system that was 
virtually complete, except for one important component: a working UNIX 
kernel. The GNU project had started work on an ambitious kernel design, 
known as the GNU/HURD, based on the Mach microkernel. However, the HURD 
was far from being in a form that could be released. (At the time of 
writing, work continues on the HURD, which currently runs only on the 
x86-32 architecture.)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Because
 a significant part of the program code that constitutes what is 
commonly known as the Linux system actually derives from the GNU 
project, Stallman prefers to use the term <span class="docEmphasis">GNU/Linux</span>
 to refer to the entire system. The question of naming (Linux versus 
GNU/Linux) is the source of some debate in the free software community. 
Since this book is primarily concerned with the API of the Linux kernel,
 we’ll generally use the term <span class="docEmphasis">Linux</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The
 stage was set. All that was required was a working kernel to go with 
the otherwise complete UNIX system already produced by the GNU project.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EJMAE">1.2.2. The Linux Kernel</h4><p class="docText">In
 1991, Linus Torvalds, a Finnish student at the University of Helsinki, 
was inspired to write an operating system for his Intel 80386 PC. In the
 course of his studies, Torvalds had come into contact with Minix, a 
small UNIX-like operating system kernel developed in the mid-1980s by 
Andrew Tanenbaum, a university professor in Holland. Tanenbaum made 
Minix, complete with source code, available as a tool for teaching 
operating system design in university courses. The Minix kernel could be
 built and run on a 386 system. However, since its primary purpose was 
as a teaching tool, it was designed to be largely independent of the 
hardware architecture, and it did not take full advantage of the 386 
processor’s capabilities.</p><p class="docText">Torvalds
 therefore started on a project to create an efficient, full-featured 
UNIX kernel to run on the 386. Over a few months, Torvalds developed a 
basic kernel that allowed him to compile and run various GNU programs. 
Then, on October 5, 1991, Torvalds requested the help of other 
programmers, making the following now much-quoted announcement of 
version 0.02 of his kernel in the <span class="docEmphasis">comp.os.minix</span> Usenet newsgroup:</p><blockquote><p class="docText">Do
 you pine for the nice days of Minix-1.1, when men were men and wrote 
their own device drivers? Are you without a nice project and just dying 
to cut your teeth on a OS you can try to modify for your needs? Are you 
finding it frustrating when everything works on Minix? No more 
all-nighters to get a nifty program working? Then this post might be 
just for you. As I mentioned a month ago, I’m working on a free version 
of a Minix-look-alike for AT-386 computers. It has finally reached the 
stage where it’s even usable (though may not be depending on what you 
want), and I am willing to put out the sources for wider distribution. 
It is just version 0.02 . . . but I’ve successfully run bash, gcc, 
gnu-make, gnu-sed, compress, etc. under it.</p></blockquote><p class="docText">Following a time-honored tradition of giving UNIX clones names ending with the letter <span class="docEmphasis">X</span>,
 the kernel was (eventually) baptized Linux. Initially, Linux was placed
 under a more restrictive license, but Torvalds soon made it available 
under the GNU GPL.</p><p class="docText">The
 call for support proved effective. Other programmers joined Torvalds in
 the development of Linux, adding various features, such as an improved 
file system, networking support, device drivers, and multiprocessor 
support. By March 1994, the developers were able to release version 1.0.
 Linux 1.2 appeared in March 1995, Linux 2.0 in June 1996, Linux 2.2 in 
January 1999, and Linux 2.4 in January 2001. Work on the 2.5 development
 kernel began in November 2001, and led to the release of Linux 2.6 in 
December 2003.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ESNAE">1.2.2.1. An aside: the BSDs</h5><p class="docText">It
 is worth noting that another free UNIX was already available for the 
x86-32 during the early 1990s. Bill and Lynne Jolitz had developed a 
port of the already mature BSD system for the x86-32, known as 386/BSD. 
This port was based on the BSD Net/2 release (June 1991), a version of 
the 4.3BSD source code in which all remaining proprietary AT&amp;T 
source code had either been replaced or, in the case of six source code 
files that could not be trivially rewritten, removed. The Jolitzes 
ported the Net/2 code to x86-32, rewrote the missing source files, and 
made the first release (version 0.0) of 386/BSD in February 1992.</p><p class="docText">After
 an initial wave of success and popularity, work on 386/BSD lagged for 
various reasons. In the face of an increasingly large backlog of 
patches, two alternative development groups soon appeared, creating 
their own releases based on 386/BSD: NetBSD, which emphasizes 
portability to a wide range of hardware platforms, and FreeBSD, which 
emphasizes performance and is the most widespread of the modern BSDs. 
The first NetBSD release was 0.8, in April 1993. The first FreeBSD 
CD-ROM (version 1.0) appeared in December 1993. Another BSD, OpenBSD, 
appeared in 1996 (as an initial version numbered 2.0) after forking from
 the NetBSD project. OpenBSD emphasizes security. In mid-2003, a new 
BSD, DragonFly BSD, appeared after a split from FreeBSD 4.<span class="docEmphasis">x</span>. DragonFly BSD takes a different approach from FreeBSD 5.<span class="docEmphasis">x</span> with respect to design for symmetric multiprocessing (SMP) architectures.</p><p class="docText">Probably
 no discussion of the BSDs in the early 1990s is complete without 
mention of the lawsuits between UNIX System Laboratories (USL, the 
AT&amp;T subsidiary spun off to develop and market UNIX) and Berkeley. 
In early 1992, the company Berkeley Software Design, Incorporated (BSDi,
 nowadays part of Wind River) began distributing a commercially 
supported BSD UNIX, BSD/OS, based on the Net/2 release and the Jolitzes’
 386/BSD additions. BSDi distributed binaries and source code for $995 
(US dollars), and advised potential customers to use their telephone 
number 1-800-ITS-UNIX.</p><p class="docText">In
 April 1992, USL filed suit against BSDi in an attempt to prevent BSDi 
from selling a product that USL claimed was still encumbered by 
proprietary USL source code and trade secrets. USL also demanded that 
BSDi cease using the deceptive telephone number. The suit was eventually
 widened to include a claim against the University of California. The 
court ultimately dismissed all but two of USL’s claims, and a 
countersuit by the University of California against USL ensued, in which
 the university claimed that USL had not given due credit for the use of
 BSD code in System V.</p><p class="docText">While
 these suits were pending, USL was acquired by Novell, whose CEO, the 
late Ray Noorda, stated publicly that he would prefer to compete in the 
marketplace rather than in the court. Settlement was finally reached in 
January 1994, with the University of California being required to remove
 3 of the 18,000 files in the Net/2 release, make some minor changes to a
 few other files, and add USL copyright notices to around 70 other 
files, which the university nevertheless could continue to distribute 
freely. This modified system was released as 4.4BSD-Lite in June 1994. 
(The last release from the university was 4.4BSD-Lite, Release 2 in June
 1995.) At this point, the terms of the legal settlement required BSDi, 
FreeBSD, and NetBSD to replace their Net/2 base with the modified 
4.4BSD-Lite source code. As [McKusick et al., 1996] notes, although this
 caused some delay in the development of the BSD derivatives, it also 
had the positive effect that these systems resynchronized with the three
 years of development work done by the university’s Computer Systems 
Research Group since the release of Net/2.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E2PAE">1.2.2.2. Linux kernel version numbers</h5><p class="docText">Like
 most free software projects, Linux follows a release-early, 
release-often model, so that new kernel revisions appear frequently 
(sometimes even daily). As the Linux user base increased, the release 
model was adapted to decrease disruption to existing users. 
Specifically, following the release of Linux 1.0, the kernel developers 
adopted a kernel version numbering scheme with each release numbered <span class="docEmphasis">x.y.z</span>: <span class="docEmphasis">x</span> representing a major version, <span class="docEmphasis">y</span> a minor version within that major version, and <span class="docEmphasis">z</span> a revision of the minor version (minor improvements and bug fixes).</p><p class="docText">Under this model, two kernel versions were always under development: a <span class="docEmphasis">stable</span> branch for use on production systems, which had an even minor version number, and a more volatile <span class="docEmphasis">development</span>
 branch, which carried the next higher odd minor version number. The 
theory–not always followed strictly in practice–was that all new 
features should be added in the current development kernel series, while
 new revisions in the stable kernel series should be restricted to minor
 improvements and bug fixes. When the current development branch was 
deemed suitable for release, it became the new stable branch and was 
assigned an even minor version number. For example, the 2.3.<span class="docEmphasis">z</span> development kernel branch resulted in the 2.4 stable kernel branch.</p><p class="docText">Following
 the 2.6 kernel release, the development model was changed. The main 
motivation for this change arose from problems and frustrations caused 
by the long intervals between stable kernel releases. (Nearly three 
years passed between the release of Linux 2.4.0 and 2.6.0.) There have 
periodically been discussions about fine-tuning this model, but the 
essential details have remained as follows:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">There is no longer a separation between stable and development kernels. Each new 2.6.<span class="docEmphasis">z</span>
 release can contain new features, and goes through a life cycle that 
begins with the addition of new features, which are then stabilized over
 the course of a number of candidate release versions. When a candidate 
version is deemed sufficiently stable, it is released as kernel 2.6.<span class="docEmphasis">z</span>. Release cycles are typically about three months long.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Sometimes, a stable 2.6.<span class="docEmphasis">z</span>
 release may require minor patches to fix bugs or security problems. If 
these fixes have a sufficiently high priority, and the patches are 
deemed simple enough to be “obviously” correct, then, rather than 
waiting for the next 2.6.<span class="docEmphasis">z</span> release, they are applied to create a release with a number of the form 2.6.<span class="docEmphasis">z.r</span>, where <span class="docEmphasis">r</span> is a sequential number for a minor revision of this 2.6.<span class="docEmphasis">z</span> kernel.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Additional
 responsibility is shifted onto distribution vendors to ensure the 
stability of the kernel provided with a distribution.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Later
 chapters will sometimes note the kernel version in which a particular 
API change (i.e., new or modified system call) occurred. Although, prior
 to the 2.6.<span class="docEmphasis">z</span>
 series, most kernel changes occurred in the odd-numbered development 
branches, we’ll generally refer to the following stable kernel version 
in which the change appeared, since most application developers would 
normally be using a stable kernel, rather than one of the development 
kernels. In many cases, the manual pages note the precise development 
kernel in which a particular feature appeared or changed.</p><p class="docText">For changes that appear in the 2.6.<span class="docEmphasis">z</span> kernel series, we note the precise kernel version. When we say that a feature is new in kernel 2.6, without a <span class="docEmphasis">z</span>
 revision number, we mean a feature that was implemented in the 2.5 
development kernel series and first appeared in the stable kernel at 
version 2.6.0.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">At
 the time of writing, the 2.4 stable Linux kernel is still supported by 
maintainers who incorporate essential patches and bug fixes, and 
periodically release new revisions. This allows installed systems to 
continue to use 2.4 kernels, rather than being forced to upgrade to a 
new kernel series (which may entail significant work in some cases).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EFSAE">1.2.2.3. Ports to other hardware architectures</h5><p class="docText">During
 the initial development of Linux, efficient implementation on the Intel
 80386 was the primary goal, rather than portability to other processor 
architectures. However, with the increasing popularity of Linux, ports 
to other processor architectures began to appear, starting with an early
 port to the Digital Alpha chip. The list of hardware architectures to 
which Linux has been ported continues to grow and includes x86-64, 
Motorola/IBM PowerPC and PowerPC64, Sun SPARC and SPARC64 (UltraSPARC), 
MIPS, ARM (Acorn), IBM zSeries (formerly System/390), Intel IA-64 
(Itanium; see [Mosberger &amp; Eranian, 2002]), Hitachi SuperH, HP 
PA-RISC, and Motorola 68000.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EPSAE">1.2.2.4. Linux distributions</h5><p class="docText">Precisely speaking, the term <span class="docEmphasis">Linux</span> refers just to the kernel developed by Linus Torvalds and others. However, the term <span class="docEmphasis">Linux</span>
 is commonly used to mean the kernel, plus a wide range of other 
software (tools and libraries) that together make a complete operating 
system. In the very early days of Linux, the user was required to 
assemble all of this software, create a file system, and correctly place
 and configure all of the software on that file system. This demanded 
considerable time and expertise. As a result, a market opened for Linux 
distributors, who created packages (<span class="docEmphasis">distributions</span>) to automate most of the installation process, creating a file system and installing the kernel and other required software.</p><p class="docText">The
 earliest distributions appeared in 1992, and included MCC Interim Linux
 (Manchester Computing Centre, UK), TAMU (Texas A&amp;M University), and
 SLS (SoftLanding Linux System). The oldest surviving commercial 
distribution, Slackware, appeared in 1993. The noncommercial Debian 
distribution appeared at around the same time, and SUSE and Red Hat soon
 followed. The currently very popular Ubuntu distribution first appeared
 in 2004. Nowadays, many distribution companies also employ programmers 
who actively contribute to existing free software projects or initiate 
new projects.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
