<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>1.4. Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">1.4. Summary</h3><p class="docText">The
 UNIX system was first implemented in 1969 on a Digital PDP-7 
minicomputer by Ken Thompson at Bell Laboratories (part of AT&amp;T). 
The operating system drew many ideas, as well as its punned name, from 
the earlier MULTICS system. By 1973, UNIX had been moved to the PDP-11 
mini-computer and rewritten in C, a programming language designed and 
implemented at Bell Laboratories by Dennis Ritchie. Legally prevented 
from selling UNIX, AT&amp;T instead distributed the complete system to 
universities for a nominal charge. This distribution included source 
code, and became very popular within universities, since it provided a 
cheap operating system whose code could be studied and modified by 
computer science academics and students.</p><p class="docText">The
 University of California at Berkeley played a key role in the 
development of the UNIX system. There, Ken Thompson and a number of 
graduate students extended the operating system. By 1979, the University
 was producing its own UNIX distribution, BSD. This distribution became 
widespread in academia and formed the basis for several commercial 
implementations.</p><p class="docText">Meanwhile, 
the breakup of the AT&amp;T monopoly permitted the company to sell the 
UNIX system. This resulted in the other major variant of UNIX, System V,
 which also formed the basis for several commercial implementations.</p><p class="docText">Two
 different currents led to the development of (GNU/) Linux. One of these
 was the GNU project, founded by Richard Stallman. By the late 1980s, 
the GNU project had produced an almost complete, freely distributable 
UNIX implementation. The one part lacking was a working kernel. In 1991,
 inspired by the Minix kernel written by Andrew Tanenbaum, Linus 
Torvalds produced a working UNIX kernel for the Intel x86-32 
architecture. Torvalds invited other programmers to join him in 
improving the kernel. Many programmers did so, and, over time, Linux was
 extended and ported to a wide variety of hardware architectures.</p><p class="docText">The
 portability problems that arose from the variations in UNIX and C 
implementations that existed by the late 1980s created a strong pressure
 for standardization. The C language was standardized in 1989 (C89), and
 a revised standard was produced in 1999 (C99). The first attempt to 
standardize the operating system interface yielded POSIX.1, ratified as 
an IEEE standard in 1988, and as an ISO standard in 1990. During the 
1990s, further standards were drafted, including various versions of the
 Single UNIX Specification. In 2001, the combined POSIX 1003.1-2001 and 
SUSv3 standard was ratified. This standard consolidates and extends 
various earlier POSIX standards and earlier versions of the Single UNIX 
Specification. In 2008, a less wide-ranging revision of the standard was
 completed, yielding the combined POSIX 1003.1-2008 and SUSv4 standard.</p><p class="docText">Unlike
 most commercial UNIX implementations, Linux separates implementation 
from distribution. Consequently, there is no single “official” Linux 
distribution. Each Linux distributor’s offering consists of a snapshot 
of the current stable kernel, with various patches applied. The LSB 
develops and promotes a set of standards for Linux systems with the aim 
of ensuring binary application compatibility across Linux distributions,
 so that compiled applications should be able to run on any 
LSB-conformant system running on the same hardware.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E2PAE">1.4.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E6PAE">1.4.1.1. Further information</h5><p class="docText">Further
 information about UNIX history and standards can be found in [Ritchie, 
1984], [McKusick et al., 1996], [McKusick &amp; Neville-Neil, 2005], 
[Libes &amp; Ressler, 1989], [Garfinkel et al., 2003], [Stevens &amp; 
Rago, 2005], [Stevens, 1999], [Quartermann &amp; Wilhelm, 1993], 
[Goodheart &amp; Cox, 1994], and [McKusick, 1999].</p><p class="docText">[Salus,
 1994] is a detailed history of UNIX, from which much of the information
 at the beginning of this chapter was drawn. [Salus, 2008] provides a 
short history of Linux and other free software projects. Many details of
 the history of UNIX can also be found in the online book <span class="docEmphasis">History of UNIX</span>, written by Ronda Hauben. This book is available at http://www.dei.isep.ipp.pt/~acc/docs/unix.html. An extremely detailed timeline showing the releases of various UNIX implementations can be found at http://www.levenez.com/unix/.</p><p class="docText">[Josey,
 2004] provides an overview of the history of the UNIX system and the 
development of SUSv3, guidance on how to use the specification, summary 
tables of the interfaces in SUSv3, and migration guides for the 
transitions from SUSv2 to SUSv3 and C89 to C99.</p><p class="docText">As well as providing software and documentation, the GNU web site (http://www.gnu.org/)
 contains a number of philosophical papers on the subject of free 
software. [Williams, 2002] is a biography of Richard Stallman.</p><p class="docText">Torvalds provides his own account of the development of Linux in [Torvalds &amp; Diamond, 2001].</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
