<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>2.1. The Core Operating System: The Kernel</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">2.1. The Core Operating System: The Kernel</h3><p class="docText">The term <span class="docEmphasis">operating system</span> is commonly used with two different meanings:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">To
 denote the entire package consisting of the central software managing a
 computer’s resources and all of the accompanying standard software 
tools, such as command-line interpreters, graphical user interfaces, 
file utilities, and editors.</p></li><li><p class="docList">More narrowly, to refer to the central software that manages and allocates computer resources (i.e., the CPU, RAM, and devices).</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The term <span class="docEmphasis">kernel</span><a name="second meaning"></a> is often used as a synonym for the second meaning, and it is with this meaning of the term <span class="docEmphasis">operating system</span> that we are concerned in this book.</p><p class="docText">Although
 it is possible to run programs on a computer without a kernel, the 
presence of a kernel greatly simplifies the writing and use of other 
programs, and increases the power and flexibility available to 
programmers. The kernel does this by providing a software layer to 
manage the limited resources of a computer.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The Linux kernel executable typically resides at the pathname <tt>/boot/vmlinuz</tt>, or something similar. The derivation of this filename is historical. On early UNIX implementations, the kernel was called <tt>unix</tt>. Later UNIX implementations, which implemented virtual memory, renamed the kernel as <tt>vmunix</tt>. On Linux, the filename mirrors the system name, with the <span class="docEmphasis">z</span> replacing the final <span class="docEmphasis">x</span> to signify that the kernel is a compressed executable.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EFSAE">2.1.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EJSAE">2.1.1.1. Tasks performed by the kernel</h5><p class="docText">Among other things, the kernel performs the following tasks:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Process scheduling</span>:
 A computer has one or more central processing units (CPUs), which 
execute the instructions of programs. Like other UNIX systems, Linux is a
 <span class="docEmphasis">preemptive multitasking</span> operating system, <span class="docEmphasis">Multitasking</span>
 means that multiple processes (i.e., running programs) can 
simultaneously reside in memory and each may receive use of the CPU(s). <span class="docEmphasis">Preemptive</span>
 means that the rules governing which processes receive use of the CPU 
and for how long are determined by the kernel process scheduler (rather 
than by the processes themselves).</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Memory management</span>:
 While computer memories are enormous by the standards of a decade or 
two ago, the size of software has also correspondingly grown, so that 
physical memory (RAM) remains a limited resource that the kernel must 
share among processes in an equitable and efficient fashion. Like most 
modern operating systems, Linux employs virtual memory management (Section 6.4), a technique that confers two main advantages:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Processes
 are isolated from one another and from the kernel, so that one process 
can’t read or modify the memory of another process or the kernel.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Only
 part of a process needs to be kept in memory, thereby lowering the 
memory requirements of each process and allowing more processes to be 
held in RAM simultaneously. This leads to better CPU utilization, since 
it increases the likelihood that, at any moment in time, there is at 
least one process that the CPU(s) can execute.</p></li></ul></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Provision of a file system</span>: The kernel provides a file system on disk, allowing files to be created, retrieved, updated, deleted, and so on.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Creation and termination of processes</span>:
 The kernel can load a new program into memory, providing it with the 
resources (e.g., CPU, memory, and access to files) that it needs in 
order to run. Such an instance of a running program is termed a <span class="docEmphasis">process</span>.
 Once a process has completed execution, the kernel ensures that the 
resources it uses are freed for subsequent reuse by later programs.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Access to devices</span>:
 The devices (mice, monitors, keyboards, disk and tape drives, and so 
on) attached to a computer allow communication of information between 
the computer and the outside world, permitting input, output, or both. 
The kernel provides programs with an interface that standardizes and 
simplifies access to devices, while at the same time arbitrating access 
by multiple processes to each device.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Networking</span>:
 The kernel transmits and receives network messages (packets) on behalf 
of user processes. This task includes routing of network packets to the 
target system.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Provision of a system call application programming interface (API)</span>: Processes can request the kernel to perform various tasks using kernel entry points known as <span class="docEmphasis">system calls</span>. The Linux system call API is the primary topic of this book. Section 3.1 details the steps that occur when a process performs a system call.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">In addition to the above features, multiuser operating systems such as Linux generally provide users with the abstraction of a <span class="docEmphasis">virtual private computer</span>;
 that is, each user can log on to the system and operate largely 
independently of other users. For example, each user has their own disk 
storage space (home directory). In addition, users can run programs, 
each of which gets a share of the CPU and operates in its own virtual 
address space, and these programs can independently access devices and 
transfer information over the network. The kernel resolves potential 
conflicts in accessing hardware resources, so users and processes are 
generally unaware of the conflicts.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EIVAE">2.1.1.2. Kernel mode and user mode</h5><p class="docText">Modern processor architectures typically allow the CPU to operate in at least two different modes: <span class="docEmphasis">user mode</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">kernel mode</span> (sometimes also referred to as <span class="docEmphasis">supervisor mode</span>).
 Hardware instructions allow switching from one mode to the other. 
Correspondingly, areas of virtual memory can be marked as being part of <span class="docEmphasis">user space</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">kernel space</span>.
 When running in user mode, the CPU can access only memory that is 
marked as being in user space; attempts to access memory in kernel space
 result in a hardware exception. When running in kernel mode, the CPU 
can access both user and kernel memory space.</p><p class="docText">Certain
 operations can be performed only while the processor is operating in 
kernel mode. Examples include executing the halt instruction to stop the
 system, accessing the memory-management hardware, and initiating device
 I/O operations. By taking advantage of this hardware design to place 
the operating system in kernel space, operating system implementers can 
ensure that user processes are not able to access the instructions and 
data structures of the kernel, or to perform operations that would 
adversely affect the operation of the system.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EJWAE">2.1.1.3. Process versus kernel views of the system</h5><p class="docText">In
 many everyday programming tasks, we are accustomed to thinking about 
programming in a process-oriented way. However, when considering various
 topics covered later in this book, it can be useful to reorient our 
perspective to consider things from the kernel’s point of view. To make 
the contrast clear, we now consider how things look first from a process
 viewpoint and then from a kernel viewpoint.</p><p class="docText">A
 running system typically has numerous processes. For a process, many 
things happen asynchronously. An executing process doesn’t know when it 
will next time out, which other processes will then be scheduled for the
 CPU (and in what order), or when it will next be scheduled. The 
delivery of signals and the occurrence of interprocess communication 
events are mediated by the kernel, and can occur at any time for a 
process. Many things happen transparently for a process. A process 
doesn’t know where it is located in RAM or, in general, whether a 
particular part of its memory space is currently resident in memory or 
held in the swap area (a reserved area of disk space used to supplement 
the computer’s RAM). Similarly, a process doesn’t know where on the disk
 drive the files it accesses are being held; it simply refers to the 
files by name. A process operates in isolation; it can’t directly 
communicate with another process. A process can’t itself create a new 
process or even end its own existence. Finally, a process can’t 
communicate directly with the input and output devices attached to the 
computer.</p><p class="docText">By 
contrast, a running system has one kernel that knows and controls 
everything. The kernel facilitates the running of all processes on the 
system. The kernel decides which process will next obtain access to the 
CPU, when it will do so, and for how long. The kernel maintains data 
structures containing information about all running processes and 
updates these structures as processes are created, change state, and 
terminate. The kernel maintains all of the low-level data structures 
that enable the filenames used by programs to be translated into 
physical locations on the disk. The kernel also maintains data 
structures that map the virtual memory of each process into the physical
 memory of the computer and the swap area(s) on disk. All communication 
between processes is done via mechanisms provided by the kernel. In 
response to requests from processes, the kernel creates new processes 
and terminates existing processes. Lastly, the kernel (in particular, 
device drivers) performs all direct communication with input and output 
devices, transferring information to and from user processes as 
required.</p><p class="docText">Later in this 
book we’ll say things such as “a process can create another process,” “a
 process can create a pipe,” “a process can write data to a file,” and 
“a process can terminate by calling <span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span>.” Remember, however, that the kernel mediates all such actions, and these statements are just shorthand for “a process can <span class="docEmphasis">request that the kernel</span> create another process,” and so on.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EWWAE">2.1.1.4. Further information</h5><p class="docText">Modern
 texts covering operating systems concepts and design, with particular 
reference to UNIX systems, include [Tanenbaum, 2007], [Tanenbaum &amp; 
Woodhull, 2006], and [Vahalia, 1996], the last of these containing much 
detail on virtual memory architectures. [Goodheart &amp; Cox, 1994] 
provide details on System V Release 4. [Maxwell, 1999] provides an 
annotated listing of selected parts of the Linux 2.2.5 kernel. [Lions, 
1996] is a detailed exposition of the Sixth Edition UNIX source code 
that remains a useful introduction to UNIX operating system internals. 
[Bovet &amp; Cesati, 2005] describes the implementation of the Linux 2.6
 kernel.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
