<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>2.2. The Shell</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">2.2. The Shell</h3><p class="docText">A <span class="docEmphasis">shell</span>
 is a special-purpose program designed to read commands typed by a user 
and execute appropriate programs in response to those commands. Such a 
program is sometimes known as a <span class="docEmphasis">command interpreter</span>.</p><p class="docText">The term <span class="docEmphasis">login shell</span> is used to denote the process that is created to run a shell when the user first logs in.</p><p class="docText">Whereas
 on some operating systems the command interpreter is an integral part 
of the kernel, on UNIX systems, the shell is a user process. Many 
different shells exist, and different users (or, for that matter, a 
single user) on the same computer can simultaneously use different 
shells. A number of important shells have appeared over time:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Bourne shell</span> (<span class="docEmphasis">sh</span>):
 This is the oldest of the widely used shells, and was written by Steve 
Bourne. It was the standard shell for Seventh Edition UNIX. The Bourne 
shell contains many of the features familiar in all shells: I/O 
redirection, pipelines, filename generation (globbing), variables, 
manipulation of environment variables, command substitution, background 
command execution, and functions. All later UNIX implementations include
 the Bourne shell in addition to any other shells they might provide.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">C shell</span> (<span class="docEmphasis">csh</span>):
 This shell was written by Bill Joy at the University of California at 
Berkeley. The name derives from the resemblance of many of the 
flow-control constructs of this shell to those of the C programming 
language. The C shell provided several useful interactive features 
unavailable in the Bourne shell, including command history, command-line
 editing, job control, and aliases. The C shell was not backward 
compatible with the Bourne shell. Although the standard interactive 
shell on BSD was the C shell, shell scripts (described in a moment) were
 usually written for the Bourne shell, so as to be portable across all 
UNIX implementations.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Korn shell</span> (<span class="docEmphasis">ksh</span>):
 This shell was written as the successor to the Bourne shell by David 
Korn at AT&amp;T Bell Laboratories. While maintaining backward 
compatibility with the Bourne shell, it also incorporated interactive 
features similar to those provided by the C shell.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Bourne again shell</span> (<span class="docEmphasis">bash</span>):
 This shell is the GNU project’s reimplementation of the Bourne shell. 
It supplies interactive features similar to those available in the C and
 Korn shells. The principal authors of <span class="docEmphasis">bash</span> are Brian Fox and Chet Ramey. Bash is probably the most widely used shell on Linux. (On Linux, the Bourne shell, <span class="docEmphasis">sh</span>, is typically provided by <span class="docEmphasis">bash</span> emulating <span class="docEmphasis">sh</span> as closely as possible.)</p></li></ul><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">POSIX.2-1992
 specified a standard for the shell that was based on the then current 
version of the Korn shell. Nowadays, the Korn shell and <span class="docEmphasis">bash</span>
 both conform to POSIX, but provide a number of extensions to the 
standard, and many of these extensions differ between the two shells.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The shells are designed not merely for interactive use, but also for the interpretation of <span class="docEmphasis">shell scripts</span>,
 which are text files containing shell commands. For this purpose, each 
of the shells has the facilities typically associated with programming 
languages: variables, loop and conditional statements, I/O commands, and
 functions.</p><p class="docText">Each of the 
shells performs similar tasks, albeit with variations in syntax. Unless 
referring to the operation of a specific shell, we typically refer to 
“the shell,” with the understanding that all shells operate in the 
manner described. Most of the examples in this book that require a shell
 use <span class="docEmphasis">bash</span>, but, unless otherwise noted, the reader can assume these examples work the same way in other Bourne-type shells.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
