<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>2.3. Users and Groups</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">2.3. Users and Groups</h3><p class="docText">Each user on the system is uniquely identified, and users may belong to groups.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EQTAE">2.3.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EUTAE">2.3.1.1. Users</h5><p class="docText">Every user of the system has a unique <span class="docEmphasis">login name</span> (username) and a corresponding numeric <span class="docEmphasis">user ID</span> (UID). For each user, these are defined by a line in the system <span class="docEmphasis">password file</span>, <tt>/etc/passwd</tt>, which includes the following additional information:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Group ID</span>: the numeric group ID of the first of the groups of which the user is a member.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Home directory</span>: the initial directory into which the user is placed after logging in.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Login shell</span>: the name of the program to be executed to interpret user commands.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The
 password record may also include the user’s password, in encrypted 
form. However, for security reasons, the password is often stored in the
 separate <span class="docEmphasis">shadow password file</span>, which is readable only by privileged users.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EEWAE">2.3.1.2. Groups</h5><p class="docText">For
 administrative purposes—in particular, for controlling access to files 
and other system resources—it is useful to organize users into <span class="docEmphasis">groups</span>.
 For example, the people in a team working on a single project, and thus
 sharing a common set of files, might all be made members of the same 
group. In early UNIX implementations, a user could be a member of only 
one group. BSD allowed a user to simultaneously belong to multiple 
groups, an idea that was taken up by other UNIX implementations and the 
POSIX.1-1990 standard. Each group is identified by a single line in the 
system <span class="docEmphasis">group file</span>, <tt>/etc/group</tt>, which includes the following information:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Group name</span>: the (unique) name of the group.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Group ID</span> (GID): the numeric ID associated with this group.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">User list</span>:
 a comma-separated list of login names of users who are members of this 
group (and who are not otherwise identified as members of the group by 
virtue of the group ID field of their password file record).</p></li></ul><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E5WAE">2.3.1.3. Superuser</h5><p class="docText">One user, known as the <span class="docEmphasis">superuser</span>, has special privileges within the system. The superuser account has user ID 0, and normally has the login name <span class="docEmphasis">root</span>.
 On typical UNIX systems, the superuser bypasses all permission checks 
in the system. Thus, for example, the superuser can access any file in 
the system, regardless of the permissions on that file, and can send 
signals to any user process in the system. The system administrator uses
 the superuser account to perform various administrative tasks on the 
system.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
