<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>2.5. File I/O Model</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">2.5. File I/O Model</h3><p class="docText">One of the distinguishing features of the I/O model on UNIX systems is the concept of <span class="docEmphasis">universality of I/O</span>. This means that the same system calls (<span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">close()</span>,
 and so on) are used to perform I/O on all types of files, including 
devices. (The kernel translates the application’s I/O requests into 
appropriate file-system or device-driver operations that perform I/O on 
the target file or device.) Thus, a program employing these system calls
 will work on any type of file.</p><p class="docText">The
 kernel essentially provides one file type: a sequential stream of 
bytes, which, in the case of disk files, disks, and tape devices, can be
 randomly accessed using the <span class="docEmphasis">lseek()</span> system call.</p><p class="docText">Many applications and libraries interpret the <span class="docEmphasis">newline</span> character (ASCII code 10 decimal, sometimes also known as <span class="docEmphasis">linefeed</span>) as terminating one line of text and commencing another. UNIX systems have no <span class="docEmphasis">end-of-file</span> character; the end of a file is detected by a read that returns no data.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EQWAE">2.5.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EUWAE">2.5.1.1. File descriptors</h5><p class="docText">The I/O system calls refer to open files using a <span class="docEmphasis">file descriptor</span>, a (usually small) nonnegative integer. A file descriptor is typically obtained by a call to <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>, which takes a pathname argument specifying a file upon which I/O is to be performed.</p><p class="docText">Normally, a process inherits three open file descriptors when it is started by the shell: descriptor 0 is <span class="docEmphasis">standard input</span>, the file from which the process takes its input; descriptor 1 is <span class="docEmphasis">standard output</span>, the file to which the process writes its output; and descriptor 2 is <span class="docEmphasis">standard error</span>,
 the file to which the process writes error messages and notification of
 exceptional or abnormal conditions. In an interactive shell or program,
 these three descriptors are normally connected to the terminal. In the <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> library, these descriptors correspond to the file streams <span class="docEmphasis">stdin</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">stdout</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">stderr</span>.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EOZAE">2.5.1.2. The <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> library</h5><p class="docText">To
 perform file I/O, C programs typically employ I/O functions contained 
in the standard C library. This set of functions, referred to as the <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> library, includes <span class="docEmphasis">fopen()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">fclose()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">scanf()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">printf()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">fgets()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">fputs()</span>, and so on. The <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> functions are layered on top of the I/O system calls (<span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">close()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span>, and so on).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">We assume that the reader is already familiar with the C standard I/O (<span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span>) functions, and don’t cover them in this book. Further information on the <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span>
 library can be found in [Kernighan &amp; Ritchie, 1988], [Harbison 
&amp; Steele, 2002], [Plauger, 1992], and [Stevens &amp; Rago, 2005].</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
