<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>2.7. Processes</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">2.7. Processes</h3><p class="docText">Put most simply, a <span class="docEmphasis">process</span>
 is an instance of an executing program. When a program is executed, the
 kernel loads the code of the program into virtual memory, allocates 
space for program variables, and sets up kernel bookkeeping data 
structures to record various information (such as process ID, 
termination status, user IDs, and group IDs) about the process.</p><p class="docText">From
 a kernel point of view, processes are the entities among which the 
kernel must share the various resources of the computer. For resources 
that are limited, such as memory, the kernel initially allocates some 
amount of the resource to the process, and adjusts this allocation over 
the lifetime of the process in response to the demands of the process 
and the overall system demand for that resource. When the process 
terminates, all such resources are released for reuse by other 
processes. Other resources, such as the CPU and network bandwidth, are 
renewable, but must be shared equitably among all processes.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EEXAE">2.7.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EIXAE">2.7.1.1. Process memory layout</h5><p class="docText">A process is logically divided into the following parts, known as <span class="docEmphasis">segments</span>:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Text</span>: the instructions of the program.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Data</span>: the static variables used by the program.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Heap</span>: an area from which programs can dynamically allocate extra memory.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Stack</span>:
 a piece of memory that grows and shrinks as functions are called and 
return and that is used to allocate storage for local variables and 
function call linkage information.</p></li></ul><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EGYAE">2.7.1.2. Process creation and program execution</h5><p class="docText">A process can create a new process using the <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> system call. The process that calls <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> is referred to as the <span class="docEmphasis">parent process</span>, and the new process is referred to as the <span class="docEmphasis">child process</span>.
 The kernel creates the child process by making a duplicate of the 
parent process. The child inherits copies of the parent’s data, stack, 
and heap segments, which it may then modify independently of the 
parent’s copies. (The program text, which is placed in memory marked as 
read-only, is shared by the two processes.)</p><p class="docText">The
 child process goes on either to execute a different set of functions in
 the same code as the parent, or, frequently, to use the <span class="docEmphasis">execve()</span> system call to load and execute an entirely new program. An <span class="docEmphasis">execve()</span>
 call destroys the existing text, data, stack, and heap segments, 
replacing them with new segments based on the code of the new program.</p><p class="docText">Several related C library functions are layered on top of <span class="docEmphasis">execve()</span>,
 each providing a slightly different interface to the same 
functionality. All of these functions have names starting with the 
string <span class="docEmphasis">exec</span>, and where the differences don’t matter, we’ll use the notation <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span> to refer generally to these functions. Be aware, however, that there is no actual function with the name <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>.</p><p class="docText">Commonly, we’ll use the verb <span class="docEmphasis">to exec</span> to describe the operation performed <span class="docEmphasis">execve()</span> and the library functions layered on top of it.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EB1AE">2.7.1.3. Process ID and parent process ID</h5><p class="docText">Each process has a unique integer <span class="docEmphasis">process identifier</span> (PID). Each process also has a <span class="docEmphasis">parent process identifier</span> (PPID) attribute, which identifies the process that requested the kernel to create this process.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EJ2AE">2.7.1.4. Process termination and termination status</h5><p class="docText">A process can terminate in one of two ways: by requesting its own termination using the <span class="docEmphasis">_exit()</span> system call (or the related <span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span> library function), or by being killed by the delivery of a signal. In either case, the process yields a <span class="docEmphasis">termination status</span>, a small nonnegative integer value that is available for inspection by the parent process using the <span class="docEmphasis">wait()</span> system call. In the case of a call to _<span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span>,
 the process explicitly specifies its own termination status. If a 
process is killed by a signal, the termination status is set according 
to the type of signal that caused the death of the process. (Sometimes, 
we’ll refer to the argument passed to _<span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span> as the <span class="docEmphasis">exit status</span> of the process, as distinct from the termination status, which is either the value passed to _<span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span> or an indication of the signal that killed the process.)</p><p class="docText">By
 convention, a termination status of 0 indicates that the process 
succeeded, and a nonzero status indicates that some error occurred. Most
 shells make the termination status of the last executed program 
available via a shell variable named <span class="docEmphasis">$?</span>.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EF4AE">2.7.1.5. Process user and group identifiers (credentials)</h5><p class="docText">Each process has a number of associated user IDs (UIDs) and group IDs (GIDs). These include:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Real user ID</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">real group ID</span>:
 These identify the user and group to which the process belongs. A new 
process inherits these IDs from its parent. A login shell gets its real 
user ID and real group ID from the corresponding fields in the system 
password file.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Effective user ID</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">effective group ID</span>:
 These two IDs (in conjunction with the supplementary group IDs 
discussed in a moment) are used in determining the permissions that the 
process has when accessing protected resources such as files and 
interprocess communication objects. Typically, the process’s effective 
IDs have the same values as the corresponding real IDs. Changing the 
effective IDs is a mechanism that allows a process to assume the 
privileges of another user or group, as described in a moment.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Supplementary group IDs</span>:
 These IDs identify additional groups to which a process belongs. A new 
process inherits its supplementary group IDs from its parent. A login 
shell gets its supplementary group IDs from the system group file.</p></li></ul><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EL5AE">2.7.1.6. Privileged processes</h5><p class="docText">Traditionally, on UNIX systems, a <span class="docEmphasis">privileged process</span> is one whose <span class="docEmphasis">effective</span>
 user ID is 0 (superuser). Such a process bypasses the permission 
restrictions normally applied by the kernel. By contrast, the term <span class="docEmphasis">unprivileged</span> (or <span class="docEmphasis">nonprivileged</span>)
 is applied to processes run by other users. Such processes have a 
nonzero effective user ID and must abide by the permission rules 
enforced by the kernel.</p><p class="docText">A process may be privileged because it was created by another privileged process—for example, by a login shell started by <span class="docEmphasis">root</span>
 (superuser). Another way a process may become privileged is via the 
set-user-ID mechanism, which allows a process to assume an effective 
user ID that is the same as the user ID of the program file that it is 
executing.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EHAAG">2.7.1.7. Capabilities</h5><p class="docText">Since kernel 2.2, Linux divides the privileges traditionally accorded to the superuser into a set of distinct units called <span class="docEmphasis">capabilities</span>.
 Each privileged operation is associated with a particular capability, 
and a process can perform an operation only if it has the corresponding 
capability. A traditional superuser process (effective user ID of 0) 
corresponds to a process with all capabilities enabled.</p><p class="docText">Granting
 a subset of capabilities to a process allows it to perform some of the 
operations normally permitted to the superuser, while preventing it from
 performing others.</p><p class="docText">Capabilities are described in detail in Chapter 39.
 In the remainder of the book, when noting that a particular operation 
can be performed only by a privileged process, we’ll usually identify 
the specific capability in parentheses. Capability names begin with the 
prefix <tt>CAP_</tt>, as in <tt>CAP_KILL</tt>.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E4AAG">2.7.1.8. The <span class="docEmphasis">init</span> process</h5><p class="docText">When booting the system, the kernel creates a special process called <span class="docEmphasis">init</span>, the “parent of all processes,” which is derived from the program file <tt>/sbin/init</tt>. All processes on the system are created (using <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>) either by <span class="docEmphasis">init</span> or by one of its descendants. The <span class="docEmphasis">init</span> process always has the process ID 1 and runs with superuser privileges. The <span class="docEmphasis">init</span> process can’t be killed (not even by the superuser), and it terminates only when the system is shut down. The main task of <span class="docEmphasis">init</span> is to create and monitor a range of processes required by a running system. (For details, see the <span class="docEmphasis">init(8)</span> manual page.)</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E4BAG">2.7.1.9. Daemon processes</h5><p class="docText">A <span class="docEmphasis">daemon</span>
 is a special-purpose process that is created and handled by the system 
in the same way as other processes, but which is distinguished by the 
following characteristics:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">It is long-lived. A daemon process is often started at system boot and remains in existence until the system is shut down.</p></li><li><p class="docList">It runs in the background, and has no controlling terminal from which it can read input or to which it can write output.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Examples of daemon processes include <span class="docEmphasis">syslogd</span>, which records messages in the system log, and <span class="docEmphasis">httpd</span>, which serves web pages via the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP).</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E1CAG">2.7.1.10. Environment list</h5><p class="docText">Each process has an <span class="docEmphasis">environment list</span>, which is a set of <span class="docEmphasis">environment variables</span>
 that are maintained within the user-space memory of the process. Each 
element of this list consists of a name and an associated value. When a 
new process is created via <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>,
 it inherits a copy of its parent’s environment. Thus, the environment 
provides a mechanism for a parent process to communicate information to a
 child process. When a process replaces the program that it is running 
using <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span>, the
 new program either inherits the environment used by the old program or 
receives a new environment specified as part of the <span class="docEmphasis">exec()</span> call.</p><p class="docText">Environment variables are created with the <span class="docEmphasis">export</span> command in most shells (or the <span class="docEmphasis">setenv</span> command in the C shell), as in the following example:</p><pre>$ export MYVAR='Hello world'</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Whenever
 we present a shell session log showing interactive input and output, 
the input text is always boldfaced. Sometimes, we include commentary in 
the log in italic text, adding notes about the commands entered or the 
output produced.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">C programs can access the environment using an external variable (<span class="docEmphasis">char **environ</span>), and various library functions allow a process to retrieve and modify values in its environment.</p><p class="docText">Environment
 variables are used for a variety of purposes. For example, the shell 
defines and uses a range of variables that can be accessed by scripts 
and programs executed from the shell. These include the variable <tt>HOME</tt>, which specifies the pathname of the user’s login directory, and the variable <tt>PATH</tt>,
 which specifies a list of directories that the shell should search when
 looking for programs corresponding to commands entered by the user.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E2EAG">2.7.1.11. Resource limits</h5><p class="docText">Each process consumes resources, such as open files, memory, and CPU time. Using the <span class="docEmphasis">setrlimit()</span> system call, a process can establish upper limits on its consumption of various resources. Each such <span class="docEmphasis">resource limit</span> has two associated values: a <span class="docEmphasis">soft limit</span>, which limits the amount of the resource that the process may consume; and a <span class="docEmphasis">hard limit</span>,
 which is a ceiling on the value to which the soft limit may be 
adjusted. An unprivileged process may change its soft limit for a 
particular resource to any value in the range from zero up to the 
corresponding hard limit, but can only lower its hard limit.</p><p class="docText">When a new process is created with <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>, it inherits copies of its parent’s resource limit settings.</p><p class="docText">The resource limits of the shell can be adjusted using the <span class="docEmphasis">ulimit</span> command (<span class="docEmphasis">limit</span> in the C shell). These limit settings are inherited by the child processes that the shell creates to execute commands.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
