<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>2.8. Memory Mappings</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">2.8. Memory Mappings</h3><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">mmap()</span> system call creates a new <span class="docEmphasis">memory mapping</span> in the calling process’s virtual address space.</p><p class="docText">Mappings fall into two categories:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">A <span class="docEmphasis">file mapping</span>
 maps a region of a file into the calling process’s virtual memory. Once
 mapped, the file’s contents can be accessed by operations on the bytes 
in the corresponding memory region. The pages of the mapping are 
automatically loaded from the file as required.</p></li><li><p class="docList">By contrast, an <span class="docEmphasis">anonymous mapping</span> doesn’t have a corresponding file. Instead, the pages of the mapping are initialized to 0.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The
 memory in one process’s mapping may be shared with mappings in other 
processes. This can occur either because two processes map the same 
region of a file or because a child process created by <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span> inherits a mapping from its parent.</p><p class="docText">When
 two or more processes share the same pages, each process may see the 
changes made by other processes to the contents of the pages, depending 
on whether the mapping is created as private or shared. When a mapping 
is <span class="docEmphasis">private</span>, 
modifications to the contents of the mapping are not visible to other 
processes and are not carried through to the underlying file. When a 
mapping is <span class="docEmphasis">shared</span>,
 modifications to the contents of the mapping are visible to other 
processes sharing the same mapping and are carried through to the 
underlying file.</p><p class="docText">Memory
 mappings serve a variety of purposes, including initialization of a 
process’s text segment from the corresponding segment of an executable 
file, allocation of new (zero-filled) memory, file I/O (memory-mapped 
I/O), and interprocess communication (via a shared mapping).</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
