<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>2.9. Static and Shared Libraries</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">2.9. Static and Shared Libraries</h3><p class="docText">An <span class="docEmphasis">object library</span>
 is a file containing the compiled object code for a (usually logically 
related) set of functions that may be called from application programs. 
Placing code for a set of functions in a single object library eases the
 tasks of program creation and maintenance. Modern UNIX systems provide 
two types of object libraries: <span class="docEmphasis">static libraries</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">shared libraries</span>.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EKZAE">2.9.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EOZAE">2.9.1.1. Static libraries</h5><p class="docText">Static libraries (sometimes also known as <span class="docEmphasis">archives</span>)
 were the only type of library on early UNIX systems. A static library 
is essentially a structured bundle of compiled object modules. To use 
functions from a static library, we specify that library in the link 
command used to build a program. After resolving the various function 
references from the main program to the modules in the static library, 
the linker extracts copies of the required object modules from the 
library and copies these into the resulting executable file. We say that
 such a program is <span class="docEmphasis">statically linked</span>.</p><p class="docText">The
 fact that each statically linked program includes its own copy of the 
object modules required from the library creates a number of 
disadvantages. One is that the duplication of object code in different 
executable files wastes disk space. A corresponding waste of memory 
occurs when statically linked programs using the same library function 
are executed at the same time; each program requires its own copy of the
 function to reside in memory. Additionally, if a library function 
requires modification, then, after recompiling that function and adding 
it to the static library, all applications that need to use the updated 
function must be relinked against the library.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EZZAE">2.9.1.2. Shared libraries</h5><p class="docText">Shared libraries were designed to address the problems with static libraries.</p><p class="docText">If
 a program is linked against a shared library, then, instead of copying 
object modules from the library into the executable, the linker just 
writes a record into the executable to indicate that at run time the 
executable needs to use that shared library. When the executable is 
loaded into memory at run time, a program called the <span class="docEmphasis">dynamic linker</span>
 ensures that the shared libraries required by the executable are found 
and loaded into memory, and performs run-time linking to resolve the 
function calls in the executable to the corresponding definitions in the
 shared libraries. At run time, only a single copy of the code of the 
shared library needs to be resident in memory; all running programs can 
use that copy.</p><p class="docText">The
 fact that a shared library contains the sole compiled version of a 
function saves disk space. It also greatly eases the job of ensuring 
that programs employ the newest version of a function. Simply rebuilding
 the shared library with the new function definition causes existing 
programs to automatically use the new definition when they are next 
executed.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
