<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>2.10. Interprocess Communication and Synchronization</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">2.10. Interprocess Communication and Synchronization</h3><p class="docText">A
 running Linux system consists of numerous processes, many of which 
operate independently of each other. Some processes, however, cooperate 
to achieve their intended purposes, and these processes need methods of 
communicating with one another and synchronizing their actions.</p><p class="docText">One
 way for processes to communicate is by reading and writing information 
in disk files. However, for many applications, this is too slow and 
inflexible. Therefore, Linux, like all modern UNIX implementations, 
provides a rich set of mechanisms for <span class="docEmphasis">interprocess communication</span> (IPC), including the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">signals</span>, which are used to indicate that an event has occurred;</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">pipes</span> (familiar to shell users as the <tt>|</tt> operator) and <span class="docEmphasis">FIFOs</span>, which can be used to transfer data between processes;</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">sockets</span>,
 which can be used to transfer data from one process to another, either 
on the same host computer or on different hosts connected by a network;</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">file locking</span>,
 which allows a process to lock regions of a file in order to prevent 
other processes from reading or updating the file contents;</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">message queues</span>, which are used to exchange messages (packets of data) between processes;</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">semaphores</span>, which are used to synchronize the actions of processes; and</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">shared memory</span>,
 which allows two or more processes to share a piece of memory. When one
 process changes the contents of the shared memory, all of the other 
processes can immediately see the changes.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The
 wide variety of IPC mechanisms on UNIX systems, with sometimes 
overlapping functionality, is in part due to their evolution under 
different variants of the UNIX system and the requirements of various 
standards. For example, FIFOs and UNIX domain sockets essentially 
perform the same function of allowing unrelated processes on the same 
system to exchange data. Both exist in modern UNIX systems because FIFOs
 came from System V, while sockets came from BSD.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
