<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>2.11. Signals</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">2.11. Signals</h3><p class="docText">Although
 we listed them as a method of IPC in the previous section, signals are 
more usually employed in a wide range of other contexts, and so deserve a
 longer discussion.</p><p class="docText">Signals
 are often described as “software interrupts.” The arrival of a signal 
informs a process that some event or exceptional condition has occurred.
 There are various types of signals, each of which identifies a 
different event or condition. Each signal type is identified by a 
different integer, defined with symbolic names of the form <tt>SIGxxxx</tt>.</p><p class="docText">Signals
 are sent to a process by the kernel, by another process (with suitable 
permissions), or by the process itself. For example, the kernel may send
 a signal to a process when one of the following occurs:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">the user typed the <span class="docEmphasis">interrupt</span> character (usually <span class="docEmphasis">Control-C</span>) on the keyboard;</p></li><li><p class="docList">one of the process’s children has terminated;</p></li><li><p class="docList">a timer (alarm clock) set by the process has expired; or</p></li><li><p class="docList">the process attempted to access an invalid memory address.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Within the shell, the <span class="docEmphasis">kill</span> command can be used to send a signal to a process. The <span class="docEmphasis">kill()</span> system call provides the same facility within programs.</p><p class="docText">When a process receives a signal, it takes one of the following actions, depending on the signal:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">it ignores the signal;</p></li><li><p class="docList">it is killed by the signal; or</p></li><li><p class="docList">it is suspended until later being resumed by receipt of a special-purpose signal.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">For
 most signal types, instead of accepting the default signal action, a 
program can choose to ignore the signal (useful if the default action 
for the signal is something other than being ignored), or to establish a
 <span class="docEmphasis">signal handler</span>.
 A signal handler is a programmer-defined function that is automatically
 invoked when the signal is delivered to the process. This function 
performs some action appropriate to the condition that generated the 
signal.</p><p class="docText">In the interval between the time it is generated and the time it is delivered, a signal is said to be <span class="docEmphasis">pending</span>
 for a process. Normally, a pending signal is delivered as soon as the 
receiving process is next scheduled to run, or immediately if the 
process is already running. However, it is also possible to <span class="docEmphasis">block</span> a signal by adding it to the process’s <span class="docEmphasis">signal mask</span>.
 If a signal is generated while it is blocked, it remains pending until 
it is later unblocked (i.e., removed from the signal mask).</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
