<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>2.12. Threads</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">2.12. Threads</h3><p class="docText">In modern UNIX implementations, each process can have multiple <span class="docEmphasis">threads</span>
 of execution. One way of envisaging threads is as a set of processes 
that share the same virtual memory, as well as a range of other 
attributes. Each thread is executing the same program code and shares 
the same data area and heap. However, each thread has it own stack 
containing local variables and function call linkage information.</p><p class="docText">Threads can communicate with each other via the global variables that they share. The threading API provides <span class="docEmphasis">condition variables</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">mutexes</span>,
 which are primitives that enable the threads of a process to 
communicate and synchronize their actions, in particular, their use of 
shared variables. Threads can also communicate with one another using 
the IPC and synchronization mechanisms described in Section 2.10.</p><p class="docText">The
 primary advantages of using threads are that they make it easy to share
 data (via global variables) between cooperating threads and that some 
algorithms transpose more naturally to a multithreaded implementation 
than to a multiprocess implementation. Furthermore, a multithreaded 
application can transparently take advantage of the possibilities for 
parallel processing on multiprocessor hardware.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
