<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>2.14. Sessions, Controlling Terminals, and Controlling Processes</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">2.14. Sessions, Controlling Terminals, and Controlling Processes</h3><p class="docText">A <span class="docEmphasis">session</span> is a collection of process groups (jobs). All of the processes in a session have the same <span class="docEmphasis">session identifier</span>. A <span class="docEmphasis">session leader</span> is the process that created the session, and its process ID becomes the session ID.</p><p class="docText">Sessions
 are used mainly by job-control shells. All of the process groups 
created by a job-control shell belong to the same session as the shell, 
which is the session leader.</p><p class="docText">Sessions usually have an associated <span class="docEmphasis">controlling terminal</span>.
 The controlling terminal is established when the session leader process
 first opens a terminal device. For a session created by an interactive 
shell, this is the terminal at which the user logged in. A terminal may 
be the controlling terminal of at most one session.</p><p class="docText">As a consequence of opening the controlling terminal, the session leader becomes the <span class="docEmphasis">controlling process</span> for the terminal. The controlling process receives a <tt>SIGHUP</tt> signal if a terminal disconnect occurs (e.g., if the terminal window is closed).</p><p class="docText">At any point in time, one process group in a session is the <span class="docEmphasis">foreground process group</span> (<span class="docEmphasis">foreground job</span>), which may read input from the terminal and send output to it. If the user types the <span class="docEmphasis">interrupt</span> character (usually <span class="docEmphasis">Control-C</span>) or the <span class="docEmphasis">suspend</span> character (usually <span class="docEmphasis">Control-Z</span>)
 on the controlling terminal, then the terminal driver sends a signal 
that kills or suspends (i.e., stops) the foreground process group. A 
session can have any number of <span class="docEmphasis">background process groups</span> (<span class="docEmphasis">background jobs</span>), which are created by terminating a command with the ampersand (<tt>&amp;</tt>) character.</p><p class="docText">Job-control
 shells provide commands for listing all jobs, sending signals to jobs, 
and moving jobs between the foreground and background.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
