<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>2.17. Client-Server Architecture</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">2.17. Client-Server Architecture</h3><p class="docText">At various points in this book, we discuss the design and implementation of client-server applications.</p><p class="docText">A <span class="docEmphasis">client-server application</span> is one that is broken into two component processes:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">a <span class="docEmphasis">client</span>, which asks the server to carry out some <span class="docEmphasis">service</span> by sending it a request message; and</p></li><li><p class="docList">a <span class="docEmphasis">server</span>, which examines the client’s request, performs appropriate actions, and then sends a response message back to the client.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Sometimes, the client and server may engage in an extended dialogue of requests and responses.</p><p class="docText">Typically,
 the client application interacts with a user, while the server 
application provides access to some shared resource. Commonly, there are
 multiple instances of client processes communicating with one or a few 
instances of the server process.</p><p class="docText">The
 client and server may reside on the same host computer or on separate 
hosts connected via a network. To communicate with one another, the 
client and server use the IPC mechanisms discussed in Section 2.10.</p><p class="docText">Servers may implement a variety of services, such as:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">providing access to a database or other shared information resource;</p></li><li><p class="docList">providing access to a remote file across a network;</p></li><li><p class="docList">encapsulating some business logic;</p></li><li><p class="docList">providing access to a shared hardware resource (e.g., a printer); or</p></li><li><p class="docList">serving web pages.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Encapsulating a service within a single server is useful for a number of reasons, such as the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Efficiency</span>:
 It may be cheaper to provide one instance of a resource (e.g., a 
printer) that is managed by a server than to provide the same resource 
locally on every computer.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Control, coordination, and security</span>:
 By holding a resource (especially an information resource) at a single 
location, the server can coordinate access to the resource (e.g., so 
that two clients don’t simultaneously update the same piece of 
information) or secure it so that it is made available to only selected 
clients.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">Operation in a heterogeneous environment</span>: In a network, the various clients, and the server, can be running on different hardware and operating system platforms.</p></li></ul>
</div>
</body>
</html>
