<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>2.18. Realtime</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">2.18. Realtime</h3><p class="docText"><span class="docEmphasis">Realtime applications</span>
 are those that need to respond in a timely fashion to input. 
Frequently, such input comes from an external sensor or a specialized 
input device, and output takes the form of controlling some external 
hardware. Examples of applications with realtime response requirements 
include automated assembly lines, bank ATMs, and aircraft navigation 
systems.</p><p class="docText">Although
 many realtime applications require rapid responses to input, the 
defining factor is that the response is guaranteed to be delivered 
within a certain deadline time after the triggering event.</p><p class="docText">The
 provision of realtime responsiveness, especially where short response 
times are demanded, requires support from the underlying operating 
system. Most operating systems don’t natively provide such support 
because the requirements of realtime responsiveness can conflict with 
the requirements of multiuser time-sharing operating systems. 
Traditional UNIX implementations are not realtime operating systems, 
although realtime variants have been devised. Realtime variants of Linux
 have also been created, and recent Linux kernels are moving toward full
 native support for realtime applications.</p><p class="docText">POSIX.1b
 defined a number of extensions to POSIX.1 for the support of realtime 
applications. These include asynchronous I/O, shared memory, 
memory-mapped files, memory locking, realtime clocks and timers, 
alternative scheduling policies, realtime signals, message queues, and 
semaphores. Even though they don’t strictly qualify as realtime, most 
UNIX implementations now support some or all of these extensions. 
(During the course of this book, we describe those features of POSIX.1b 
that are supported by Linux.)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">In this book, we use the term <span class="docEmphasis">real time</span> to refer to the concept of calendar or elapsed time, and the term <span class="docEmphasis">realtime</span> to denote an operating system or application providing the type of responsiveness described in this section.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
