<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>2.19. The /proc File System</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">2.19. The <tt>/proc</tt> File System</h3><p class="docText">Like several other UNIX implementations, Linux provides a <tt>/proc</tt> file system, which consists of a set of directories and files mounted under the <tt>/proc</tt> directory.</p><p class="docText">The <tt>/proc</tt>
 file system is a virtual file system that provides an interface to 
kernel data structures in a form that looks like files and directories 
on a file system. This provides an easy mechanism for viewing and 
changing various system attributes. In addition, a set of directories 
with names of the form <tt>/proc/</tt><span class="docEmphasis">PID</span>, where <span class="docEmphasis">PID</span> is a process ID, allows us to view information about each process running on the system.</p><p class="docText">The contents of <tt>/proc</tt>
 files are generally in human-readable text form and can be parsed by 
shell scripts. A program can simply open and read from, or write to, the
 desired file. In most cases, a process must be privileged to modify the
 contents of files in the <tt>/proc</tt> directory.</p><p class="docText">As we describe various parts of the Linux programming interface, we’ll also describe the relevant <tt>/proc</tt> files. Section 12.1 provides further general information on this file system. The <tt>/proc</tt> file system is not specified by any standards, and the details that we describe are Linux-specific.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
