<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>3.2. Library Functions</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">3.2. Library Functions</h3><p class="docText">A <span class="docEmphasis">library function</span>
 is simply one of the multitude of functions that constitutes the 
standard C library. (For brevity, when talking about a specific function
 in the rest of the book we’ll often just write <span class="docEmphasis">function</span> rather than <span class="docEmphasis">library function</span>.)
 The purposes of these functions are very diverse, including such tasks 
as opening a file, converting a time to a human-readable format, and 
comparing two character strings.</p><p class="docText">Many
 library functions don’t make any use of system calls (e.g., the 
string-manipulation functions). On the other hand, some library 
functions are layered on top of system calls. For example, the <span class="docEmphasis">fopen()</span> library function uses the <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span>
 system call to actually open a file. Often, library functions are 
designed to provide a more caller-friendly interface than the underlying
 system call. For example, the <span class="docEmphasis">printf()</span> function provides output formatting and data buffering, whereas the <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span> system call just outputs a block of bytes. Similarly, the <span class="docEmphasis">malloc()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">free()</span> functions perform various bookkeeping tasks that make them a much easier way to allocate and free memory than the underlying <span class="docEmphasis">brk()</span> system call.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
