<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>3.3. The Standard C Library; The GNU C Library (glibc)</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">3.3. The Standard C Library; The GNU C Library (<span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span>)</h3><p class="docText">There
 are different implementations of the standard C library on the various 
UNIX implementations. The most commonly used implementation on Linux is 
the GNU C library (<span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span>, http://www.gnu.org/software/libc/).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The
 principal developer and maintainer of the GNU C library was initially 
Roland McGrath. Nowadays, this task is carried out by Ulrich Drepper.</p><p class="docText">Various
 other C libraries are available for Linux, including libraries with 
smaller memory requirements for use in embedded device applications. 
Examples include <span class="docEmphasis">uClibc</span> (http://www.uclibc.org/) and <span class="docEmphasis">diet libc</span> (http://www.fefe.de/dietlibc/). In this book, we confine the discussion to <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span>, since that is the C library used by most applications developed on Linux.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E5EAG">3.3.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ECFAG">3.3.1.1. Determining the version of <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> on the system</h5><p class="docText">Sometimes, we need to determine the version of <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> on a system. From the shell, we can do this by running the <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span>
 shared library file as though it were an executable program. When we 
run the library as an executable, it displays various text, including 
its version number:</p><pre><b>$ /lib/libc.so.6</b>
GNU C Library stable release version 2.10.1, by Roland McGrath et al.
Copyright (C) 2009 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
This is free software; see the source for copying conditions.
There is NO warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
Compiled by GNU CC version 4.4.0 20090506 (Red Hat 4.4.0-4).
Compiled on a Linux &gt;&gt;2.6.18-128.4.1.el5&lt;&lt; system on 2009-08-19.
Available extensions:
        The C stubs add-on version 2.1.2.
        crypt add-on version 2.1 by Michael Glad and others
        GNU Libidn by Simon Josefsson
        Native POSIX Threads Library by Ulrich Drepper et al
        BIND-8.2.3-T5B
        RT using linux kernel aio
For bug reporting instructions, please see:
&lt;http://www.gnu.org/software/libc/bugs.html&gt;.</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">In some Linux distributions, the GNU C library resides at a pathname other than <tt>/lib/libc.so.6</tt>. One way of determining the location of the library is to run the <span class="docEmphasis">ldd</span> (list dynamic dependencies) program against an executable linked dynamically against <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span>
 (most executables are linked in this manner). We can then inspect the 
resulting library dependency list to find the location of the <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> shared library:</p><pre>$ ldd myprog | grep libc
        libc.so.6 =&gt; /lib/tls/libc.so.6 (0x4004b000)</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">There are two means by which 
an application program can determine the version of the GNU C library 
present on the system: by testing constants or by calling a library 
function. From version 2.0 onward, <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> defines two constants, <tt>__GLIBC__</tt> and <tt>__GLIBC_MINOR__</tt>, that can be tested at compile time (in <tt>#ifdef</tt> statements). On a system with <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span>
 2.12 installed, these constants would have the values 2 and 12. 
However, these constants are of limited use in a program that is 
compiled on one system but run on another system with a different <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span>. To handle this possibility, a program can call the <span class="docEmphasis">gnu_get_libc_version()</span> function to determine the version of <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> available at run time.</p><pre>#include &lt;gnu/libc-version.h&gt;

const char *<b>gnu_get_libc_version</b>(void);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns pointer to null-terminated, statically allocated string containing GNU C library version number</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">gnu_get_libc_version()</span> function returns a pointer to a string, such as <span class="docEmphasis">2.12</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">We can also obtain version information by using the <span class="docEmphasis">confstr()</span> function to retrieve the value of the (<span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span>-specific) <tt>_CS_GNU_LIBC_VERSION</tt> configuration variable. This call returns a string such as <span class="docEmphasis">glibc 2.12</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
