<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>3.4. Handling Errors from System Calls and Library Functions</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">3.4. Handling Errors from System Calls and Library Functions</h3><p class="docText">Almost
 every system call and library function returns some type of status 
value indicating whether the call succeeded or failed. This status value
 should <span class="docEmphasis">always</span>
 be checked to see whether the call succeeded. If it did not, then 
appropriate action should be taken—at the very least, the program should
 display an error message warning that something unexpected occurred.</p><p class="docText">Although
 it is tempting to save typing time by excluding these checks 
(especially after seeing examples of UNIX and Linux programs where 
status values are not checked), it is a false economy. Many hours of 
debugging time can be wasted because a check was not made on the status 
return of a system call or library function that “couldn’t possibly 
fail.”</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">A few system calls never fail. For example, <span class="docEmphasis">getpid()</span> always successfully returns the ID of a process, and <span class="docEmphasis">_exit()</span> always terminates a process. It is not necessary to check the return values from such system calls.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EOFAG">3.4.1. </h4><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ESFAG">3.4.1.1. Handling system call errors</h5><p class="docText">The
 manual page for each system call documents the possible return values 
of the call, showing which value(s) indicate an error. Usually, an error
 is indicated by a return of -1. Thus, a system call can be checked with
 code such as the following:</p><pre>fd = open(pathname, flags, mode);       /* system call to open a file */
if (fd == -1) {
    /* Code to handle the error */
}
...
if (close(fd) == -1) {
    /* Code to handle the error */
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">When a system call fails, it sets the global integer variable <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> to a positive value that identifies the specific error. Including the <tt>&lt;errno.h&gt;</tt> header file provides a declaration of <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span>, as well as a set of constants for the various error numbers. All of these symbolic names commence with <tt>E</tt>. The section headed <tt>ERRORS</tt> in each manual page provides a list of possible <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> values that can be returned by each system call. Here is a simple example of the use of <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> to diagnose a system call error:</p><pre>cnt = read(fd, buf, numbytes);
if (cnt == -1) {
    if (errno == EINTR)
        fprintf(stderr, "read was interrupted by a signal\n");
    else {
        /* Some other error occurred */
    }
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Successful system calls and library functions never reset <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span>
 to 0, so this variable may have a nonzero value as a consequence of an 
error from a previous call. Furthermore, SUSv3 permits a successful 
function call to set <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span>
 to a nonzero value (although few functions do this). Therefore, when 
checking for an error, we should always first check if the function 
return value indicates an error, and only then examine <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> to determine the cause of the error.</p><p class="docText">A few system calls (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">getpriority()</span>) can legitimately return -1 on success. To determine whether an error occurs in such calls, we set <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> to 0 before the call, and then check it afterward. If the call returns -1 and <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> is nonzero, an error occurred. (A similar statement also applies to a few library functions.)</p><p class="docText">A common course of action after a failed system call is to print an error message based on the <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> value. The <span class="docEmphasis">perror()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">strerror()</span> library functions are provided for this purpose.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">perror()</span> function prints the string pointed to by its <span class="docEmphasis">msg</span> argument, followed by a message corresponding to the current value of <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span>.</p><pre>#include &lt;stdio.h&gt;

void <b>perror</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">msg</span>);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">A simple way of handling errors from system calls would be as follows:</p><pre>fd = open(pathname, flags, mode);
if (fd == -1) {
    perror("open");
    exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
}</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">strerror()</span> function returns the error string corresponding to the error number given in its <span class="docEmphasis">errnum</span> argument.</p><pre>#include &lt;string.h&gt;

char *<b>strerror</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">errnum</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Returns pointer to error string corresponding to <span class="docEmphasis">errnum</span></p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The string returned by <span class="docEmphasis">strerror()</span> may be statically allocated, which means that it could be overwritten by subsequent calls to <span class="docEmphasis">strerror()</span>.</p><p class="docText">If <span class="docEmphasis">errnum</span> specifies an unrecognized error number, <span class="docEmphasis">strerror()</span> returns a string of the form <span class="docEmphasis">Unknown error nnn</span>. On some other implementations, <span class="docEmphasis">strerror()</span> instead returns <tt>NULL</tt> in this case.</p><p class="docText">Because <span class="docEmphasis">perror()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">strerror()</span> functions are locale-sensitive (Section 10.4), error descriptions are displayed in the local language.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0ETKAG">3.4.1.2. Handling errors from library functions</h5><p class="docText">The
 various library functions return different data types and different 
values to indicate failure. (Check the manual page for each function.) 
For our purposes, library functions can be divided into the following 
categories:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">Some library functions return error information in exactly the same way as system calls: a -1 return value, with <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> indicating the specific error. An example of such a function is <span class="docEmphasis">remove()</span>, which removes a file (using the <span class="docEmphasis">unlink()</span> system call) or a directory (using the <span class="docEmphasis">rmdir()</span> system call). Errors from these functions can be diagnosed in the same way as errors from system calls.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Some library functions return a value other than -1 on error, but nevertheless set <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> to indicate the specific error condition. For example, <span class="docEmphasis">fopen()</span> returns a <tt>NULL</tt> pointer on error, and the setting of <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> depends on which underlying system call failed. The <span class="docEmphasis">perror()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">strerror()</span> functions can be used to diagnose these errors.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Other library functions don’t use <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span>
 at all. The method for determining the existence and cause of errors 
depends on the particular function and is documented in the function’s 
manual page. For these functions, it is a mistake to use <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">perror()</span>, or <span class="docEmphasis">strerror()</span> to diagnose errors.</p></li></ul>
</div>
</body>
</html>
