<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>3.5. Notes on the Example Programs in This Book</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">3.5. Notes on the Example Programs in This Book</h3><p class="docText">In this section, we describe various conventions and features commonly employed by the example programs presented in this book.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EAFAG">3.5.1. Command-Line Options and Arguments</h4><p class="docText">Many of the example programs in this book rely on command-line options and arguments to determine their behavior.</p><p class="docText">Traditional
 UNIX command-line options consist of an initial hyphen, a letter that 
identifies the option, and an optional argument. (GNU utilities provide 
an extended option syntax consisting of two initial hyphens, followed by
 a string identifying the option and an optional argument.) To parse 
these options, we use the standard <span class="docEmphasis">getopt()</span> library function (described in Appendix B).</p><p class="docText">Each
 of our example programs that has a nontrivial command-line syntax 
provides a simple help facility for the user: if invoked with the —<span class="docEmphasis">help</span> option, the program displays a usage message that indicates the syntax for command-line options and arguments.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0ESFAG">3.5.2. Common Functions and Header Files</h4><p class="docText">Most
 of the example programs include a header file containing commonly 
required definitions, and they also use a set of common functions. We 
discuss the header file and functions in this section.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E3GAG">3.5.2.1. Common header file</h5><p class="docText">Example 3-1
 is the header file used by nearly every program in this book. This 
header file includes various other header files used by many of the 
example programs, defines a <span class="docEmphasis">Boolean</span>
 data type, and defines macros for calculating the minimum and maximum 
of two numeric values. Using this header file allows us to make the 
example programs a bit shorter.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0ENHAG">Example 3-1. Header file used by most example programs</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre><b>lib/tlpi_hdr.h</b>
#ifndef TLPI_HDR_H
#define TLPI_HDR_H      /* Prevent accidental double inclusion */

#include &lt;sys/types.h&gt;  /* Type definitions used by many programs */
#include &lt;stdio.h&gt;      /* Standard I/O functions */
#include &lt;stdlib.h&gt;     /* Prototypes of commonly used library functions,
                           plus EXIT_SUCCESS and EXIT_FAILURE constants */
#include &lt;unistd.h&gt;     /* Prototypes for many system calls */
#include &lt;errno.h&gt;      /* Declares errno and defines error constants */
#include &lt;string.h&gt;     /* Commonly used string-handling functions */

#include "get_num.h"    /* Declares our functions for handling numeric
                           arguments (getInt(), getLong()) */

#include "error_functions.h"  /* Declares our error-handling functions */

typedef enum { FALSE, TRUE } Boolean;

#define min(m,n) ((m) &lt; (n) ? (m) : (n))
#define max(m,n) ((m) &gt; (n) ? (m) : (n))

#endif
      <b>lib/tlpi_hdr.h</b></pre><br/>
</div><p></p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EYHAG">3.5.2.2. Error-diagnostic functions</h5><p class="docText">To simplify error handling in our example programs, we use the error-diagnostic functions whose declarations are shown in Example 3-2.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EVMAG">Example 3-2. Declarations for common error-handling functions</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre><b>lib/error_functions.h</b>
#ifndef ERROR_FUNCTIONS_H
#define ERROR_FUNCTIONS_H

void errMsg(const char *format, ...);

#ifdef __GNUC__

/* This macro stops 'gcc -Wall' complaining that "control reaches
       end of non-void function" if we use the following functions to
       terminate main() or some other non-void function. */

#define NORETURN __attribute__ ((__noreturn__))
#else
#define NORETURN
#endif

void errExit(const char *format, ...) NORETURN ;

void err_exit(const char *format, ...) NORETURN ;

void errExitEN(int errnum, const char *format, ...) NORETURN ;

void fatal(const char *format, ...) NORETURN ;

void usageErr(const char *format, ...) NORETURN ;

void cmdLineErr(const char *format, ...) NORETURN ;

#endif
      <b>lib/error_functions.h</b></pre><br/>
</div><p></p><p class="docText">To diagnose errors from system calls and library functions, we use <span class="docEmphasis">errMsg()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">errExit()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">err_exit()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">errExitEN()</span>.</p><pre>#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

void <b>errMsg</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">format</span>, ...);
void <b>errExit</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">format</span>, ...);
void <b>err_exit</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">format</span>, ...);
void <b>errExitEN</b>(int <span class="docEmphasis">errnum</span>, const char *<span class="docEmphasis">format</span>, ...);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">errMsg()</span> function prints a message on standard error. Its argument list is the same as for <span class="docEmphasis">printf()</span>, except that a terminating newline character is automatically appended to the output string. The <span class="docEmphasis">errMsg()</span> function prints the error text corresponding to the current value of <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span>—this consists of the error name, such as <tt>EPERM</tt>, plus the error description as returned by <span class="docEmphasis">strerror()</span>—followed by the formatted output specified in the argument list.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">errExit()</span> function operates like <span class="docEmphasis">errMsg()</span>, but also terminates the program, either by calling <span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span> or, if the environment variable <tt>EF_DUMPCORE</tt> is defined with a nonempty string value, by calling <span class="docEmphasis">abort()</span> to produce a core dump file for use with the debugger. (We explain core dump files in Section 22.1.)</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">err_exit()</span> function is similar to <span class="docEmphasis">errExit()</span>, but differs in two respects:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">It doesn’t flush standard output before printing the error message.</p></li><li><p class="docList">It terminates the process by calling _<span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span> instead of <span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span>. This causes the process to terminate without flushing <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> buffers or invoking exit handlers.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">The details of these differences in the operation of <span class="docEmphasis">err_exit()</span> will become clearer in Chapter 25, where we describe the differences between _<span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span>, and consider the treatment of <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> buffers and exit handlers in a child created by <span class="docEmphasis">fork()</span>. For now, we simply note that <span class="docEmphasis">err_exit()</span>
 is especially useful if we write a library function that creates a 
child process that needs to terminate because of an error. This 
termination should occur without flushing the child’s copy of the 
parent’s (i.e., the calling process’s) <span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> buffers and without invoking exit handlers established by the parent.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">errExitEN()</span> function is the same as <span class="docEmphasis">errExit()</span>, except that instead of printing the error text corresponding to the current value of <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span>, it prints the text corresponding to the error number (thus, the <span class="docEmphasis">EN</span> suffix) given in the argument <span class="docEmphasis">errnum</span>.</p><p class="docText">Mainly, we use <span class="docEmphasis">errExitEN()</span>
 in programs that employ the POSIX threads API. Unlike traditional UNIX 
system calls, which return -1 on error, the POSIX threads functions 
diagnose an error by returning an error number (i.e., a positive number 
of the type normally placed in <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span>) as their function result. (The POSIX threads functions return 0 on success.)</p><p class="docText">We could diagnose errors from the POSIX threads functions using code such as the following:</p><pre>errno = pthread_create(&amp;thread, NULL, func, &amp;arg);
if (errno != 0)
    errExit("pthread_create");</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">However, this approach is inefficient because <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span>
 is defined in threaded programs as a macro that expands into a function
 call that returns a modifiable lvalue. Thus, each use of <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> results in a function call. The <span class="docEmphasis">errExitEN()</span> function allows us to write a more efficient equivalent of the above code:</p><pre>int s;

s = pthread_create(&amp;thread, NULL, func, &amp;arg);
if (s != 0)
    errExitEN(s, "pthread_create");</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">In C terminology, an <span class="docEmphasis">lvalue</span>
 is an expression referring to a region of storage. The most common 
example of an lvalue is an identifier for a variable. Some operators 
also yield lvalues. For example, if <span class="docEmphasis">p</span> is a pointer to a storage area, then *<span class="docEmphasis">p</span> is an lvalue. Under the POSIX threads API, <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> is redefined to be a function that returns a pointer to a thread-specific storage area (see Section 31.3).</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">To diagnose other types of errors, we use <span class="docEmphasis">fatal()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">usageErr()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">cmdLineErr()</span>.</p><pre>#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

void <b>fatal</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">format</span>, ...);
void <b>usageErr</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">format</span>, ...);
void <b>cmdLineErr</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">format</span>, ...);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">fatal()</span> function is used to diagnose general errors, including errors from library functions that don’t set <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span>. Its argument list is the same as for <span class="docEmphasis">printf()</span>,
 except that a terminating newline character is automatically appended 
to the output string. It prints the formatted output on standard error 
and then terminates the program as with <span class="docEmphasis">errExit()</span>.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">usageErr()</span> function is used to diagnose errors in command-line argument usage. It takes an argument list in the style of <span class="docEmphasis">printf()</span> and prints the string <span class="docEmphasis">Usage</span>: followed by the formatted output on standard error, and then terminates the program by calling <span class="docEmphasis">exit()</span>. (Some of the example programs in this book provide their own extended version of the <span class="docEmphasis">usageErr()</span> function, under the name <span class="docEmphasis">usageError()</span>.)</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">cmdLineErr()</span> function is similar to <span class="docEmphasis">usageErr()</span>, but is intended for diagnosing errors in the command-line arguments specified to a program.</p><p class="docText">The implementations of our error-diagnostic functions are shown in Example 3-3.</p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EFVAG">Example 3-3. Error-handling functions used by all programs</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>lib/error_functions.c</b>
#include &lt;stdarg.h&gt;
#include "error_functions.h"
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"
#include "ename.c.inc"          /* Defines ename and MAX_ENAME */

#ifdef __GNUC__
__attribute__ ((__noreturn__))
#endif
static void
terminate(Boolean useExit3)
{
    char *s;

    /* Dump core if EF_DUMPCORE environment variable is defined and
       is a nonempty string; otherwise call exit(3) or _exit(2),
       depending on the value of 'useExit3'. */

    s = getenv("EF_DUMPCORE");

    if (s != NULL &amp;&amp; *s != '\0')
        abort();
    else if (useExit3)
        exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
    else
        _exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
}

static void
outputError(Boolean useErr, int err, Boolean flushStdout,
        const char *format, va_list ap)
{
#define BUF_SIZE 500
    char buf[BUF_SIZE], userMsg[BUF_SIZE], errText[BUF_SIZE];

    vsnprintf(userMsg, BUF_SIZE, format, ap);

    if (useErr)
        snprintf(errText, BUF_SIZE, " [%s %s]",
                (err &gt; 0 &amp;&amp; err &lt;= MAX_ENAME) ?
                ename[err] : "?UNKNOWN?", strerror(err));
    else
        snprintf(errText, BUF_SIZE, ":");

    snprintf(buf, BUF_SIZE, "ERROR%s %s\n", errText, userMsg);

    if (flushStdout)
        fflush(stdout);       /* Flush any pending stdout */
    fputs(buf, stderr);
    fflush(stderr);           /* In case stderr is not line-buffered */
}

void
errMsg(const char *format, ...)
{
    va_list argList;
    int savedErrno;

    savedErrno = errno;       /* In case we change it here */

    va_start(argList, format);
    outputError(TRUE, errno, TRUE, format, argList);
    va_end(argList);

    errno = savedErrno;
}

void
errExit(const char *format, ...)
{
    va_list argList;

    va_start(argList, format);
    outputError(TRUE, errno, TRUE, format, argList);
    va_end(argList);

    terminate(TRUE);
}

void
err_exit(const char *format, ...)
{
    va_list argList;

    va_start(argList, format);
    outputError(TRUE, errno, FALSE, format, argList);
    va_end(argList);

    terminate(FALSE);
}

void
errExitEN(int errnum, const char *format, ...)
{
    va_list argList;

    va_start(argList, format);
    outputError(TRUE, errnum, TRUE, format, argList);
    va_end(argList);

    terminate(TRUE);
}

void
fatal(const char *format, ...)
{
    va_list argList;

    va_start(argList, format);
    outputError(FALSE, 0, TRUE, format, argList);
    va_end(argList);

    terminate(TRUE);
}

void
usageErr(const char *format, ...)
{
    va_list argList;

    fflush(stdout);           /* Flush any pending stdout */

    fprintf(stderr, "Usage: ");
    va_start(argList, format);
    vfprintf(stderr, format, argList);
    va_end(argList);

    fflush(stderr);           /* In case stderr is not line-buffered */
    exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
}

void
cmdLineErr(const char *format, ...)
{
    va_list argList;

    fflush(stdout);           /* Flush any pending stdout */

    fprintf(stderr, "Command-line usage error: ");
    va_start(argList, format);
    vfprintf(stderr, format, argList);
    va_end(argList);

    fflush(stderr);           /* In case stderr is not line-buffered */
    exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
}
     <b>lib/error_functions.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><p class="docText">The file <tt>enames.c.inc</tt> included by Example 3-3 is shown in Example 3-4. This file defines an array of strings, <span class="docEmphasis">ename</span>, that are the symbolic names corresponding to each of the possible <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span>
 values. Our error-handling functions use this array to print out the 
symbolic name corresponding to a particular error number. This is a 
workaround to deal with the facts that, on the one hand, the string 
returned by <span class="docEmphasis">strerror()</span>
 doesn’t identify the symbolic constant corresponding to its error 
message, while, on the other hand, the manual pages describe errors 
using their symbolic names. Printing out the symbolic name gives us an 
easy way of looking up the cause of an error in the manual pages.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The content of the <tt>ename.c.inc</tt> file is architecture-specific, because <span class="docEmphasis">errno</span> values vary somewhat from one Linux hardware architecture to another. The version shown in Example 3-4 is for a Linux 2.6/x86-32 system. This file was built using a script (<tt>lib/Build_ename.sh</tt>) included in the source code distribution for this book. This script can be used to build a version of <tt>ename.c.inc</tt> that should be suitable for a specific hardware platform and kernel version.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">Note that some of the strings in the <span class="docEmphasis">ename</span> array are empty. These correspond to unused error values. Furthermore, some of the strings in <span class="docEmphasis">ename</span>
 consist of two error names separated by a slash. These strings 
correspond to cases where two symbolic error names have the same numeric
 value.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">From the <tt>ename.c.inc</tt> file, we can see that the <tt>EAGAIN</tt> and <tt>EWOULDBLOCK</tt>
 errors have the same value. (SUSv3 explicitly permits this, and the 
values of these constants are the same on most, but not all, other UNIX 
systems.) These errors are returned by a system call in circumstances in
 which it would normally block (i.e., be forced to wait before 
completing), but the caller requested that the system call return an 
error instead of blocking. <tt>EAGAIN</tt> 
originated on System V, and it was the error returned for system calls 
performing I/O, semaphore operations, message queue operations, and file
 locking (<span class="docEmphasis">fcntl()</span>). <tt>EWOULDBLOCK</tt> originated on BSD, and it was returned by file locking (<span class="docEmphasis">flock()</span>) and socket-related system calls.</p><p class="docText">Within SUSv3, <tt>EWOULDBLOCK</tt> is mentioned only in the specifications of various interfaces related to sockets. For these interfaces, SUSv3 permits either <tt>EAGAIN</tt> or <tt>EWOULDBLOCK</tt> to be returned by nonblocking calls. For all other nonblocking calls, only the error <tt>EAGAIN</tt> is specified in SUSv3.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EDYAG">Example 3-4. Linux error names (x86-32 version)</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>lib/ename.c.inc</b>
static char *ename[] = {
    /*   0 */ "",
    /*   1 */ "EPERM", "ENOENT", "ESRCH", "EINTR", "EIO", "ENXIO", "E2BIG",
    /*   8 */ "ENOEXEC", "EBADF", "ECHILD", "EAGAIN/EWOULDBLOCK", "ENOMEM",
    /*  13 */ "EACCES", "EFAULT", "ENOTBLK", "EBUSY", "EEXIST", "EXDEV",
    /*  19 */ "ENODEV", "ENOTDIR", "EISDIR", "EINVAL", "ENFILE", "EMFILE",
    /*  25 */ "ENOTTY", "ETXTBSY", "EFBIG", "ENOSPC", "ESPIPE", "EROFS",
    /*  31 */ "EMLINK", "EPIPE", "EDOM", "ERANGE", "EDEADLK/EDEADLOCK",
    /*  36 */ "ENAMETOOLONG", "ENOLCK", "ENOSYS", "ENOTEMPTY", "ELOOP", "",
    /*  42 */ "ENOMSG", "EIDRM", "ECHRNG", "EL2NSYNC", "EL3HLT", "EL3RST",
    /*  48 */ "ELNRNG", "EUNATCH", "ENOCSI", "EL2HLT", "EBADE", "EBADR",
    /*  54 */ "EXFULL", "ENOANO", "EBADRQC", "EBADSLT", "", "EBFONT", "ENOSTR",
    /*  61 */ "ENODATA", "ETIME", "ENOSR", "ENONET", "ENOPKG", "EREMOTE",
    /*  67 */ "ENOLINK", "EADV", "ESRMNT", "ECOMM", "EPROTO", "EMULTIHOP",
    /*  73 */ "EDOTDOT", "EBADMSG", "EOVERFLOW", "ENOTUNIQ", "EBADFD",
    /*  78 */ "EREMCHG", "ELIBACC", "ELIBBAD", "ELIBSCN", "ELIBMAX",
    /*  83 */ "ELIBEXEC", "EILSEQ", "ERESTART", "ESTRPIPE", "EUSERS",
    /*  88 */ "ENOTSOCK", "EDESTADDRREQ", "EMSGSIZE", "EPROTOTYPE",
    /*  92 */ "ENOPROTOOPT", "EPROTONOSUPPORT", "ESOCKTNOSUPPORT",
    /*  95 */ "EOPNOTSUPP/ENOTSUP", "EPFNOSUPPORT", "EAFNOSUPPORT",
    /*  98 */ "EADDRINUSE", "EADDRNOTAVAIL", "ENETDOWN", "ENETUNREACH",
    /* 102 */ "ENETRESET", "ECONNABORTED", "ECONNRESET", "ENOBUFS", "EISCONN",
    /* 107 */ "ENOTCONN", "ESHUTDOWN", "ETOOMANYREFS", "ETIMEDOUT",
    /* 111 */ "ECONNREFUSED", "EHOSTDOWN", "EHOSTUNREACH", "EALREADY",
    /* 115 */ "EINPROGRESS", "ESTALE", "EUCLEAN", "ENOTNAM", "ENAVAIL",
    /* 120 */ "EISNAM", "EREMOTEIO", "EDQUOT", "ENOMEDIUM", "EMEDIUMTYPE",
    /* 125 */ "ECANCELED", "ENOKEY", "EKEYEXPIRED", "EKEYREVOKED",
    /* 129 */ "EKEYREJECTED", "EOWNERDEAD", "ENOTRECOVERABLE", "ERFKILL"
};

#define MAX_ENAME 132
     <b>lib/ename.c.inc</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EOYAG">3.5.2.3. Functions for parsing numeric command-line arguments</h5><p class="docText">The header file in Example 3-5 provides the declaration of two functions that we frequently use for parsing integer command-line arguments: <span class="docEmphasis">getInt()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getLong()</span>. The primary advantage of using these functions instead of <span class="docEmphasis">atoi()</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">atol()</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">strtol()</span> is that they provide some basic validity checking of numeric arguments.</p><pre>#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

int <b>getInt</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">arg</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span>, const char *<span class="docEmphasis">name</span>);
long <b>getLong</b>(const char *<span class="docEmphasis">arg</span>, int <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span>, const char *<span class="docEmphasis">name</span>);</pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Both return <span class="docEmphasis">arg</span> converted to numeric form</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">getInt()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getLong()</span> functions convert the string pointed to by <span class="docEmphasis">arg</span> to an <span class="docEmphasis">int</span> or a <span class="docEmphasis">long</span>, respectively. If <span class="docEmphasis">arg</span> doesn’t contain a valid integer string (i.e., only digits and the characters <tt>+</tt> and <tt>-</tt>), then these functions print an error message and terminate the program.</p><p class="docText">If the <span class="docEmphasis">name</span> argument is non-<tt>NULL</tt>, it should contain a string identifying the argument in <span class="docEmphasis">arg</span>. This string is included as part of any error message displayed by these functions.</p><p class="docText">The <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> argument provides some control over the operation of the <span class="docEmphasis">getInt()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getLong()</span> functions. By default, these functions expect strings containing signed decimal integers. By ORing (|) one or more of the <tt>GN_*</tt> constants defined in Example 3-5 into <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span>, we can select alternative bases for conversion and restrict the range of the number to being nonnegative or greater than 0.</p><p class="docText">The implementations of the <span class="docEmphasis">getInt()</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">getLong()</span> functions are provided in Example 3-6.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Although the <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span>
 argument allows us to enforce the range checks described in the main 
text, in some cases, we don’t request such checks in our example 
programs, even though it might seem logical to do so. For example, in Example 47-1, we don’t check the <span class="docEmphasis">init-value</span>
 argument. This means that the user could specify a negative number as 
the initial value for a semaphore, which would result in an error (<tt>ERANGE</tt>) in the subsequent <span class="docEmphasis">semctl()</span>
 system call, because a semaphore can’t have a negative value. Omitting 
range checks in such cases allows us to experiment not just with the 
correct use of system calls and library functions, but also to see what 
happens when invalid arguments are supplied. Real-world applications 
would usually impose stronger checks on their command-line arguments.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0E34AG">Example 3-5. Header file for <tt>get_num.c</tt></h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre><b>lib/get_num.h</b>
#ifndef GET_NUM_H
#define GET_NUM_H

#define GN_NONNEG       01      /* Value must be &gt;= 0 */
#define GN_GT_0         02      /* Value must be &gt; 0 */

                                /* By default, integers are decimal */
#define GN_ANY_BASE   0100      /* Can use any base - like strtol(3) */
#define GN_BASE_8     0200      /* Value is expressed in octal */
#define GN_BASE_16    0400      /* Value is expressed in hexadecimal */

long getLong(const char *arg, int flags, const char *name);

int getInt(const char *arg, int flags, const char *name);

#endif
      <b>lib/get_num.h</b></pre><br/>
</div><p></p><h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EK5AG">Example 3-6. Functions for parsing numeric command-line arguments</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>lib/get_num.c</b>
#include &lt;stdio.h&gt;
#include &lt;stdlib.h&gt;
#include &lt;string.h&gt;
#include &lt;limits.h&gt;
#include &lt;errno.h&gt;
#include "get_num.h"

static void
gnFail(const char *fname, const char *msg, const char *arg, const char *name)
{
    fprintf(stderr, "%s error", fname);
    if (name != NULL)
        fprintf(stderr, " (in %s)", name);
    fprintf(stderr, ": %s\n", msg);
    if (arg != NULL &amp;&amp; *arg != '\0')
        fprintf(stderr, "        offending text: %s\n", arg);

    exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
}

static long
getNum(const char *fname, const char *arg, int flags, const char *name)
{
    long res;
    char *endptr;
    int base;

    if (arg == NULL || *arg == '\0')
        gnFail(fname, "null or empty string", arg, name);

    base = (flags &amp; GN_ANY_BASE) ? 0 : (flags &amp; GN_BASE_8) ? 8 :
                        (flags &amp; GN_BASE_16) ? 16 : 10;

    errno = 0;
    res = strtol(arg, &amp;endptr, base);
    if (errno != 0)
        gnFail(fname, "strtol() failed", arg, name);

    if (*endptr != '\0')
        gnFail(fname, "nonnumeric characters", arg, name);

    if ((flags &amp; GN_NONNEG) &amp;&amp; res &lt; 0)
        gnFail(fname, "negative value not allowed", arg, name);

    if ((flags &amp; GN_GT_0) &amp;&amp; res &lt;= 0)
        gnFail(fname, "value must be &gt; 0", arg, name);

    return res;
}

long
getLong(const char *arg, int flags, const char *name)
{
    return getNum("getLong", arg, flags, name);
}

int
getInt(const char *arg, int flags, const char *name)
{
    long res;

    res = getNum("getInt", arg, flags, name);

    if (res &gt; INT_MAX || res &lt; INT_MIN)
        gnFail("getInt", "integer out of range", arg, name);

    return (int) res;
}
     <b>lib/get_num.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
