<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>3.6. Portability Issues</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">3.6. Portability Issues</h3><p class="docText">In
 this section, we consider the topic of writing portable system 
programs. We introduce feature test macros and the standard system data 
types defined by SUSv3, and then look at some other portability issues.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EJKAG">3.6.1. Feature Test Macros</h4><p class="docText">Various standards govern the behavior of the system call and library function APIs (see Section 1.3).
 Some of these standards are defined by standards bodies such The Open 
Group (Single UNIX Specification), while others are defined by the two 
historically important UNIX implementations: BSD and System V Release 4 
(and the associated System V Interface Definition).</p><p class="docText">Sometimes,
 when writing a portable application, we may want the various header 
files to expose only the definitions (constants, function prototypes, 
and so on) that follow a particular standard. To do this, we define one 
or more of the <span class="docEmphasis">feature test macros</span>
 listed below when compiling a program. One way that we can do this is 
by defining the macro in the program source code before including any 
header files:</p><pre>#define _BSD_SOURCE 1</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Alternatively, we can use the <span class="docEmphasis">-D</span> option to the C compiler:</p><pre><b>$ cc -D_BSD_SOURCE prog.c</b></pre><br/>
<hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The term <span class="docEmphasis">feature test macro</span>
 may seem confusing, but it makes sense if we look at things from the 
perspective of the implementation. The implementation decides which of 
the <span class="docEmphasis">features</span> available in each header it should make visible, by <span class="docEmphasis">testing</span> (with <tt>#if</tt>) which values the application has defined for these <span class="docEmphasis">macros</span>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The
 following feature test macros are specified by the relevant standards, 
and consequently their usage is portable to all systems that support 
these standards:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">_POSIX_SOURCE</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">If defined (with any value), expose definitions conforming to POSIX.1-1990 and ISO C (1990). This macro is superseded by <tt>_POSIX_C_SOURCE</tt>.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">_POSIX_C_SOURCE</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">If defined with the value 1, this has the same effect as <tt>_POSIX_SOURCE</tt>.
 If defined with a value greater than or equal to 199309, also expose 
definitions for POSIX.1b (realtime). If defined with a value greater 
than or equal to 199506, also expose definitions for POSIX.1c (threads).
 If defined with the value 200112, also expose definitions for the 
POSIX.1-2001 base specification (i.e., the XSI extension is excluded). 
(Prior to version 2.3.3, the <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> headers don’t interpret the value 200112 for <tt>_POSIX_C_SOURCE</tt>.)
 If defined with the value 200809, also expose definitions for the 
POSIX.1-2008 base specification. (Prior to version 2.10, the <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> headers don’t interpret the value 200809 for <tt>_POSIX_C_SOURCE</tt>.)</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">_XOPEN_SOURCE</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">If
 defined (with any value), expose POSIX.1, POSIX.2, and X/Open (XPG4) 
definitions. If defined with the value 500 or greater, also expose SUSv2
 (UNIX 98 and XPG5) extensions. Setting to 600 or greater additionally 
exposes SUSv3 XSI (UNIX 03) extensions and C99 extensions. (Prior to 
version 2.2, the <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> headers don’t interpret the value 600 for <tt>_XOPEN_SOURCE</tt>.) Setting to 700 or greater also exposes SUSv4 XSI extensions. (Prior to version 2.10, the <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> headers don’t interpret the value 700 for <tt>_XOPEN_SOURCE</tt>.) The values 500, 600, and 700 for <tt>_XOPEN_SOURCE</tt> were chosen because SUSv2, SUSv3, and SUSv4 are Issues 5, 6, and 7, respectively, of the X/Open specifications.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">The following feature test macros listed are <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span>-specific:</p><dl class="docList"><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">_BSD_SOURCE</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">If defined (with any value), expose BSD definitions. Defining this macro also defines <tt>_POSIX_C_SOURCE</tt>
 with the value 199506. Explicitly setting just this macro causes BSD 
definitions to be favored in a few cases where standards conflict.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">_SVID_SOURCE</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">If defined (with any value), expose System V Interface Definition (SVID) definitions.</p></dd><dt><br/><p><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docPubcolor"><span class="docMonofont">_GNU_SOURCE</span></span></span></p></dt><dd><p class="docList">If
 defined (with any value), expose all of the definitions provided by 
setting all of the preceding macros, as well as various GNU extensions.</p></dd></dl><p class="docText">When the GNU C compiler is invoked without special options, <tt>_POSIX_SOURCE</tt>, <tt>_POSIX_C_SOURCE=200809</tt> (200112 with <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> versions 2.5 to 2.9, or 199506 with <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> versions earlier than 2.4), <tt>_BSD_SOURCE</tt>, and <tt>_SVID_SOURCE</tt> are defined by default.</p><p class="docText">If individual macros are defined, or the compiler is invoked in one of its standard modes (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">cc -ansi</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">cc -std=c99</span>), then only the requested definitions are supplied. There is one exception: if <tt>_POSIX_C_SOURCE</tt> is not otherwise defined, and the compiler is not invoked in one of its standard modes, then <tt>_POSIX_C_SOURCE</tt> is defined with the value 200809 (200112 with <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> versions 2.4 to 2.9, or 199506 with <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span> versions earlier than 2.4).</p><p class="docText">Defining multiple macros is additive, so that we could, for example, use the following <span class="docEmphasis">cc</span> command to explicitly select the same macro settings as are provided by default:</p><pre class="preFixedWidth"><b>$ cc -D_POSIX_SOURCE -D_POSIX_C_SOURCE=199506 \</b>
                                           <b>-D_BSD_SOURCE -D_SVID_SOURCE prog.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The <tt>&lt;features.h&gt;</tt> header file and the <span class="docEmphasis">feature_test_macros(7)</span> manual page provide further information on precisely what values are assigned to each of the feature test macros.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EQQAG">3.6.1.1. <tt>_POSIX_C_SOURCE</tt>, <tt>_XOPEN_SOURCE</tt>, and POSIX.1/SUS</h5><p class="docText">Only the <tt>_POSIX_C_SOURCE</tt> and <tt>_XOPEN_SOURCE</tt>
 feature test macros are specified in POSIX.1-2001/SUSv3, which requires
 that these macros be defined with the values 200112 and 600, 
respectively, in conforming applications. Defining <tt>_POSIX_C_SOURCE</tt> as 200112 provides conformance to the POSIX.1-2001 base specification (i.e., <span class="docEmphasis">POSIX conformance</span>, excluding the XSI extension). Defining <tt>_XOPEN_SOURCE</tt> as 600 provides conformance to SUSv3 (i.e., <span class="docEmphasis">XSI conformance</span>,
 the base specification plus the XSI extension). Analogous statements 
apply for POSIX.1-2008/SUSv4, which require that the two macros be 
defined with the values 200809 and 700.</p><p class="docText">SUSv3 specifies that setting <tt>_XOPEN_SOURCE</tt> to 600 should supply all of the features that are enabled if <tt>_POSIX_C_SOURCE</tt> is set to 200112. Thus, an application needs to define only <tt>_XOPEN_SOURCE</tt> for SUSv3 (i.e., XSI) conformance. SUSv4 makes an analogous specification that setting <tt>_XOPEN_SOURCE</tt> to 700 should supply all of the features that are enabled if <tt>_POSIX_C_SOURCE</tt> is set to 200809.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EBSAG">3.6.1.2. Feature test macros in function prototypes and source code examples</h5><p class="docText">The
 manual pages describe which feature test macro(s) must be defined in 
order to make a particular constant definition or function declaration 
visible from a header file.</p><p class="docText">All
 of the source code examples in this book are written so that they will 
compile using either the default GNU C compiler options or the following
 options:</p><pre><b>$ cc -std=c99 -D_XOPEN_SOURCE=600</b></pre><br/>
<p class="docText">The prototype of each 
function shown in this book indicates any feature test macro(s) that 
must be defined in order to employ that function in a program compiled 
with either the default compiler options or the options in the <span class="docEmphasis">cc</span>
 command just shown. The manual pages provide more precise descriptions 
of the feature test macro(s) required to expose the declaration of each 
function.</p><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0E6SAG">3.6.2. System Data Types</h4><p class="docText">Various
 implementation data types are represented using standard C types, for 
example, process IDs, user IDs, and file offsets. Although it would be 
possible to use the C fundamental types such as <span class="docEmphasis">int</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">long</span> to declare variables storing such information, this reduces portability across UNIX systems, for the following reasons:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">The sizes of these fundamental types vary across UNIX implementations (e.g., a <span class="docEmphasis">long</span>
 may be 4 bytes on one system and 8 bytes on another), or sometimes even
 in different compilation environments on the same implementation. 
Furthermore, different implementations may use different types to 
represent the same information. For example, a process ID might be an <span class="docEmphasis">int</span> on one system but a <span class="docEmphasis">long</span> on another.</p></li><li><p class="docList">Even
 on a single UNIX implementation, the types used to represent 
information may differ between releases of the implementation. Notable 
examples on Linux are user and group IDs. On Linux 2.2 and earlier, 
these values were represented in 16 bits. On Linux 2.4 and later, they 
are 32-bit values.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">To
 avoid such portability problems, SUSv3 specifies various standard 
system data types, and requires an implementation to define and use 
these types appropriately. Each of these types is defined using the C <tt>typedef</tt> feature. For example, the <span class="docEmphasis">pid_t</span> data type is intended for representing process IDs, and on Linux/x86-32 this type is defined as follows:</p><pre>typedef int pid_t;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Most of the standard system data types have names ending in <span class="docEmphasis">_t</span>. Many of them are declared in the header file <tt>&lt;sys/types.h&gt;</tt>, although a few are defined in other header files.</p><p class="docText">An
 application should employ these type definitions to portably declare 
the variables it uses. For example, the following declaration would 
allow an application to correctly represent process IDs on any 
SUSv3-conformant system:</p><pre>pid_t mypid;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Table 3-1
 lists some of the system data types we’ll encounter in this book. For 
certain types in this table, SUSv3 requires that the type be implemented
 as an <span class="docEmphasis">arithmetic type</span>.
 This means that the implementation may choose the underlying type as 
either an integer or a floating-point (real or complex) type.</p><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 3-1. Selected system data types</h5></caption><colgroup span="3"><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Data type</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">SUSv3 type requirement</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Description</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">blkcnt_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">signed integer</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">File block count (Section 15.1)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">blksize_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">signed integer</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">File block size (Section 15.1)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">cc_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">unsigned integer</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Terminal special character (Section 62.4)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">clock_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">integer or real-floating</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">System time in clock ticks (Section 10.7)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">clockid_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">an arithmetic type</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Clock identifier for POSIX.1b clock and timer functions (Section 23.6)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">comp_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">not in SUSv3</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Compressed clock ticks (Section 28.1)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">dev_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">an arithmetic type</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Device number, consisting of major and minor numbers (Section 15.1)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">DIR</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">no type requirement</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Directory stream (Section 18.8)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">fd_set</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">structure type</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">File descriptor set for <span class="docEmphasis">select()</span> (Section 63.2.1)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">fsblkcnt_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">unsigned integer</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">File-system block count (Section 14.11)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">fsfilcnt_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">unsigned integer</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">File count (Section 14.11)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">gid_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">integer</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Numeric group identifier (Section 8.3)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">id_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">integer</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">A generic type for holding identifiers; large enough to hold at least <span class="docEmphasis">pid_t</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">uid_t</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">gid_t</span></td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">in_addr_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">32-bit unsigned integer</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">IPv4 address (Section 59.4)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">in_port_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">16-bit unsigned integer</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">IP port number (Section 59.4)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">ino_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">unsigned integer</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">File i-node number (Section 15.1)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">key_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">an arithmetic type</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">System V IPC key (Section 45.2)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">mode_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">integer</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">File permissions and type (Section 15.1)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">mqd_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">no type requirement, but shall not be an array type</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">POSIX message queue descriptor</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">msglen_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">unsigned integer</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Number of bytes allowed in System V message queue (Section 46.4)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">msgqnum_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">unsigned integer</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Counts of messages in System V message queue (Section 46.4)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">nfds_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">unsigned integer</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Number of file descriptors for <span class="docEmphasis">poll()</span> (Section 63.2.2)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">nlink_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">integer</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Count of (hard) links to a file (Section 15.1)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">off_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">signed integer</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">File offset or size (Section 4.7 and Section 15.1)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">pid_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">signed integer</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Process ID, process group ID, or session ID (Section 6.2, Section 34.2, and Section 34.3)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">ptrdiff_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">signed integer</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Difference between two pointer values, as a signed integer</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">rlim_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">unsigned integer</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Resource limit (Section 36.2)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">sa_family_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">unsigned integer</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Socket address family (Section 56.4)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">shmatt_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">unsigned integer</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Count of attached processes for a System V shared memory segment (Section 48.8)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">sig_atomic_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">integer</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Data type that can be atomically accessed (Section 21.1.3)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">siginfo_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">structure type</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Information about the origin of a signal (Section 21.4)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">sigset_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">integer or structure type</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Signal set (Section 20.9)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">size_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">unsigned integer</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Size of an object in bytes</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">socklen_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">integer type of at least 32 bits</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Size of a socket address structure in bytes (Section 56.3)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">speed_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">unsigned integer</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Terminal line speed (Section 62.7)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">ssize_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">signed integer</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Byte count or (negative) error indication</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">stack_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">structure type</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Description of an alternate signal stack (Section 21.3)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">suseconds_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">signed integer allowing range [-1, 1000000]</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Microsecond time interval (Section 10.1)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">tcflag_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">unsigned integer</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Terminal mode flag bit mask (Section 62.2)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">time_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">integer or real-floating</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Calendar time in seconds since the Epoch (Section 10.1)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">timer_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">an arithmetic type</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Timer identifier for POSIX.1b interval timer functions (Section 23.6)</td></tr><tr><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">uid_t</span></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">integer</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">Numeric user identifier (Section 8.1)</td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><p class="docText">When discussing the data types in Table 3-1
 in later chapters, we’ll often make statements that some type “is an 
integer type [specified by SUSv3].” This means that SUSv3 requires the 
type to be defined as an integer, but doesn’t require that a particular 
native integer type (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">short</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">int</span>, or <span class="docEmphasis">long</span>)
 be used. (Often, we won’t say which particular native data type is 
actually used to represent each of the system data types in Linux, 
because a portable application should be written so that it doesn’t care
 which data type is used.)</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EFVBG">3.6.2.1. Printing system data type values</h5><p class="docText">When printing values of one of the numeric system data types shown in Table 3-1 (e.g., <span class="docEmphasis">pid_t</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">uid_t</span>), we must be careful not to include a representation dependency in the <span class="docEmphasis">printf()</span> call. A representation dependency can occur because C’s argument promotion rules convert values of type <span class="docEmphasis">short</span> to <span class="docEmphasis">int</span>, but leave values of type <span class="docEmphasis">int</span> and <span class="docEmphasis">long</span> unchanged. This means that, depending on the definition of the system data type, either an <span class="docEmphasis">int</span> or a <span class="docEmphasis">long</span> is passed in the <span class="docEmphasis">printf()</span> call. However, because <span class="docEmphasis">printf()</span> has no way to determine the types of its arguments at run time, the caller must explicitly provide this information using the <tt>%d</tt> or <tt>%ld</tt> format specifier. The problem is that simply coding one of these specifiers within the <span class="docEmphasis">printf()</span> call creates an implementation dependency. The usual solution is to use the <tt>%ld</tt> specifier and always cast the corresponding value to <span class="docEmphasis">long</span>, like so:</p><pre>pid_t mypid;

mypid = getpid();           /* Returns process ID of calling process */
printf("My PID is %ld\n", (long) mypid);</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">We make one exception to the above technique. Because the <span class="docEmphasis">off_t</span> data type is the size of <span class="docEmphasis">long long</span> in some compilation environments, we cast <span class="docEmphasis">off_t</span> values to this type and use the <tt>%lld</tt> specifier, as described in Section 5.10.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">The C99 standard defines the <tt>z</tt> length modifier for <span class="docEmphasis">printf()</span>, to indicate that the following integer conversion corresponds to a <span class="docEmphasis">size_t</span> or <span class="docEmphasis">ssize_t</span> type. Thus, we could write <tt>%zd</tt> instead of using <tt>%ld</tt> plus a cast for these types. Although this specifier is available in <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span>, we avoid it because it is not available on all UNIX implementations.</p><p class="docText">The C99 standard also defines the <tt>j</tt> length modifier, which specifies that the corresponding argument is of type <span class="docEmphasis">intmax_t</span> (or <span class="docEmphasis">uintmax_t</span>),
 an integer type that is guaranteed to be large enough to be able to 
represent an integer of any type. Ultimately, the use of an <span class="docEmphasis">(intmax_t)</span> cast plus the <tt>%jd</tt> specifier should replace the <span class="docEmphasis">(long)</span> cast plus the <tt>%ld</tt> specifier as the best way of printing numeric system data type values, since the former approach also handles <span class="docEmphasis">long long</span> values and any extended integer types such as <span class="docEmphasis">int128_t</span>. However, (again) we avoid this technique since it is not possible on all UNIX implementations.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><h4 class="docSection2Title" id="title-ID0EYYBG">3.6.3. Miscellaneous Portability Issues</h4><p class="docText">In this section, we consider a few other portability issues that we may encounter when writing system programs.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0E5ZBG">3.6.3.1. Initializing and using structures</h5><p class="docText">Each
 UNIX implementation specifies a range of standard structures that are 
used in various system calls and library functions. As an example, 
consider the <span class="docEmphasis">sembuf</span> structure, which is used to represent a semaphore operation to be performed by the <span class="docEmphasis">semop()</span> system call:</p><pre>struct sembuf {
    unsigned short sem_num;         /* Semaphore number */
    short          sem_op;          /* Operation to be performed */
    short          sem_flg;         /* Operation flags */
};</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Although SUSv3 specifies structures such as <span class="docEmphasis">sembuf</span>, it is important to realize the following:</p><ul><li><p class="docList">In general, the order of field definitions within such structures is not specified.</p></li><li><p class="docList">In some cases, extra implementation-specific fields may be included in such structures.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Consequently, it is not portable to use a structure initializer such as the following:</p><pre>struct sembuf s = { 3, -1, SEM_UNDO };</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Although this initializer will work on Linux, it won’t work on another implementation where the fields in the <span class="docEmphasis">sembuf</span>
 structure are defined in a different order. To portably initialize such
 structures, we must use explicit assignment statements, as in the 
following:</p><pre>struct sembuf s;

s.sem_num = 3;
s.sem_op  = -1;
s.sem_flg = SEM_UNDO;</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">If we are using C99, then 
we can employ that language’s new syntax for structure initializers to 
write an equivalent initialization:</p><pre>struct sembuf s = { .sem_num = 3, .sem_op = -1, .sem_flg = SEM_UNDO };</pre><br/>
<p class="docText">Considerations about 
the order of the members of standard structures also apply if we want to
 write the contents of a standard structure to a file. To do this 
portably, we can’t simply do a binary write of the structure. Instead, 
the structure fields must be written individually (probably in text 
form) in a specified order.</p><h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EE2BG">3.6.3.2. Using macros that may not be present on all implementations</h5><p class="docText">In some cases, a macro may not be defined on all UNIX implementations. For example, the <tt>WCOREDUMP()</tt>
 macro (which checks whether a child process produced a core dump file) 
is widely available, but it is not specified in SUSv3. Therefore, this 
macro might not be present on some UNIX implementations. In order to 
portably handle such possibilities, we can use the C preprocessor <tt>#ifdef</tt> directive, as in the following example:</p><pre>#ifdef WCOREDUMP
    /* Use WCOREDUMP() macro */
#endif</pre><br/>
<h5 class="docSection3Title" id="title-ID0EZ2BG">3.6.3.3. Variation in required header files across implementations</h5><p class="docText">In
 some cases, the header files required to prototype various system calls
 and library functions vary across UNIX implementations. In this book, 
we show the requirements on Linux and note any variations from SUSv3.</p><p class="docText">Some of the function synopses in this book show a particular header file with the accompanying comment <span class="docEmphasis">/* For portability */</span>.
 This indicates that the header file is not required on Linux or by 
SUSv3, but because some other (especially older) implementations may 
require it, we should include it in portable programs.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">For many of the functions that it specified, POSIX.1-1990 required that the header <tt>&lt;sys/types.h&gt;</tt>
 be included before any other headers associated with the function. 
However, this requirement was redundant, because most contemporary UNIX 
implementations did not require applications to include this header for 
these functions. Consequently, SUSv1 removed this requirement. 
Nevertheless, when writing portable programs, it is wise to make this 
one of the first header files included. (However, we omit this header 
from our example programs because it is not required on Linux and 
omitting it allows us to make the example programs one line shorter.)</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/>
</div>
</body>
</html>
