<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>3.7. Summary</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">3.7. Summary</h3><p class="docText">System
 calls allow processes to request services from the kernel. Even the 
simplest system calls have a significant overhead by comparison with a 
user-space function call, since the system must temporarily switch to 
kernel mode to execute the system call, and the kernel must verify 
system call arguments and transfer data between user memory and kernel 
memory.</p><p class="docText">The
 standard C library provides a multitude of library functions that 
perform a wide range of tasks. Some library functions employ system 
calls to do their work; others perform tasks entirely within user space.
 On Linux, the usual standard C library implementation that is used is <span class="docEmphasis">glibc</span>.</p><p class="docText">Most
 system calls and library functions return a status indicating whether a
 call has succeeded or failed. Such status returns should always be 
checked.</p><p class="docText">We introduced a 
number of functions that we have implemented for use in the example 
programs in this book. The tasks performed by these functions include 
diagnosing errors and parsing command-line arguments.</p><p class="docText">We
 discussed various guidelines and techniques that can help us write 
portable system programs that run on any standards-conformant system.</p><p class="docText">When
 compiling an application, we can define various feature test macros 
that control the definitions exposed by header files. This is useful if 
we want to ensure that a program conforms to some formal or 
implementation-defined standard(s).</p><p class="docText">We
 can improve the portability of system programs by using the system data
 types defined in various standards, rather than native C types. SUSv3 
specifies a wide range of system data types that an implementation 
should support and that an application should employ.</p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
