<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN"
  "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
  <meta http-equiv="content-type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" />
  <title>4.1. Overview</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css" type="text/css" />
</head>

<body>
 <div class="htmlcontent"><h3 class="docSection1Title" id="-100000">4.1. Overview</h3><p class="docText">All system calls for performing I/O refer to open files using a <span class="docEmphasis">file descriptor</span>,
 a (usually small) nonnegative integer. File descriptors are used to 
refer to all types of open files, including pipes, FIFOs, sockets, 
terminals, devices, and regular files. Each process has its own set of 
file descriptors.</p><p class="docText">By convention, most programs expect to be able to use the three standard file descriptors listed in Table 4-1.
 These three descriptors are opened on the program’s behalf by the 
shell, before the program is started. Or, more precisely, the program 
inherits copies of the shell’s file descriptors, and the shell normally 
operates with these three file descriptors always open. (In an 
interactive shell, these three file descriptors normally refer to the 
terminal under which the shell is running.) If I/O redirections are 
specified on a command line, then the shell ensures that the file 
descriptors are suitably modified before starting the program.</p><p></p><table border="1" cellspacing="0" width="100%"><caption><h5 class="docTableTitle">Table 4-1. Standard file descriptors</h5></caption><colgroup span="4"><col></col><col></col><col></col><col></col></colgroup><thead><tr><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">File descriptor</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">Purpose</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom">POSIX name</th><th align="left" class="docTableCell thead" scope="col" style="text-align:left" valign="bottom"><span class="docEmphasis">stdio</span> stream</th></tr></thead><tbody><tr><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">0</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">standard input</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>STDIN_FILENO</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">stdin</span></td></tr><tr><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">1</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">standard output</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>STDOUT_FILENO</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">stdout</span></td></tr><tr><td align="center" class="docTableCell" valign="top">2</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top">standard error</td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><tt>STDERR_FILENO</tt></td><td align="left" class="docTableCell" valign="top"><span class="docEmphasis">stderr</span></td></tr></tbody></table><p></p><br/><p class="docText">When
 referring to these file descriptors in a program, we can use either the
 numbers (0, 1, or 2) or, preferably, the POSIX standard names defined 
in <tt>&lt;unistd.h&gt;</tt>.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p><span class="v2"><i><b>Note:</b></i></span></p><p class="docText">Although the variables <span class="docEmphasis">stdin</span>, <span class="docEmphasis">stdout</span>, and <span class="docEmphasis">stderr</span> initially refer to the process’s standard input, output, and error, they can be changed to refer to any file by using the <span class="docEmphasis">freopen()</span> library function. As part of its operation, <span class="docEmphasis">freopen()</span> may change the file descriptor underlying the reopened stream. In other words, after an <span class="docEmphasis">freopen()</span> on <span class="docEmphasis">stdout</span>, for example, it is no longer safe to assume that the underlying file descriptor is still 1.</p><hr noshade="noshade" size="1"/><p class="docText">The
 following are the four key system calls for performing file I/O 
(programming languages and software packages typically employ these 
calls only indirectly, via I/O libraries):</p><ul><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">fd = open (pathname, flags, mode)</span> opens the file identified by <span class="docEmphasis">pathname</span>, returning a file descriptor used to refer to the open file in subsequent calls. If the file doesn’t exist, <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> may create it, depending on the settings of the <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> bit-mask argument. The <span class="docEmphasis">flags</span> argument also specifies whether the file is to be opened for reading, writing, or both. The <span class="docEmphasis">mode</span> argument specifies the permissions to be placed on the file if it is created by this call. If the <span class="docEmphasis">open()</span> call is not being used to create a file, this argument is ignored and can be omitted.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">numread = read (fd, buffer, count)</span> reads at most <span class="docEmphasis">count</span> bytes from the open file referred to by <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span> and stores them in <span class="docEmphasis">buffer</span>. The <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> call returns the number of bytes actually read. If no further bytes could be read (i.e., end-of-file was encountered), <span class="docEmphasis">read()</span> returns 0.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">numwritten = write (fd, buffer, count)</span> writes up to <span class="docEmphasis">count</span> bytes from <span class="docEmphasis">buffer</span> to the open file referred to by <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span>. The <span class="docEmphasis">write()</span> call returns the number of bytes actually written, which may be less than <span class="docEmphasis">count</span>.</p></li><li><p class="docList"><span class="docEmphasis">status = close (fd)</span> is called after all I/O has been completed, in order to release the file descriptor <span class="docEmphasis">fd</span> and its associated kernel resources.</p></li></ul><p class="docText">Before we launch into the details of these system calls, we provide a short demonstration of their use in Example 4-1. This program is a simple version of the <span class="docEmphasis">cp(1)</span>
 command. It copies the contents of the existing file named in its first
 command-line argument to the new file named in its second command-line 
argument.</p><p class="docText">We can use the program in Example 4-1 as follows:</p><pre><b>$ ./copy oldfile newfile</b></pre><br/>
<h5 class="docExampleTitle" id="title-ID0EJWAG">Example 4-1. Using I/O system calls</h5><p></p><div class="box"><pre class="preFixedHeight"><b>fileio/copy.c</b>
#include &lt;sys/stat.h&gt;
#include &lt;fcntl.h&gt;
#include "tlpi_hdr.h"

#ifndef BUF_SIZE        /* Allow "cc -D" to override definition */
#define BUF_SIZE 1024
#endif

int
main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
    int inputFd, outputFd, openFlags;
    mode_t filePerms;
    ssize_t numRead;
    char buf[BUF_SIZE];

    if (argc != 3 || strcmp(argv[1], "--help") == 0)
        usageErr("%s old-file new-file\n", argv[0]);

    /* Open input and output files */

    inputFd = open(argv[1], O_RDONLY);
    if (inputFd == -1)
        errExit("opening file %s", argv[1]);

    openFlags = O_CREAT | O_WRONLY | O_TRUNC;
    filePerms = S_IRUSR | S_IWUSR | S_IRGRP | S_IWGRP |
                S_IROTH | S_IWOTH;      /* rw-rw-rw- */
    outputFd = open(argv[2], openFlags, filePerms);
    if (outputFd == -1)
        errExit("opening file %s", argv[2]);

    /* Transfer data until we encounter end of input or an error */

    while ((numRead = read(inputFd, buf, BUF_SIZE)) &gt; 0)
        if (write(outputFd, buf, numRead) != numRead)
            fatal("couldn't write whole buffer");
    if (numRead == -1)
        errExit("read");

    if (close(inputFd) == -1)
        errExit("close input");
    if (close(outputFd) == -1)
        errExit("close output");

    exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
}
      <b>fileio/copy.c</b>

					  </pre><br/>
</div><p></p>
</div>
</body>
</html>
